Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citations — See Ch. 88. Municipal Court — See Ch. 38.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted as §§ 25.01, 25.02(1), 25.03, 25.04 and 25.11 of the former
City Code]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code of General Ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the ordinance:
§ 1-2. Conflicts.
If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
§ 1-3. Documents incorporated by reference.
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written
or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated
in this Code as if fully set forth herein, and the Clerk/Treasurer shall file,
deposit and keep in his or her office a copy of the code, standard, rule,
regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed,
deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper
care by any person during the Clerk/Treasurer's office hours, subject to
A. Reference to Wisconsin Statutes. All references in this Code to
"Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis. Stats." shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes
as of the adoption of this Code and shall include all renumbering,
revisions and amendments thereto. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27;
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
B. Gender; singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any
ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied
to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as
well as to one person or thing, provided these rules of construction shall
not be applied to any provisions which shall contain any express
language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or
context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
C. Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic
and all entities of any kind capable of being sued unless plainly
inapplicable.
D. Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
such orders or regulations which the Clerk/Treasurer may prescribe for
their preservation.
§ 1-4. Violations and penalties.
A. General penalty. Any person, upon conviction for violating any provision
of this Code for which another penalty is not provided, may be required
to forfeit not more than $2,000. [Amended by Ord. No. 71-67; Ord.
No. 92-61; Ord. No. 07-01]
B. Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to
pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court
for violation of any ordinance of the City, the Court may, in lieu of
ordering imprisonment of the defendant or after the defendant has
been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of
the defendant for such forfeiture and costs.
C. Dispositions for juvenile offenders. [Added by Ord. No. 97-67]
(1) Purpose. Pursuant to § 938.17(2), Wis. Stats., the City of Watertown
hereby authorizes the Municipal Court of the City of Watertown to
utilize any and all dispositional alternatives authorized by state law
in exercising jurisdiction over juveniles for violations of the City of
Watertown municipal ordinances.
(2) Pursuant to § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court of the
City of Watertown shall have authority to impose the following
dispositions and sanctions in every proceeding against juveniles for
violations of the City of Watertown municipal ordinances:
(a) Any and all dispositions under § 938.343, Wis. Stats., as
amended from time to time, which section is hereby adopted by
reference;
(b) Any and all dispositions under § 938.344, Wis. Stats., as
amended from time to time, which section is hereby adopted by
reference; and
(c) Any and all sanctions under § 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., except
§ 938.355(6)(d)1, as amended from time to time, which section
is hereby adopted by reference.
D. Municipal Court fees. In a Municipal Court action, except an action for
violation of an ordinance in conformity with § 347.48(2m), Wis. Stats.
(seat belt violations), the Municipal Judge shall collect a fee of $38 on
each separate matter, whether it is on default of appearance, a plea of
guilty or of no contest, on issuance of a warrant or summons, or the
action is tried as a contested matter. Of each fee received by the Judge
under this subsection, the Municipal Clerk/Treasurer shall pay monthly
$5 to the Secretary of Administration for deposit in the general fund
and shall retain the balance for use of the municipality pursuant to
§ 1-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Restitution. [Added by Ord. No. 97-47A]
§ 814.65(1), Wis. Stats. [Added by Ord. No. 02-27; amended by Ord.
No. 07-01; Ord. No. 13-37; 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
A. The Municipal Court, in addition to ordering any payment authorized by
law, may order a defendant to make full or partial restitution to any
victim or, if the victim is deceased, to his or her estate, if the Court finds
all of the following:
(1) The defendant is guilty of violating an ordinance that prohibits
conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by
state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both.
(2) The violation resulted in damage to the property of or physical
injury to a person other than the defendant.
B. Restitution ordered under this section is enforceable in a civil action by
the victim named in the order to receive restitution. A court may not
order a defendant to pay more than $10,000 in restitution under this
section. This ten-thousand-dollar limit does not apply to restitution
ordered for violation of § 410-24B or E of this Code. [Amended
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
C. If the violation resulted in damage to or loss or destruction of property,
the restitution order may require that the defendant do one of the
following:
(1) Return the property to the owner or owner's designee.
(2) If return of the property under Subsection C(1) is impossible,
impractical or inadequate, pay the owner or owner's designee,
subject to the ten-thousand-dollar limit in Subsection B, the
reasonable repair or replacement cost or the greater of the
following:
(a) The value of the property on the date of its damage, loss or
destruction.
(b) The value of the property on the date judgment is rendered,
less the value of any part of the property returned as of the
date of its return. The value of retail merchandise shall be its
retail value.
D. If the violation resulted in physical injury, the restitution order may
require that the defendant do one or more of the following, subject to
the ten-thousand-dollar limit in Subsection B:
(1) Pay an amount equal to the cost of necessary medical and related
professional services and devices relating to physical, psychiatric
or psychological care and treatment.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5
(2) Reimburse the injured person for income lost as a result of the
violation.
(3) If the injured person's sole employment at the time of the injury
was performing the duties of a homemaker, pay an amount
sufficient to reimburse the person for any payments made to
another to perform those duties from the date of the injury and to
ensure that the duties are continued until the person is able to
resume performance of the duties.
E. The restitution order may require that the defendant do one or more of
the following, subject to the ten-thousand-dollar limit in Subsection B:
(1) Pay all special damages, but not general damages, including, but
without limitation because of enumeration, the money equivalent of
loss resulting from property taken, destroyed, broken or otherwise
harmed and out-of-pocket losses, such as medical expenses,
substantiated by evidence in the record, that could be recovered in
a civil action against the defendant for his or her conduct in the
commission of the violation.
(2) Pay an amount equal to the income lost and reasonable out-ofpocket
expenses incurred by the person against whom the violation
was committed as a result of the commencement of the action or of
cooperating in the investigation and prosecution of the violation.
(3) If justice so requires, reimburse any insurer, surety or other person
who has compensated a victim for a loss otherwise compensable
under this section.
F. If the Court orders that restitution be paid to more than one person, the
Court may direct the sequence in which payments are to be made. The
Court shall order that all restitution to victims be made before
restitution to other persons. If more than one defendant is ordered to
make payments to the same person, the Court may apportion liability
between the defendants or specify joint and several liability. If the Court
specifies that two or more defendants are jointly and severally liable,
the Court shall distribute any overpayments so that each defendant, as
closely as possible, pays the same proportion of the ordered restitution.
G. Restitution ordered under this section does not limit or impair the right
of a victim to sue and recover damages from the defendant in a civil
action. The fact that restitution was required or made is not admissible
as evidence in that civil action and has no legal effect on the merits of
the civil action. Any restitution made by payment or community service
shall be set off against any judgment in favor of the victim in a civil
action arising out of the facts or events that were the basis for the
restitution. The Court trying that civil action shall hold a separate
hearing to determine the validity and amount of any setoff asserted by
the defendant.
H. Determination of amount of restitution; hearing.
§ 1-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 1-5
1:6
(1) The Court, in determining whether to order restitution and the
amount thereof, shall consider all of the following:
(a) The amount of loss suffered by any victim as a result of the
violation.
(b) The financial resources of the defendant.
(c) The present and future earning ability of the defendant.
(d) The needs and earning ability of the defendant's dependents.
(e) Any other factors which the Court deems appropriate.
(2) If the Court finds that the conditions in Subsection A are met, the
Court may hold the restitution hearing at the time of any
appearance by the defendant before the Court or may summon the
defendant to appear to determine if restitution shall be ordered.
The Court shall give the victim an opportunity to present evidence
and arguments pertaining to the factor specified in Subsection
H(1)(a). The Court shall give the defendant the opportunity to
present evidence and arguments on the factors specified in
Subsection H(1). The victim has the burden of demonstrating by
the preponderance of the evidence the amount of loss sustained as
a result of the violation. The defendant has the burden of
demonstrating by the preponderance of the evidence the factors
specified in Subsection H(1)(b) to (e). When hearing evidence as to
the factors specified in Subsection H(1), the Court may waive the
rules of practice, procedure, pleading and evidence, except
provisions relating to privileged communications and personal
transactions or communication with a decedent or mentally ill
person.
I. If the restitution ordered under this section is directed to a minor child,
and if the minor child fails to pay restitution as ordered by the
Municipal Court or as agreed to in a deferred prosecution agreement,
or if it appears likely that the child will not pay restitution as ordered or
agreed to, the victim or the victim's insurer shall be eligible to pursue
the rights available to him under § 895.035, Wis. Stats.
SPECIAL NOTATION: The Watertown Police Department and
Watertown Municipal Court are directed to notify all victims of their
rights under this section for those offenses outlined in § 1-5A at the
time of the initial contact with the victim(s) and at the time of the
conviction of any person for those offenses outlined in § 1-5A.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:7

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the City of Watertown
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Common Council of the
City of Watertown, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 550, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of
Watertown," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-7. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-8. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer
and shall remain there for use and examination by the public for at least two
weeks, in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action is
taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy
shall be certified to by the City Clerk/Treasurer, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk/Treasurer to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Common
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Watertown"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be inserted in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:9
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Clerk/Treasurer of the City of Watertown, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption
of this ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the
office of the Clerk/Treasurer for inspection by the public at all times during
regular office hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk/Treasurer, or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk/Treasurer, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the Code required to be filed in the Clerk/Treasurer's office for use by the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are included as
supplements to said Code.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk/Treasurer or an authorized agent of the Clerk/Treasurer upon the
payment of a fee to be set by the Common Council. The Clerk/Treasurer may
also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Watertown to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as
provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 1-16
1:10
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-17. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of Watertown which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect. This ordinance specifically repeals Original Section
2.01(3), Municipal Judge.
§ 1-18. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in §
1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 2, 2016.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:11
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances; new ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
fee or fees.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing sewer or water
rates or charges.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the City of Watertown, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection D
hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Common Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. Fee amounts have been removed from the following sections: §§ 147-12;
205-5, 205-7B; 216-2A, 216-4D(3), 220-3, 220-18, 224-4; 228-1A, 228-2,
228-10B and C, 228-14A and 228-15; 240-3, 253-6A and B, 253-15B,
253-20A, 253-22B, E, 253-23C(2), 253-49B(3), 266-1, 282-6C, 303-8C,
319-19B, 319-20C, 319-21B, 319-22B, 319-23B, 319-24B, 319-25B,
332-6B(3), 377-24A, 377-25B, C and D, 398-7C(1), 398-15A, 403-9D(3),
403-11, 410-13F(2), 410-45 introductory paragraph and Subsections
B(1) and D(2)(e), 419-6B, 419-8NN(2), 419-10F(1); § 424-8C(2)(b)[3],
D(1); 428-2A, 446-13D, 457-4C, 457-7B(9) and D, 468-4, 480-4E, 497-7D
and J, 508-9J(8)(a) and (b), 508-17C(1) and (2), 512-18, 545-8C, 545-9B,
550-130D, 550-157A(1) and (2).
C. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
§ 1-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 1-19
1:12
§ 1-20. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
(1) References to specific chapters and sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes and Wisconsin Administrative Code are revised to reflect
the numbering of the statutes and Administrative Code as of the
publication of this Code.
(2) References to the "Department of Health and Social Services" and
"Department of Health and Family Services" are amended to read
"Department of Health Services."
(3) References to the "Department of Industry, Labor and Human
Relations" and "Department of Commerce" are amended to read
"Department of Safety and Professional Services."
D. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-19D, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:13
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
§ 7-1. Organization.
The administrative organization of the City shall consist of the following:
A. Finance.
(1) Assessment.
(2) Clerk/Treasurer. (department)
(3) Board of Review.
(4) Election Officials.
(5) Tourism Commission.
B. Public Works.
(1) Engineering Department.
(a) Building, Safety and Zoning Division.
(b) Building Inspection Division.
(2) Streets and Storm Sewers.
(3) Water Department.
(4) Airport.
(5) City Planning.
(6) Park, Recreation and Forestry.
C. Public Safety.
(1) Fire Department.
(2) Police Department.
(3) Humane Officer.
(4) Public Health Department.
(5) Licensing Board.
(6) Transit Commission.
D. Legal.
(1) City Attorney
(2) Municipal Judge
§ 1-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 7-1
1:14
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
§ 10-1. Review of administrative determinations.
Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the Common
Council or a board, commission, committee, agency, official or employee
of the City or an agent acting on its behalf may have such determination
reviewed as provided in this chapter. The remedies under this chapter shall
not be exclusive, but an election to proceed hereunder shall be an election
of remedies.
§ 10-2. Determinations reviewable. [Amended by Ord. No. 93-61]
The following determinations are reviewable under this chapter:
§ 10-3. Determinations not subject to review.
The following determinations are not reviewable under this chapter:
(3) Municipal Court.
E. Watertown Redevelopment Authority. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.
17-8]
F. Watertown Housing Authority. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-8]
A. The grant or denial in whole or in part, after application, of an initial
permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except a fermented malt
beverage or intoxicating liquor license.
B. The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit,
license, right, privilege or authority, except as provided in § 10-3D.
C. The denial of a grant of money or other thing of value under a statute or
ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant.
D. The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a
municipal employee or officer, other than by a court.
A. A legislative enactment. A legislative enactment is an ordinance,
resolution or adopted motion of the Common Council.
B. Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures
under state statutes or other provisions of this Code.
C. The denial of a tort or contract claim for money required to be filed with
the City under § 62.25, Wis. Stats.
D. The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a fermented malt
beverage license or intoxicating liquor license. [Amended by Ord. No.
83-27]
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:15
§ 10-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Includes the Common Council and any board,
commission, committee, agency, official, employee or agent of the City
making a determination under § 10-1 and every person, committee or
agency of the City authorized to make an independent review under
§ 10-8B.2
PERSON AGGRIEVED — Includes any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, public or private organization, and any official, department,
board, commission or agency of the City whose rights, duties or privileges
are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority.
§ 10-5. Initiation of review.
A department, board, commission, agency, official or employee of the City
who is aggrieved may not initiate review under this chapter of a
determination of any other department, board, commission, agency, official
or employee of the City but may respond or intervene in a review
proceeding under this chapter initiated by another.
§ 10-6. Reducing determination to writing.
If a determination subject to this chapter is made orally or, if in writing,
does not state the reasons therefor, the municipal authority making such
determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such
determination made within 10 days of notice of such determination, reduce
the determination and the reasons therefor to writing and mail or deliver
such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The
determination shall be dated and shall advise such person of his right to
have such determination reviewed, shall advise that such review may be
taken within 30 days, and shall name the office or person to whom a request
for review shall be addressed.
E. Judgments and orders of a court.
F. Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations.
G. Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration or other procedures
provided in collective bargaining agreements.
H. The suspension, removal or disciplining or nonrenewal of an
employment contract of a municipal employee or officer. [Added by
Ord. No. 93-59]
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 10-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 10-7
1:16
§ 10-7. Request for review of determination.
Any person aggrieved may have a written or oral determination reviewed
by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority which
made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person of such
determination. The request for review shall state the grounds upon which
the person aggrieved contends that the determination should be modified
or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the official, employee,
agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body which made the
determination, but failure to make such request to the proper party shall not
preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such failure has caused
prejudice to the municipal authority.
§ 10-8. Review of determination.
§ 10-9. Administrative appeal.
A. Initial determination. If a request for review is made under § 10-7, the
determination to be reviewed shall be termed an "initial
determination."
B. Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made by the
officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body
which made the initial determination. However, an independent review
of such determination by another person, committee or agency of the
City appointed by the Mayor, with confirmation by the Common
Council, shall be provided. [Amended by Ord. No. 78-20]
C. When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial
determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The
time for review may be extended by agreement with the person
aggrieved.
D. Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file
with his request for review or within the time agreed with the municipal
authority written evidence and argument in support of his position with
respect to the initial determination.
E. Decision on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or
modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person
aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review, which
shall state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the
person aggrieved of his right to appeal the decision, shall advise that
the appeal may be taken within 30 days, and shall name the office or
person with whom notice of appeal shall be filed.
A. Appeal from initial determination or decision on review.
(1) If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance
with § 10-10 when the initial determination was made, he may elect
to follow §§ 10-6 through 10-8 but is not entitled to a further
§ 10-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-9
1:17
§ 10-10. Hearing on administrative appeal.
§ 10-11. Final determination.
hearing under § 10-10 unless granted by the municipal authority.
He may, however, seek judicial review under § 10-12.
(2) If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in
compliance with § 10-10 when the initial determination was made,
he shall follow §§ 10-6 through 10-8 and may appeal under this
section (§ 10-9) from the decision made under § 10-8.
B. Time within which appeal may be taken under this section. Appeal from
a decision on review under § 10-8 may be taken within 30 days of notice
of such decision.
C. How appeal may be taken. An appeal under this section may be taken
by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the
municipal authority's decision on review written notice of appeal.
A. Time of hearing. The City shall provide the appellant a hearing on an
appeal under § 10-9 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and
shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal
service at least 10 days before such hearing. The office or person with
whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify the City
Attorney, who shall forthwith advise the Mayor of such appeal.
B. Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the municipal
authority may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and
call and examine witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the other
party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the Chairperson conducting the
hearing. The administrative appeal body conducting the hearing shall
have the authority to issue subpoenas pursuant to Ch. 885, Wis. Stats.
[Amended by Ord. No. 92-36; Ord. No. 13-323]
C. Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person
employed for the purpose of making a record of the hearing shall take
notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The
person conducting the hearing may, and upon request of the appellant
shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a
recording device, the expense thereof to be paid by the City.
D. Hearing on initial determination. Where substantial existing rights are
affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making
such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly
affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this section
before making such determination.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 10-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 10-11
1:18
§ 10-12. Judicial review.
§ 10-13. Legislative review.
A. Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under § 10-10
and the filing of briefs, if any, the decisionmaker shall mail or deliver to
the appellant its written determination, stating the reasons therefor.
Such determination shall be a final determination.
B. A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the
requirements of § 10-10, or a decision on review under § 10-8 following
such hearing, shall be a final determination, judicial review of which
may be obtained under § 10-12.
A. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek
review thereof by writ of certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final
determination.
B. The record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the
person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone
requesting the same at his expense. If the person seeking review
establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing court,
the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the
City, and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of the
transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the
proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the
requirement for a transcript.
A. Seeking review pursuant to this chapter does not preclude a person
aggrieved from seeking relief from the Common Council or any of its
boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have
jurisdiction.
B. If in the course of legislative review under this section a determination
is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the
Common Council, board, commission, committee or agency shall be
made part of the record on review under § 10-12.
C. The Common Council, board, commission, committee or agency
conducting a legislative review under this section need not conduct the
type of hearing required under § 10-10.
§ 10-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-13
1:19
Chapter 24
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 80.
Mayor and Council — See Ch. 114.
Police Department — See Ch. 147.
Water Department — See Ch. 193.
Airport — See Ch. 211.
Alcohol beverage licensing — See Ch. 220,
Art. I.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 398.
§ 10-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 10-13
1:20
ARTICLE I
Plan Commission
[Adopted as § 2.05(6) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
96-8; Ord. No. 02-47]
§ 24-1. Membership.
The City Plan Commission shall consist of the Mayor, who shall be the
presiding officer, the City Engineer or the Assistant Engineer, the
Chairperson of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission, an
Alderperson and three citizens appointed pursuant to § 62.23(1), Wis. Stats.
Section 62.23, Wis. Stats., is incorporated by reference herein and made
a part hereof for the purpose of establishing the duties of the City Plan
Commission. The Secretary of the Plan Commission shall be appointed by
the Mayor.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1
1:21

ARTICLE II
Police and Fire Commission
[Adopted as § 2.06(1) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
02-47]
§ 24-2. Membership; appointment.
The City shall have a Police and Fire Commission consisting of five citizens,
three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The Mayor shall annually, by May
1, appoint in writing, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commission, one
member for a term of five years. No appointment shall be made which will
result in more than three members of the Commission belonging to the
same political party. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings
and shall have the powers set forth in § 62.13, Wis. Stats.
A. Fire Department: see Chapter 80 of this Code.
B. Police Department: see Chapter 147 of this Code.
§ 24-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:23

ARTICLE III
Board of Review
[Adopted as § 2.04(3) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
98-50; Ord. No. 02-47]
§ 24-3. Membership; terms of office.
The Board of Review of the City shall consist of the Mayor, two Aldermen
to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common
Council, and two citizen members to be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to confirmation by the Common Council. The term of office for the citizen
members shall be for three years. If any Aldermanic member of the Board
shall cease being an Alderperson, his term as a member of the Board shall
immediately terminate. The Mayor shall serve as Chairperson of the Board
of Review.
§ 24-4. Official meeting place.
The official meeting place for the Board of Review is hereby designated to
be the Common Council chambers in the Municipal Building located at 106
Jones Street, Watertown, Wisconsin, or any other room within the Municipal
Building designated by the Board.
§ 24-5. First meeting. [Amended by Ord. No. 10-21]
As provided by § 70.47(3)(a), Wis. Stats., the Board shall annually hold its
first meeting day to comply with state statutes.
§ 24-6. Confidentiality of income and expense information. [Added
8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 06-17]
Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor's duties,
requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to
§ 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto, then such
income and expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall be
held by the Assessor on a confidential basis; except, however, that the
information may be revealed to and used by persons in the discharging
of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office
(including, but not limited to, use by the Assessor in performance of official
duties of the Assessor's office and use by the Board of Review in
performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income
and expense information provided to the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af), Wis.
Stats., unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per § 70.47(7)(af),
Wis. Stats., not subject to the right of inspection and copying under
§ 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-6
1:25

ARTICLE IV
Public Works Commission
[Adopted as § 2.05 (first paragraph) and (5) and § 17.01 of the
former City Code]
§ 24-7. Membership; appointment; powers and duties. [Amended by
Ord. No. 96-8; Ord. No. 02-47; Ord. No. 11-084]
§ 24-8. Public Works Commission. [Amended by Ord. No. 71-61;
Ord. No. 92-34; Ord. No. 02-45]
A. The functions and duties of the Board of Public Works designated in
§ 62.14, Wis. Stats., shall be performed by the Public Works
Commission of the Common Council, and whenever the statute or
ordinance refers to functions or duties of the Board of Public Works,
such duties or functions shall be performed by the Public Works
Commission.
B. Wastewater treatment and sanitary sewers. The wastewater treatment
plant and sanitary sewer collection system shall be supervised by the
Public Works Commission. The Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager
shall have the powers and duties provided by state statutes and City
ordinances and shall supervise the operation, maintenance and
upgrading of the sanitary sewer collection system and wastewater
treatment plant.
A. Composition. The Public Works Commission, hereinafter referred to as
the "Commission" shall consist of four Alderpersons from the Common
Council and one citizen member from the community at large to take
entire charge and management of the said utilities under the general
control and supervision of the Common Council. [Amended 10-4-2016
by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-29]
B. Appointment.
(1) The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the confirmation of the Common Council.
(2) Annually, after the spring election each year, the Mayor shall
appoint the four Aldermanic members to the Commission for the
term of one year. In the first meeting of the Common Council in
January, commencing with the year of 2003, the Mayor shall make
his citizen appointments for a four-year term.
(3) In case of a vacancy in the Commission due to death, resignation,
removal or for any other cause whatsoever, such vacancy shall be
filled by an appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
C. Administrative functions of the Commission.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 24-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-8
1:27
(1) The Commission shall make such rules and regulations for its own
proceedings and for the government of its department as it shall
deem necessary and proper in addition to but not inconsistent with
the rules and regulations herein contained and not inconsistent
with law. It may appoint a manager.
(2) All utility receipts shall be paid to the City Clerk/Treasurer's office.
[Amended by Ord. No. 10-30]
(3) The Commission shall have entire charge and management of the
Water Utility and the Wastewater Utility and as such shall have
supervision over the buildings, grounds and all matters connected
therewith and shall see that all ordinances of the City and all rules
and regulations of the Commission are complied with; that the
conditions of all contracts by or with the Commission are faithfully
complied with; and that the assessments of the water rates are duly
made, collected and paid into the City treasury. The Commission
shall keep records of all extensions, additions, changes, alterations
and attachments made to the system of waterworks, and all meters
and the locations thereof, and it shall perform such other duties as
the Common Council or the Mayor may prescribe. [Amended by
Ord. No. 10-30]
§ 24-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 24-8
1:28
ARTICLE V
Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission
[Adopted as § 2.05(7) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
96-8; Ord. No. 02-47]
§ 24-9. Membership.
The Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission shall consist of seven
members. Six members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval
of the Common Council. One member shall be an Alderperson appointed
by the Mayor, with the approval of the Common Council. All members of
the Commission shall be qualified electors of the City and shall serve as
members of the Commission without compensation.
§ 24-10. Terms of office.
The terms of office for each member of the Commission shall be three years,
except that the Aldermanic member of the Commission shall be appointed
annually by the Mayor. All terms shall commence effective May 1 of the year
of appointment.
§ 24-11. Duties.
The duties of the Commission shall be as follows:
A. There shall be a President and Secretary elected at the first meeting
after April 30 of each year. The Commission shall hire a properly
qualified director as may be required to conduct a comprehensive park,
recreation and forestry program.
B. The Commission shall review, recommend and implement policies,
rules, regulations and budgets (subject to Common Council approval)
relating to park, playground, recreational and cultural facilities or
functions and develop an urban forestry program.
C. The Commission shall exercise broad responsibility for the development
and improvement of park, playground, recreational and cultural
facilities or functions to better serve the City. Special attention shall be
given to long-range planning and programming. Further, the
Commission shall promote the general beauty of the City and its
approaches.
D. The Commission is authorized to create and appoint advisory groups to
make studies and to disseminate information on all of its activities.
Such groups shall serve without compensation.
E. The Commission shall transmit to the Common Council full and
complete annual reports of department activities, and also such
additional reports as the Commission deems in the public interest.
F. Exemptions-granting authority to Parks Director. Upon Park,
Recreation and Forestry Commission approval, the Director of Parks or
§ 24-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-11
1:29
his or her designee may implement exemptions related to the
enforceability or applicability of City ordinances affecting parks,
recreation or forestry uses, interests or operations upon demonstrated
management needs, safety concerns or reasons of the general public
good or benefit. [Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 14-36]
(1) Any such exemptions shall not affect the force or effect of
ordinances in this or any other chapter except as narrowly
described by written memorandum for specifically defined
purposes and times; any conflict nevertheless arising by way of an
exemption implemented pursuant to this subsection in light of the
meaning or effect of a City ordinance shall result in the City
ordinance serving as authoritative and controlling.
(2) Any such exemptions shall be approved only upon consultation with
any other directly or indirectly impacted City department, unit or
official. All due and careful attention is to be given to the uniform
and equal affording of exemptions as well as the minimizing of any
risk attendant to the implementation of exemptions. Exemptions
implemented under this subsection shall have no fiscal impact.
§ 24-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 24-11
1:30
ARTICLE VI
Airport Commission
[Adopted as § 2.05(4) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
96-8; Ord. No. 97-8; Ord. No. 02-47]
§ 24-12. Powers and duties.
The operation, maintenance and equipment of the Municipal Airport shall
be under the supervision of the Airport Commission, which shall have the
powers and duties relating to these responsibilities as provided in Ch.
114, Wis. Stats., and City ordinances. The Airport Commission, working
with the Airport Manager, may recommend such airport improvements as
are deemed appropriate. However, the responsibility for all development,
construction and improvement at the Airport shall be vested in the Public
Works Commission and Common Council. Oversight of various projects may
be delegated to other reviewing bodies such as the Plan Commission, Site
Plan Review Committee or City staff.
§ 24-13. Membership.5
The Airport Commission shall be comprised of seven members, consisting
of citizens at large and one Alderperson of the City. The appointment of the
citizen members shall be on a basis so that no more than one term of the
citizen members will expire in any one year.
§ 24-14. Authority.
All authority not specifically delegated by statute or ordinance to the Airport
Commission shall be retained by the Public Works Commission and Common
Council. All fees or charges for the use of the Municipal Airport, including
lease terms, shall be set by the Airport Commission. All construction
contracts shall be approved by the Common Council and entered into by the
City.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 24-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-14
1:31

ARTICLE VII
Transit Commission
[Adopted as § 2.06(6) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
02-47]
§ 24-15. Membership; powers and duties.
The Transit Commission shall consist of five citizen members to be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Common Council for fouryear
terms. A Chairperson shall be elected by the Commission. The powers
and duties of the Transit Commission shall be according to provisions of
§ 66.1021(4) and (6) through (12), Wis. Stats.
§ 24-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-15
1:33

ARTICLE VIII
Licensing Board
[Adopted as § 2.06(5) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
85-16; Ord. No. 92-31; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No. 96-40; Ord. No.
02-47]
§ 24-16. Membership. [Amended by Ord. No. 13-09]
The Licensing Board of the City of Watertown shall consist of five members,
including the Mayor and two Alderpersons from the Common Council, to be
appointed by the Mayor for a one-year term, to serve without compensation.
There shall also be appointed one citizen at large member and one citizen
member demonstrably representative of the liquor industry, to be appointed
by the Mayor for a two-year term, to serve without compensation. The
Chairperson of the Licensing Board shall be the Mayor.
§ 24-17. Duties.
The duties of the Licensing Board of the City of Watertown shall be as
follows:
A. To investigate all license applications required to be submitted by the
Code of the City of Watertown and the Wisconsin Statutes and present
its recommendation to the Common Council, whenever necessary, for
approval. In the event the Licensing Board refuses to recommend
approval of any initial license under this Code, said decision shall be
final, subject to §§ 125.12(3m) and 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats. The
Licensing Board shall issue a written decision stating the reason(s) for
denial of a new license pursuant to § 125.12(3m), Wis. Stats. The
decision of the Licensing Board shall be final, subject to an aggrieved
party's right to seek review in Circuit Court pursuant to § 125.12(2)(d),
Wis. Stats. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-10]
B. To review all licensing ordinances of the City and make
recommendations to the Common Council regarding adoption or
revision of the same.
C. To conduct fact-finding hearings, make findings of fact, conclusions of
law and a recommendation to the Common Council, and to perform
such other duties pertaining to the revocation, suspension, nonissuance
or nonrenewal of alcohol beverage licenses, pursuant to § 125.12, Wis.
Stats.
D. To perform such other duties as are delegated under the Code of the
City of Watertown.
§ 24-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-17
1:35

ARTICLE IX
Tourism Commission
[Adopted 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-4 as § 2.04(5) of the former City
Code]
§ 24-18. Membership.
There is hereby created, pursuant to § 66.0615(1 m)(c) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, a Watertown Tourism Commission, which shall consist of a
membership as follows:
§ 24-19. Purpose and duties.
The purpose and duties of the Watertown Tourism Commission shall be
to coordinate tourism promotion and tourism development for the City
of Watertown, to perform such duties and to provide such services as
permitted under § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., and other applicable laws
A. Six persons who live or work in the City of Watertown, to be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation by a majority of the Common
Council who are present when the vote is taken. With the exception of
the term of the Common Council member appointed hereunder, which
appointment shall be for a one-year term, there shall be an inaugural
class of three Commissioners, initially appointed for a term of two
years, and an inaugural class of three Commissioners initially appointed
for three years, the purpose of such initial manner of appointment
being to stagger the expiration of each appointee term. Following the
expiration of each appointee's inaugural term, the term for a
Commissioner shall be three years. Commissioners shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor and may be reappointed up to a maximum of six
terms. The determination as to an inaugural term assignment of two or
three years shall be in the sole and exclusive discretion of the Mayor
and shall be clearly specified by the Mayor at the time of appointment
and made record by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
B. One member shall represent the Watertown hotel and motel industry.
C. Other municipal officials may be appointed as needed as ex officio
members.
§ 24-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-19
1:37

ARTICLE X
Redevelopment Authority
[Adopted 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-8]
§ 24-20. Creation; assumption of obligations; membership; powers
and duties.
Pursuant to § 66.1333(3), Wis. Stats., the Redevelopment Authority of the
City of Watertown is created as follows:
A. It shall be deemed a separate body corporate and politic for the purpose
of carrying out blight elimination, slum clearance, and urban renewal
programs and projects.
B. For purposes of this section, "HUD projects" shall mean any public
housing project, activity, operation, or expenditure undertaken by the
City of Watertown which is wholly or partly subsidized by funds
received from the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
C. It is authorized to act as the agent of the City of Watertown in planning
and carrying out community development programs and activities
approved by the Mayor and Common Council under the Federal
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, other than HUD
projects, and as agent to perform all acts thereunto, except the
development of the general plan of the City, which may be otherwise
performed by the Planning Commission under §§ 66.1301 to 66.1327,
66.1331, 66.1337 or 66.1105, Wis. Stats.
D. Any programs and projects undertaken by the former Community
Development Authority of the City of Watertown as of or prior to
December 20, 2016, other than HUD projects (which shall remain with,
and be the object of, as well as under the control and management of,
the Watertown Housing Authority) shall hereinafter be transferred to,
and administered by, the Redevelopment Authority. Any procedures,
hearings, actions or approvals taken or initiated by the former
Community Development Authority under § 66.1333, Wis. Stats., on
pending projects are deemed to have been taken or initiated by the
Redevelopment Authority as though the Redevelopment Authority had
originally undertaken such procedures, hearings, actions or approvals.
E. Any form of indebtedness issued by the former Community
Development Authority not related to HUD projects shall be assumed
by the Redevelopment Authority, except as indicated herein.
F. The title and any other form of interest in or to real estate now owned
by the former Community Development Authority, other than properties
on which HUD projects occur, shall now vest in the Redevelopment
Authority without further action or conveyance, and all conveyance
hereto made by the Redevelopment Authority of real or personal
property is ratified and confirmed in all respects.
§ 24-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-20
1:39
G. Ownership and control of all assets currently owned by the former
Community Development Authority unrelated to HUD projects as of
December 20, 2016, shall hereby be transferred to the Redevelopment
Authority.
H. All contracts, other than contracts related to HUD projects, entered
into between the federal government and the former Community
Development Authority, or between the former Community
Development Authority and other parties, shall be assumed by the
Redevelopment Authority. Contracts for disposition of real property
entered into by the former Community Development Authority with
respect to any project shall be deemed contracts of the Redevelopment
Authority without the requirement of amendments thereto. Contracts
entered into between the federal government and the former
Community Development Authority, other than those related to HUD
projects, shall bind the Redevelopment Authority in the same manner as
though originally entered into by the Redevelopment Authority.
I. The Redevelopment Authority may execute all necessary, convenient or
appropriate documents or instruments to reflect its assumption of the
obligations as set forth herein.
J. How constituted. The Redevelopment Authority shall be constituted of
seven residents of the City of Watertown appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by 4/5 of the total membership of the Common Council. In
making such appointments, the Mayor and Common Council shall give
due consideration to the general interest of the appointee in
redevelopment, slum clearance or urban renewal programming and
shall, insofar as is possible, designate representatives from the general
public, labor, industry, finance or business groups, and civic
organizations. Appointees shall have sufficient ability and experience in
related fields, especially in the fields of finance and management, to
assure efficiency in the redevelopment program, its planning and
direction. At least one of the seven Commissioners shall be a member of
the Common Council. No more than two of the Commissioners may be
officers of the City of Watertown.
K. Term. The Commissioners who are first appointed shall be designated
by the appointing power to serve for the following terms: two for one
year, two for two years, one for three years, one for four years, and one
for five years, from the date of their appointment. After the first
appointments, the term of office is five years. A Commissioner holds
office until a successor is appointed and qualified. Removal of a
Commissioner is governed by § 66.1201, Wis. Stats. Vacancies and new
appointments are filled in the manner provided in Subsection J.
L. Powers and duties: The Redevelopment Authority shall have all powers
allocated to it under § 66.1333, Wis. Stats.
§ 24-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 24-20
1:40
ARTICLE XI
Housing Authority
[Adopted 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-8]
§ 24-21. Creation; assumption of obligations.
Pursuant to § 66.1201, Wis. Stats., the Housing Authority of the City of
Watertown is created or reaffirmed, as necessary or most publically
expedient; the Housing Authority of the City of Watertown, which shall have
all powers allocated to it under § 66.1201, Wis. Stats., shall assume:
A. Any HUD projects undertaken by the former Community Development
Authority of the City of Watertown as of December 20, 2016, which shall
hereafter be transferred to and administered by the Housing Authority.
Any procedures, hearings, actions or approvals taken or initiated by the
former Community Development Authority under § 66.1201, Wis.
Stats., on pending projects are deemed to have been taken or initiated
by the Housing Authority as though the Housing Authority had
originally undertaken such procedures, hearings, actions or approvals.
B. Any form of indebtedness issued by the former Community
Development Authority related to HUD projects shall be assumed by
the Housing Authority, except as indicated heretofore.
C. Any form of title to real estate owned by the former Community
Development Authority on which HUD projects occur shall now vest in
the Housing Authority without further action or conveyance, and all
conveyance hereto made by the Housing Authority of real or personal
property is ratified and confirmed in all respects.
D. Any ownership or control of assets currently owned by the former
Community Development Authority related to HUD projects shall
hereby be transferred to the Housing Authority.
E. All contracts related to HUD projects entered into between the federal
government and the former Community Development Authority, or
between the former Community Development Authority and other
parties, shall be assumed by the Housing Authority. Contracts for
disposition of real property entered into by the former Community
Development Authority with respect to any HUD project shall be
deemed contracts of the Housing Authority without the requirement of
amendments thereto. Contracts entered into between the federal
government and the former Community Development Authority related
to HUD projects shall bind the Housing Authority in the same manner
as though originally entered into by the Housing Authority. The Housing
Authority may execute any necessary, convenient or appropriate
documents or instruments to reflect its assumption of the obligations
set forth hereunder. The Housing Authority shall be constituted
pursuant to and as provided by § 66.1201(5), Wis. Stats.; the Housing
Authority Commissioner terms, office qualifications and qualities shall
be as fixed pursuant to and as provided by § 66.1201(5), Wis. Stats.
§ 24-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-21
1:41
Chapter 33
CITATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalties — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 33-1. Statutory authorization. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-7; Ord.
No. 13-396]
Pursuant to § 66.0113(1)(a), Wis. Stats., the City hereby elects to use the
citation method of enforcement of all its ordinances, including ordinances
for which a statutory counterpart exists.
§ 33-2. Contents of citation.
The citation shall contain the following:
A. The name and address of the alleged violator.
B. Factual allegations describing the alleged violation.
C. The time and place of the offense.
D. The section of the ordinance violated.
E. A designation of the offense in such a manner as can readily be
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so.
F. The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court.
G. A statement which informs the alleged violator:
(1) That a cash deposit based on the schedule established by this
chapter may be made and shall be delivered or mailed to the Police
Department prior to the time of the scheduled court appearance.
(2) That if a deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary
unless he is subsequently summoned.
(3) That if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not
appear in court, he or she either will be deemed to have tendered a
plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture, plus costs, fees and
surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the
amount of the deposit, or will be summoned into court to answer
the complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest.7
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 24-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 33-2
1:42
§ 33-3. Form of citation.
The form of the citation to be used by the City is on file in the office of the
City Clerk/Treasurer and is adopted by reference.
§ 33-4. Schedule of deposits. [Amended by Ord. No. 78-25; Ord. No.
13-1710]
The cash deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation may be
issued are included on the deposit schedule established by the Municipal
Judge and approved by the Common Council, a copy of which is on file with
the City Clerk/Treasurer as well as in the offices of the Chief of Police and
the City Attorney.
§ 33-5. Issuance of citations.
(4) That if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does
not appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a
summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the
nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment under
§ 66.0113(3)(d), Wis. Stats., or the municipality may commence an
action against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus
costs, fees and surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats.8
(5) That if the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that
prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct
prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment, or
both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the property of or
physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator, the court
may summon the alleged violator into court to determine if
restitution shall be ordered under § 800.093, Wis. Stats.9
H. A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the
statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to indicate
that the statement required under Subsection G has been read. Such
statement shall be sent or brought with the cash deposit.
I. Such other information as the City deems necessary.
A. Law enforcement officers. Any law enforcement officer may issue
citations authorized under this chapter.
B. City officials.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II); this ordinance also repealed original subsection (g)(5), pertaining to the right to a
jury trial, which was amended by Ord. No. 78-25 and which immediately followed this
subsection.
9. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 33-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-5
1:43
§ 33-6. Procedure on default.
Section 66.0113(3), Wis. Stats., relating to violator's options and procedure
on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 33-7. Nonexclusivity.
(1) The following City officials may issue citations with respect to those
specified ordinances which are directly related to their official
responsibilities:
(a) City Attorney.
(b) Fire Chief.
(c) Health Officer.
(d) Building Inspector.
(e) Electrical Inspector.
(f) Water Systems Manager. [Amended by Ord. No. 04-27]
(g) Truancy Abatement Officer. [Amended by Ord. No. 04-34]
(h) Street Superintendent. [Amended by Ord. No. 05-06]
(i) Assistant Street Superintendent. [Amended by Ord. No.
05-06]
(j) Zoning Administrator. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-19]
(k) Plumbing Inspector. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-19]
(l) Community Service Officer. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
17-19]
(m) Building, Safety and Zoning Code Compliance Officer. [Added
6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-8]
(2) Such City officials may delegate their authority to issue such
citations to their subordinates. [Amended by Ord. No. 88-3]
C. Police auxiliary officers. Police auxiliary officers may enforce
regulations under Chs. 497 or 500, citable under the Police Department
"Notice of Parking Violation" form of citation. This section does not
authorize issuance of Wisconsin uniform traffic or nontraffic municipal
citations. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-19]
A. Other ordinance. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the
Common Council from adopting any other ordinance or providing for
the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or
other matter.
§ 33-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 33-7
1:44
§ 33-8. Municipal Court procedure. [Amended by Ord. No. 78-25;
Ord. No. 13-40]
Chapter 800 of the Wisconsin Statutes outlining the Municipal Court
procedure is adopted by reference in this Code with the exception of
§ 800.10(1) and (2).
Chapter 38
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 38-1. Municipal Judge.
B. Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude
the City or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other
ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any
ordinance, regulation or order.
A. Pursuant to § 755.01, Wis. Stats., there is created the office of
Municipal Judge for the City of Watertown. The Municipal Judge shall
be elected at large at the spring election in odd-numbered years for a
term of four years, or until a successor is elected and qualifies,
commencing on May 1 next succeeding his or her election. Candidates
for the Municipal Judge position must reside in the City of Watertown
and also shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in Wisconsin.
[Amended 11-3-2015 by Ord. No. 15-37]
B. All candidates for the position of Municipal Judge shall be nominated by
nomination papers as provided in § 8.10, Wis. Stats., and selection at a
primary election, if such is held as provided in § 8.11, Wis. Stats. The
Common Council of the City of Watertown shall provide for a primary
election in the event that more than two candidates file nomination
papers for the position of Municipal Judge as provided for in
§ 8.11(1)(a), Wis. Stats., and such primary election shall be held on the
third Tuesday of February as provided in § 5.02(22), Wis. Stats.
C. The Municipal Judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a
vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in § 757.02(1), Wis.
Stats., and at the same time the City shall obtain a dishonesty insurance
policy or other appropriate insurance policy that covers the Municipal
Judge, in an amount fixed by the City, but in no case with a policy limit
less than $10,000. The City shall pay the costs of the insurance policy.
The Municipal Judge shall not act until the oath has been filed with the
Clerk of the Circuit Court for Dodge and Jefferson Counties, as required
by § 19.01(4)(c), Wis. Stats., and the requirements of § 755.03(2), Wis.
Stats., have been complied with. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No.
18-2]
D. The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be fixed by the Common Council
of the City of Watertown, which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No
§ 33-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1
1:45
§ 38-2. Municipal Court established.
§ 38-3. Forfeitures.
salary shall be paid for any time during the term which the Judge has
not executed the official oath, as required by § 755.03, Wis. Stats., and
filed pursuant to § 19.01(4)(c), Wis. Stats. [Amended 4-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-2]
A. There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court under the
provisions of Chapter 755 of the Wisconsin Statutes, to be designated
as "Watertown Municipal Court." The Municipal Judge and the
Municipal Court shall have such jurisdiction as provided by §§ 755.045
and 755.05, Wis. Stats., and as otherwise provided by law.
B. The Municipal Court shall be open at such times and at such locations
as determined by the Municipal Judge, subject to the provisions of
§ 755.09, Wis. Stats. The City of Watertown shall provide a courtroom in
the Municipal Building of the City of Watertown. The Municipal Court
Clerk shall maintain his or her office in the Municipal Building of the
City of Watertown and shall be under the supervision of the Municipal
Judge, and his or her salary shall be part of the Municipal Court budget
commencing with the 2003 budget year.
C. The procedure of the Municipal Court shall be as provided by Ch. 800,
Wis. Stats.
D. The Municipal Judge may impose a sanction authorized under
§ 800.12(2), Wis. Stats., for contempt of court, as defined in § 785.01(1),
Wis. Stats., in accordance with the procedures under § 785.03, Wis.
Stats. The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt in an
amount not to exceed $200 or, upon nonpayment of the forfeiture,
penalty assessment under § 757.05, Wis. Stats.; jail assessment under
§ 302.46, Wis. Stats.; crime laboratories and drug law enforcement
assessment under § 165.755, Wis. Stats.; any applicable consumer
protection assessment under § 100.261, Wis. Stats.; and any applicable
domestic abuse assessment under § 973.055(1), Wis. Stats.; with a jail
sentence not to exceed seven days. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18]
A. The Municipal Judge may impose punishment and sentences as
provided by Ch. 800, Wis. Stats., and as provided in the ordinances of
the City of Watertown. All forfeitures, fees, assessments and costs shall
be paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days after receipt of the
money by the Judge or other court personnel, and at the time of
payment, the Judge shall report to the City Treasurer the title of the
action, the offense for which a forfeiture was imposed and the total
amount of the forfeiture, fees, assessments and costs, if any, as required
by § 800.10(2), Wis. Stats. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
§ 38-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 38-3
1:46
§ 38-4. Bond deposit schedule. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18]
The Municipal Judge shall establish and submit to the Common Council for
approval a bond deposit schedule. When approved, copies shall be kept in
the offices of the City Clerk/Treasurer and Police Department.
§ 38-5. Employees.
The Municipal Judge shall, in writing, appoint such Clerks and Deputy
Clerks as are authorized by the Common Council, as provided in § 755.10,
Wis. Stats. Their salaries shall be fixed by the Common Council. The Clerks
shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, take the oath provided
by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., and give a bond if required by the Common Council.
The cost of the bond shall be paid by the municipality. Oaths and bonds of
the Clerks shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk-Treasurer.
Chapter 52
ELECTIONS
B. On a monthly basis, the Municipal Judge shall also report to the Clerk-
Treasurer the title, nature of offenses and total amount of judgments
imposed in actions and proceedings in which money was collected.
C. The Municipal Judge shall account for those cases where judgment has
been entered but the forfeiture has not been paid. The terms of a
payment deferral shall be listed. The Municipal Judge shall also account
for the suspension of operating privileges or jail sentences entered for
nonpayment of forfeitures and shall list the amount due.
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-5
1:47

ARTICLE I
Districts and Wards
[Adopted as Ch. 23 of the former City Code]
§ 52-1. Aldermanic districts. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-43; Ord. No.
91-86; Ord. No. 01-20]
§ 52-2. Ward boundaries. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-43]
For the purposes of real estate descriptions and uses required by the
Assessment Department of the City of Watertown, the ward boundaries as
established by Ordinance No. 60-6, adopted June 7, 1960, for the thendesignated
Wards 1 through 4 and 6 through 13 and the boundaries for
Wards 5 and 14 established prior to 1960 shall be retained; a map of these
ward boundaries for purposes of real estate description and use by the
Assessment Department of the City of Watertown is on file in the Register
of Deeds office of Jefferson County as Document No. 684920, File Number
77.
A. The Aldermanic Districts of the City of Watertown shall be as follows:
(1) The First Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 1 and 2.
(2) The Second Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 5 and 6.
(3) The Third Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 13 and 14.
(4) The Fourth Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 11 and 12.
(5) The Fifth Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 7 and 8.
(6) The Sixth Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 3 and 4.
(7) The Seventh Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 9 and 10.
(8) The Eighth Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 17 and 18.
(9) The Ninth Aldermanic District shall consist of Wards 15 and 16.
B. Wards as referred to in this article are wards as established by the
Common Council of the City of Watertown with Resolution Exhibit No.
6612, July 17, 2001.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:49

ARTICLE II
Election Officials
[Adopted as § 2.04(4) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
02-47]
§ 52-3. Number.
The number of election inspectors shall be determined and scheduled by
the Municipal Clerk/Treasurer but shall be no fewer than three per election
unit.
§ 52-4. Work hours.
Shifts may be split as determined by the Municipal Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 52-5. Types of election officials.
Special registration deputies, special voting deputies, election day
registration deputies, greeters and any other election-related personnel
shall be determined by the Municipal Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 52-6. Appointments.
The Mayor shall appoint election officials with confirmation by the Common
Council.
§ 52-7. Compensation.
The compensation for election officials shall be determined by the Common
Council in the annual payroll resolution.
§ 52-8. (Reserved)11
11.Editor's Note: Former § 52-8, Special registration deputies, was repealed 11-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-26.
§ 52-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-8
1:51

ARTICLE III
Primary Election
[Adopted by Ord. No. 05-3 (§ 2.01(6) of the former City Code)
§ 52-9. When held.
Whenever three or more persons file nomination papers for any elected
office in the City of Watertown, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall always
schedule a primary election to narrow the field to the two candidates who
obtain the most votes in the primary election.
§ 52-10. Withdrawal of candidates.
In the event that one or more candidates notify the City Clerk/Treasurer,
in writing, that they no longer want to be a candidate so that there remain
only two persons seeking to be elected, then a primary does not have to be
held if the notice or notices are received before the deadline for setting the
primary election.
§ 52-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-10
1:53
Chapter 56
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT
§ 56-1. Emergency Management Director.12
Pursuant to Ch. 166, Wis. Stats., the City of Watertown hereby appoints the
Fire Chief as Emergency Management Director to develop an emergency
management program consistent with the state plan of emergency
management, as expressed in Ch. 323, Wis. Stats., and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
§ 56-2. Policy.
In preparing and executing the emergency management program, the
services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments
and agencies of the City of Watertown shall be utilized to the maximum
extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments
and agencies are directed to cooperate with the Emergency Management
Director and to provide such services and facilities as are needed.
§ 56-3. Succession to municipal offices.
All municipal officers and department heads shall designate persons as
emergency interim successors to their respective offices as provided by
§ 323.54, Wis. Stats. If a municipal officer or department head is absent or
unable to exercise the powers and perform the duties of his office because
of an emergency, such successor shall have all the powers and perform all
the duties of the officer or department head.
§ 56-4. Joint action.
In consideration of the joint action provision of the Jefferson County
Emergency Management Ordinance, Section 7, the City of Watertown
hereby enters into a joint action agreement with Jefferson County to provide
for utilization of existing services of said municipality in conjunction with
efforts by the Office of Emergency Management of Jefferson County.
Chapter 60
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT
§ 60-1. Supervision.
The Engineering Department shall be supervised by the City Engineer,
who shall be responsible for providing engineering services for all City
departments as may be required. This shall include the planning, design,
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 52-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 60-1
1:54
supervision, coordination and contracting of all construction projects
undertaken by the City, except as otherwise set forth in this Code or
specified by the Public Works Commission. In addition, the City Engineer
shall supervise the City's Building Inspectors.
§ 60-2. Monitoring of Rock River.
The City Engineer shall also monitor the flow and elevations of the Rock
River. He shall take all necessary steps to ensure safe operation of the two
dams within the City, including notification of the Director of Emergency
Management and other state and federal officials whenever dangerous
conditions arise.
Chapter 65
ETHICS
§ 65-1. Declaration of policy.
A. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to
the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper
channels of the government structure; that public office not be used for
personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a
Code of Ethics for all City of Watertown officials and employees,
whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of
boards, committees and commissions of the City.
B. The purpose of the code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards
of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those
acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the City
of Watertown and by directing disclosure by such officials and
employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the
City. The Common Council recognizes that the representatives of the
City are drawn from society and therefore cannot and should not be
without all personal and economic interest in the decisions and policies
of government; that citizens who serve as City officials and employees
retain their rights as citizens to have interests of a personal and
economic nature; that the standards of ethical conduct for City officials
and employees need to distinguish between those minor and
inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free society and
those conflicts which are substantial and material; and that City
officials and employees may need to engage in employment,
professional or business activities other than official duties in order to
support themselves or their families and to maintain a continuity of
professional or business activity or may need to maintain investments,
which activities or investments do not conflict with the specific
provisions of this code. The provisions and purpose of this code and
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-1
1:55
§ 65-2. Responsibility of public office.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANYTHING OF VALUE — Any money or property, favor, service, payment,
advance, forbearance, loan or promise of future employment, but does not
include compensation and expenses paid by the state, fees, honorariums
and expenses which are permitted and reported under § 19.56, Wis. Stats.,
and political contributions which are reported under Ch. 11, Wis. Stats.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which shall yield directly or
indirectly a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or
to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
PERSON — Any person, corporation, partnership or joint venture.
§ 65-4. Fair and equal treatment.
such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared
to be in the best public interest.13
C. It is the intent of the Common Council that in its operations the Board of
Ethics shall protect to the fullest extent possible the rights of
individuals affected.
A. Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold
office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State and
to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality
and thus to foster respect of all government. They are bound to observe
in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge
faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal
considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their
primary concern.
B. There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes which should,
while not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of any code of
ethics. Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes are made a part of this Code of Ethics and shall
apply to public officials and employees whenever applicable:
(1) Section 946.10, Bribery of public officers and employees.
(2) Section 946.11, Special privileges from public utilities.
(3) Section 946.12, Misconduct in public office.
(4) Section 946.13, Private interest in public contract prohibited.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 65-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 65-4
1:56
§ 65-5. Conflict of interest.
A. Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit
the unauthorized use of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit.
B. Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen.
A. No official or employee shall accept anything of value, whether in the
form of a gift, service, loan or promise, from any person which may tend
to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his or her official duties. It is not a conflict of interest
for any public employee or public official to receive a gift or gratuity
that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value.
B. No public official or employee shall engage in any business or
transaction or shall act in regard to any financial interest, direct or
indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her
official duties for the benefit of the public, contrary to the provisions of
this code or which would tend to impair his or her independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties. Any
official who receives, directly or indirectly, any gift or gifts having an
aggregate value of more than $50 within any calendar year from any
person who is known by said official or employee to be interested
directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings
with the City upon which the official or employee has any influence or
input or over which the official or employee has any jurisdiction,
discretion or control shall disclose the nature and value of such gifts to
the Ethics Board by January 20 next following the year in which the gift
or gifts are received.
C. No public official or employee shall engage in or accept private
employment or render service for private interest when such
employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his
or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties,
unless otherwise permitted by law, unless disclosure is made as
hereinafter provided.
D. No public official or employee and no business in which a City official or
public employee holds a ten-percent or greater interest may enter into a
contract with the City of Watertown involving a payment or payments of
more than $3,000 within a twelve-month period unless said official or
employee has first made a written disclosure of the nature and extent to
such relationship or interest to the Board and to the department acting
for the City in regard to such contract. This subsection does not affect
the application of § 946.13, Wis. Stats.
§ 65-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-5
1:57
§ 65-6. Ethics Board.14
There is hereby created an Ethics Board consisting of three members and
one alternate member, who shall serve without compensation unless the
Common Council otherwise provides. The members of the Board of Ethics
shall be residents of the City and shall not be elected officials, full-time
appointed officials or City employees, nor shall they be currently serving
on any other City board or commission. Each member shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation by the Common Council. The
City Attorney shall furnish the Board whatever legal assistance is necessary
in the carrying out of its functions. Terms of office shall be three years,
except that when the initial appointments are made, one member shall be
appointed for one year, one for two years, and one for three years. The
alternate shall serve on the Board when one of the members of the Board
is unavailable. The term of the alternate shall be for three years. The Ethics
Board shall elect its own Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
§ 65-7. Duties of Ethics Board.
E. No official or employee shall disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government or affairs of this City, nor shall he
or she use such information to advance the financial or other private
interest of himself or herself or any other person.
F. Disclosure of interest in legislation. Any member of the Common
Council who has a financial interest in any proposed legislation before
the Common Council shall disclose on the records of the Common
Council the nature and extent of such interest prior to or during the
initial discussion on said legislation. Any other official or employee who
has a financial interest in any proposed legislative action of the
Common Council and who participates in discussion with or gives an
official opinion or recommendation to the Common Council shall
disclose, on the records of the Common Council, the nature and extent
of such interest.
A. The Ethics Board shall adopt and develop written rules, which shall be
submitted to the Common Council for approval. A copy of such rules
shall be filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer.
B. Any person to whom this chapter applies may apply to the Ethics Board
for an advisory opinion and shall be guided by the opinion rendered.
Such person shall have the opportunity to present his interpretations of
the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of the code
before the advisory decision is rendered. The Board's deliberations and
action upon such applications shall be in meetings not open to the
public. Records of the Board's opinions, opinion requests and
investigations of violations shall be closed to public inspection. The
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 65-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 65-7
1:58
Board, however, may make such records public with the consent of the
individual requesting the advisory opinion.
C. The Board shall investigate any complaint properly filed with it.
D. The Board shall accept from any person, or make upon its own motion, a
verified complaint in writing, which shall state the name of the officer
or employee alleged to have committed a violation of this chapter and
which shall set forth the particulars thereof. The Board shall forward,
within 10 days, a copy of the complaint to the officer or employee who is
accused. If no action on the verified complaint is taken by the Board
within 60 days, the complaint shall be void.
E. Following the receipt or motion of a verified complaint, the Board may
make preliminary investigations with respect to alleged violations of
this chapter. No preliminary investigation of the activities of any officer
or employee may be initiated unless such officer or employee is notified
in writing. The notice shall state the exact nature and purpose of the
investigation, the individual's specific actions or activities to be
investigated, and a statement of such person's due process rights.
F. If, after such investigation, the Board finds that probable cause exists to
believe the allegations of the complaint, it shall conduct a hearing on
the matter, which shall be held not more than 30 days after such
finding. The Board shall give the accused at least 20 days' notice of the
hearing date. Such hearing shall be at closed session, unless the
accused petitions for a hearing open to the public. The rules of civil
evidence shall apply to such hearings. All evidence, including certified
copies of records and documents which the Board considers, shall be
fully offered and made part of the record in the case. Every party shall
be afforded adequate opportunity to rebut or offer countervailing
evidence. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-12]
G. During all stages of any investigation or proceeding conducted under
this section, the accused or any person whose activities are under
investigation shall be entitled to be represented by counsel of his own
choosing.
H. The accused or his representative shall have an adequate opportunity
to examine all documents and records to be used at the hearing under
Subsection F at a reasonable time before the date of the hearing, as
well as during the hearing, to bring witnesses, to establish all pertinent
facts and circumstances, and to question or refute any testimony or
evidence, including opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse
witnesses.
I. The Board shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses
and to issue subpoenas granted other boards and commissions under
§ 885.01(3), Wis. Stats.
J. Determination. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall file its
decision within five days in writing, signed by all participating Board
§ 65-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-7
1:59
§ 65-8. Applicability.
This code shall be operative in all instances covered by its provisions
except when superseded by an applicable statutory provision and statutory
action is mandatory or when the application of a statutory provision is
discretionary but determined by the Ethics Board to be more appropriate or
desirable.
§ 65-9. Violations and penalties.15
A determination that a public official's or public employee's actions
constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this chapter may
constitute a cause for removal from office, termination of employment,
suspension, reprimand or other appropriate disciplinary action. As an
alternative or in addition to sanctions imposed herein, any individual
violating the Ethics Code shall be subject to a nonreimbursable forfeiture
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 as determined by the City of
Watertown Common Council.
Chapter 76
FINANCE AND TAXATION
members, with findings of fact and conclusions of law concerning the
propriety of the conduct of the officer or employee and, if appropriate,
refer the matter to the Common Council or other proper authority with
a recommendation for suspension, removal from office or employment
or other disciplinary action.
K. The affirmative vote of the Board shall be required for any action taken
by the Board, with the exception that action taken by the Board
pursuant to a hearing conducted under Subsection F shall require an
unanimous vote.
15.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 65-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 65-9
1:60
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted as §§ 3.01 to 3.04, 3.06 to 3.09, 3.13, 3.15 and 3.19 of the
former City Code]
§ 76-1. Depositories.
§ 76-2. Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. [Amended by Ord.
No. 76-3; Ord. No. 92-76]
A. Designation. Every state or national bank, savings and loan association,
savings and trust company, mutual savings bank, and credit union
located in this state which has qualified as a public depository with the
Secretary of Financial Institutions and has complied in all other
respects with Ch. 34, Wis. Stats., is hereby designated as a public
depository of the City to receive and hold such funds of the City as may
from time to time be deposited therein.16
B. Local government pooled investment fund.
(1) The City is authorized to participate in the Wisconsin Local
Government Pooled Investment Fund pursuant to § 25.50, Wis.
Stats.
(2) The City Clerk-Treasurer is designated as the local official who may
transfer City funds to the State Treasurer for deposit in the fund.
[Amended by Ord. No. 87-31]
(3) The State Treasurer is authorized to accept telephone requests for
withdrawal of City funds.
C. Authorized and suitable investments. Authorized investments include
any investment stipulated in Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0603(1m). In
accordance with §§ 34.01(5) and 34.09, Wis. Stats., all Wisconsin banks,
state and federal chartered, all financial institutions insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), as well as the Wisconsin
Local Government Pooled Investment Fund, are authorized
depositories. [Amended by Ord. No. 87-32; Ord. No. 98-68;
12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-47]
D. Delegation of authority. Management and administrative responsibility
for the investment program of the City is entrusted to the City Clerk/
Treasurer under the direction of the Common Council. Individuals
authorized to engage in investment transactions on behalf of the City
are the Clerk/Treasurer, the Mayor or those individuals designated by
the Clerk/Treasurer, Mayor or Common Council. [Added 12-15-2015
by Ord. No. 15-47]
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-2
1:61
§ 76-3. Duplicate Treasurer's bond eliminated.
§ 76-4. Time for payment of taxes.
A. Aggregate tax stated on roll. Pursuant to § 70.65, Wis. Stats., the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the
aggregate amount of state, county, school and local taxes in a single
column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the
tax is levied or, in the case of personal property, in a single column
opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied.
B. Use of abbreviated legal description. Pursuant to § 70.86, Wis. Stats.,
the Council hereby authorizes the City Assessor to use an abbreviated
legal description system as set forth in § 70.25, Wis. Stats., to prepare
the assessment and tax rolls and to use on the tax bills which are mailed
to the owners of real estate within the City.
A. Bond eliminated. The City elects not to give the bond on the City
Treasurer as provided for by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
B. City liable for default of Clerk-Treasurer. Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis.
Stats., the City shall be obligated to pay, in case the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required by law
to be paid by such Clerk-Treasurer to the County Treasurer. [Amended
by Ord. No. 87-34]
A. Installments. If real estate taxes for a tax parcel assessed in the City are
$100 or less, they must be paid in full by January 31. If they exceed
$100, they may be paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer in no more than
three installments, as follows:
(1) The first installment shall be 1/3 of the total real estate tax plus the
full amount of any installment payments on any special
assessments, special charges and/or special taxes and shall become
due and payable on the 31st day of January.
(2) The second installment shall be 1/3 of the real estate taxes and
shall be due and payable on the 30th day of April.
(3) The third installment shall be 1/3 of the total real estate taxes and
shall be due and payable on the 31st day of July. On any installment
date, the taxpayer may pay the balance of the taxes due.
[Amended by Ord. No. 97-79]
B. Delinquent installments; interest. Interest shall be computed per
§§ 74.12(10) and 74.47(1), Wis. Stats. [Amended by Ord. No. 11-07]
C. Personal property taxes. All personal property taxes assessed in the
City, except those on improvements on leased land, shall be payable in
full on or before five working days after January 31. Payments not made
by that date shall accrue interest from February 1. [Amended by Ord.
No. 89-7517]
§ 76-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 76-5
1:62
§ 76-5. Payments by boards and commissions to members
prohibited.
No public board or commission having charge and management of a City
department, utility or public property, and which board or commission may
have authority by ordinance or statute to approve expenditures against any
fund whatsoever which is in the City treasury, shall grant to any member
of said board or commission any salary or wage which is designated or
intended to compensate such member or members for services as a member
or members of said board or commission, unless such salary or wage shall
have been first approved by a majority vote of all members of the Common
Council and the amount of such salary or wage fixed by ordinance.
§ 76-6. Accounts payable. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-30; Ord. No.
97-40]
§ 76-7. Fiscal year.
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
§ 76-8. Budget system. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-115A; Ord. No.
97-41]
A. At every regular meeting of the Common Council, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall submit a list of all accounts payable needing Common Council
approval. An affirmative majority vote of those Alderpersons present at
each meeting shall permit the Clerk-Treasurer to pay said accounts.
B. The Clerk-Treasurer is also authorized to pay accounts without Council
approval in the following categories: wages, utility payments,
withholding taxes, insurance premiums, Wisconsin Retirement Fund
payments, deferred compensation payments, payments required on
City indebtedness, and any other expenditures previously approved by
the Common Council by resolution or acceptance of committee report
or authorized by the purchasing policy.
C. Section 66.0609, Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted except as amended by
the purchasing policy.
A. On or before September 1 of each year, each officer, department or
board shall file with the City Clerk-Treasurer:
(1) An itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the
powers and duties of the office, department or board during the
preceding fiscal year; and a detailed statement of the receipts and
disbursements on account of any special fund under the
supervision of the officer, department or board during that year,
and the condition and management of those funds; and
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 76-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-8
1:63
(2) Detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year
and for the ensuing fiscal year. The statements shall be presented
in the form prescribed by the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall be
designated as the "departmental estimates" and shall be as nearly
uniform as possible for the main divisions of all departments.
B. The Mayor shall consider the departmental estimates in consultation
with the department head and shall then determine the total amount to
be recommended in the budget for the department or activity.
C. On or before September 20 of each year, the Mayor shall prepare and
submit to the Finance Committee a proposed budget of the City for the
ensuing fiscal year. The proposed budget shall include:
(1) The expense of conducting each department and activity of the City
for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current
year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increases and
decreases recommended as compared with appropriations for the
current year.
(2) An itemization of all anticipated income of the City from sources
other than general property taxes and bond issues, with a
comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from
each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and
current fiscal years.
(3) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general
property taxes which, with income from other sources, will be
necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
(4) Other information as may be required by the Common Council,
Finance Committee and/or state law. The Finance Committee shall
provide a reasonable number of copies of the proposed budget for
distribution to citizens.
D. The Finance Committee shall submit to the Common Council, after it
has reviewed the budget and made recommended changes, the draft of
an appropriation resolution providing for the expenditures proposed for
the ensuing fiscal year. On submission of the proposed appropriation
resolution to the Common Council, it shall be deemed to have been
regularly introduced to the body.
E. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall publish as a Class 1 notice, under Ch.
985, Wis. Stats., a budget summary in the form prescribed by the Mayor
and by § 65.90(3)(b), Wis. Stats. The notice shall also indicate where the
proposed budget in detail is available for public inspection and the time
and place at which a public hearing on the proposed budget is to be
conducted. The Common Council shall, not less than 15 days after
publication of the budget summary, hold a public hearing on the
proposed budget. Following the public hearing, the proposed budget
may be changed without the requirement of a two-thirds vote as
provided under § 65.90(5)(a), Wis. Stats.
§ 76-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 76-8
1:64
§ 76-9. City funds to be spent in accordance with appropriations.
[Amended by Ord. No. 79-40; Ord. No. 91-36; Ord. No. 97-41]
§ 76-10. Service charge for tax-exempt residences.
F. Upon written recommendation of the Mayor, the Common Council may,
at any time, by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership, transfer any
portion of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any other
purpose or object. Notice of the transfer shall be given by publication
within 10 days thereafter in accordance with § 65.90(5)(a), Wis. Stats.
A. No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in
pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when
changed as authorized by Wisconsin Statutes. At the close of each fiscal
year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the
general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation, but appropriations
may be made by the Council, to be paid out of the income of the current
year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which
will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation
shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall
have been accomplished or abandoned.
B. Council approval required for certain expenditures. The Common
Council may approve all expenditures as required by the purchasing
policy.
C. Mayor's approval required for certain expenditures. The Mayor may
approve all expenditures as defined by the purchasing policy.
A. Statement of purpose. Within the City there are many fine institutions
such as colleges, churches, nursing homes, private clubs, rest homes,
old-age homes, and homes for the mentally and/or physically
handicapped. Most of these institutions own single- or multiple-family
residences for the benefit of their staffs. The City provides fire and
police protection, snow removal, garbage collection and other services
to these residences. These services are presently provided at no cost to
these residences since they are exempt from real estate taxation, and
therefore the cost of these services is paid by the non-tax-exempt
property owners in the City. By the adoption of this section it is hereby
declared to be the public policy of the City that the tax-exempt
residences referred to herein should pay a share of the cost of providing
municipal services from which they benefit.
B. Property subject to service charge. All tax-exempt single-family or
multiple-family residences and private clubs located within the City
shall be subject to the service charge set forth in Subsection C. This
service charge shall apply to all structures whose principal use is for
residential housing, and structures for multiple usage incidental to the
principal residential use and intended as housing shall be subject to the
service charge. Residential housing which is partially exempt from
§ 76-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-10
1:65
taxation shall pay only a pro rata share of the service charge based
upon the percentage of tax exemption.
C. Amount of service charge. The annual service charge to be paid shall be
$400 per residence or club, effective January 1, 1991. [Amended by
Ord. No. 90-90]
D. Payment of service charge. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall mail a notice
of the service charge to the owners of record of the property in question
prior to June 1 of every year. After receipt of notice, payment shall be
made in full to the City Clerk-Treasurer on or before September 1 of any
year, after which interest at 8% per annum will be charged. [Added by
Ord. No. 71-74A; amended by Ord. No. 87-37]
§ 76-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 76-10
1:66
ARTICLE II
Room Tax
[Adopted by Ord. No. 98-24 (§ 3.17 of the former City Code)]
§ 76-11. Enactment. [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
Pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., a room tax is hereby imposed on the
privilege of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by hotel
keepers, motel operators, bed-and-breakfast operators, lodging
marketplace, owners of short-term rentals or tourist rooming houses and
other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public,
irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the
accommodations. In this article, "hotel," "motel" and "transient" have the
meaning set forth in § 77.52(2)(a)(1), Wis. Stats. Any tax so imposed shall
not be subject to the selective sales tax as provided in Ch. 77, Wis. Stats.
§ 76-12. Effective date.
The tax shall be effective October 1, 1998.
§ 76-13. Rate. [Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-23]
The tax imposed shall be at the rate of 5% of the gross proceeds billed or
received for furnishing accommodations to the public.
§ 76-14. Collection of tax.
Each person furnishing accommodations to the public as set forth
hereinabove shall collect the tax concurrent with the billing and collecting
of any corresponding sales tax and shall individually itemize the tax on any
invoice, billing or statement provided to the accommodated public. This
tax shall not be imposed on sales to the federal government and persons
or organizations exempted from sales and use tax under § 77.54(9a), Wis.
Stats., as amended from time to time.
§ 76-15. Filing and payment. [Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord. No.
14-23]
Each person furnishing accommodations to the public shall file a room tax
return, on the form to be provided by the City Clerk/Treasurer, with the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer on the 20th day of the month following
the end of each calendar month, accompanied by payment of the tax due,
if any, for that month, less an amount equal to 5% of the tax collected
to compensate the person filing the return for administrative expenses
incurred. The five-percent deduction shall only apply if the payment of said
room tax is not delinquent.
§ 76-16. Enforcement.
A. The City Clerk/Treasurer or his designee shall have the right, upon
reasonable notice, to inspect and audit the financial records of each
§ 76-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-16
1:67
§ 76-17. Amended returns.
Each person filing a return may, within one year from the due date of that
return, file an amended return for the purpose of correcting information
contained on the return as originally filed. If additional tax is due, such
amount, including any applicable interest, shall be paid with the amended
return. In the event of a tax overpayment, the Clerk/Treasurer shall refund
the amount of overpayment within 30 days of receipt of the amended return.
§ 76-18. Expenditures.
person furnishing accommodations to the public for the purposes of
determining whether a return has been properly filed or whether the
amount of the tax has been properly determined. The Clerk/Treasurer,
according to his best judgment, may estimate and determine the tax
payable for any calendar month if any person required to file a return
fails, neglects or refuses to do so or fails or refuses to give access
to inspect or audit his financial records in accordance with this
subsection.18
B. Interest in the amount of 12% per annum shall accrue on any tax not
paid when due.
C. In the event any person fails or refuses to give access to inspect
financial records pursuant to this section, that person shall be subject
to a forfeiture not to exceed 5% of the tax due. Each failure or refusal
shall constitute a separate violation of this provision.
D. In the event a person fails to pay any tax when due, that person shall be
subject to a forfeiture not to exceed the lesser of $5,000 or 25% of the
tax due for the previous year.
E. The information obtained under this section shall be kept in confidence
by those inspecting and auditing the financial records, unless said
information is used in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of the
duties of their office or by order of the court. Persons found guilty of
violating this subsection may be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$500.19
A. The revenues generated by the room tax shall be apportioned as
follows: 30% to the general fund and 70% to a reserve account to
promote tourism.
B. The City shall be assisted in its effort to promote tourism by the
Chamber of Commerce and a Committee on Tourism which the
Chamber shall establish. The Committee on Tourism shall be an
ongoing and broad-based advisory committee, the goal of which shall
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 76-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 76-18
1:68
be to set objectives and implement strategies to promote tourism within
the City.
C. Any continuing expenditures approved within the annual City budget
which are intended to be funded by the 70% of room tax revenues that
are dedicated to promoting tourism shall be clearly noted.
D. The Finance Committee and Common Council will seek input from the
Tourism Committee on decisions relating to the expenditure of the 70%
of room tax revenues dedicated to promoting tourism. While all
expenditure authority shall be retained by the Common Council,
priority consideration shall be given to those expenditures that the
Tourism Committee recommends.
§ 76-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-18
1:69

ARTICLE III
Special Charges for Current Services
[Adopted by Ord. No. 06-16 (§ 25.14 of the former City Code)]
§ 76-19. Legislative purpose.
The Common Council of the City of Watertown determines and finds that its
departments, agencies and employees may from time to time render certain
current services to make public improvements upon real property within the
City of Watertown. Such current services confer on the owner or owners of
such real property a benefit which improves or enhances the value of such
real property and are in addition to the general benefits which the owner
or owners of such real property enjoy in common with the other residents
of the City. Since the current services for public improvements to such real
property can reasonably be expected to benefit the affected property only, it
is reasonable and fair not to fund the cost of such current services from the
general revenues of the City. Therefore, it is intent of this article to levy a
special charge against such real property for the current services or public
improvements so provided in order to defray the actual and reasonable cost
of providing these current services to the real property so affected. This
special charge is adopted pursuant to the authority granted in § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats., and is in addition to any other method provided by law to collect
special charges for current services.
§ 76-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURRENT SERVICES — Those special, governmental services provided
by the City, either directly by its employees and officials or indirectly by
contracted services with third parties, which affect only a single property
or a contiguous area of several properties within the City and which are in
addition to those regular services provided generally throughout the City.
Services contained in this definition include, but are not necessarily limited
to, removal of abandoned vehicles, snow and ice removal, noxious weed
and vegetation elimination, alarm box response fees, repair of sidewalks,
garbage and refuse disposal, recycling, stormwater management fees, tree
care or removal, disposition of dead animals, repair of water meters,
abatement of public nuisances, sewer and water service laterals,
installation or repairs to sidewalks or curbs and gutters, soil erosion/
conservation work, and stormwater utility charges.
SPECIAL CHARGE — A fee imposed on the owner or owners of real property
for current services or public improvements that have been rendered to the
affected real estate by the City and which is reasonably designed to meet
the overall cost of such current services for which the fee was imposed.
The special charge levied against the real estate in this article is not
adopted under the special assessment procedure authorized in § 66.0703,
Wis. Stats., and is a separate and independent charge which is adopted
under § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
§ 76-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-21
1:71
§ 76-21. Levy of special charge.
The City may levy a special charge against the real property within the City
to recover the cost of current services or public improvements rendered to
such real property by allocating all or a portion of the cost of the current
services to the property so served, which may consist of a single property or
a series of several contiguous properties actually affected by such current
services or public improvements.
§ 76-22. Procedure for assessment of special charge.
A. Whenever a department head or public official of the City, or any of his
or her authorized agents, shall determine that any public work or
improvement or any current service shall be rendered and financed in
whole or in part by a special charge levied under this article, he or she
shall notify the owner or person having charge of such premises, in
writing, at least two weeks prior thereto, of a hearing before the
department head or public official on the imposition of a special charge
to be levied against the real property so affected by the current services
or public improvement imposed under the authority of the Code of the
City or the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. The owner or person in charge of the premises shall have a right to be
present at such hearing and be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The
only issues to be addressed at such hearing shall be the necessity of
rendering such current services (if the services have not yet been
rendered or if the owner or person having charge of the premises has
not previously been given an opportunity to complete the task or
activity at his or her sole expense) and the actual and reasonable costs
of performing such current services. After such hearing, the
department head or public official shall either abandon such work or
proceed under Subsection C below, unless the department head or
public official determines at the hearing held under this section that,
because of the severity of the condition or the scope of the remedy
needed to correct the problem requiring current services on the real
property, there is created an emergency condition which will threaten
the public health, safety or welfare and which warrants immediate
action. The department head or public official shall provide written
notice of such decision, the time period during which representatives of
the City will render the current services, and a brief description of the
current services to be rendered on the property to the owner or person
having charge of such premises.
C. Prior to proceeding to perform any work or render any current services
under Subsection B, the owner or person having charge of such
premises shall be given at least 30 days to cause the task or activity to
be completed as ordered, except that the performance time period shall
be shortened to a time period less than 30 days when the department
head or public official determines that an emergency condition exists.
Otherwise, the department head or public official shall determine the
time specified, shall order the scope of the work or current services to
§ 76-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 76-22
1:72
§ 76-23. Delinquency; attachment of lien against real property.
be performed, and shall provide written notice of such time period to
the owner or person having charge of such premises, depending on the
severity of the problem and the scope of correction needed to remedy
the problem. The owner or person having charge of the premises shall
be deemed to have waived any additional time to perform the task
or activity if such owner or person has been provided prior notice by
the department head or public official under other provisions of the
Watertown Code or Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Should this order not be complied with within the time specified in the
order, the department head or public official shall cause such work to
be completed, unless the owner or person in charge of such premises
shall have appealed the order of the department head or public official
entered under Subsection E below. If the department head or public
official shall cause the work to be done, or if the work has already been
completed, all of the actual and reasonable costs shall be charged
against the real property as a special charge. The department head or
public official shall provide written notice to the owner or person in
charge of the premises of the actual and reasonable costs of providing
the current services or public improvement, the date when payment is
due, and the appeal rights of the owner or person in charge of the
premises under this section.
E. A person who receives an order from the department head or public
official and objects to all or a part thereof may, within 30 days of the
date of the mailing of the order to such person, notify the department
head or public official, in writing, of the nature of the objection and of a
request for a hearing thereon. The written order under Subsection C
above shall be deemed the initial determination, and the municipal
authority charged with conducting the review, pursuant to § 10-8B of
the Watertown Code, shall be the Public Works Commission of the
Common Council. The Public Works Commission shall proceed to
conduct a hearing on the appellant's objection, pursuant to §§ 10-9 and
10-10 of this Code. The department head or public official, or his or her
designee, shall be present at such hearing. The appellant may be
represented by counsel. The Public Works Commission may affirm,
cancel or modify the order of the department head or public official, in
its discretion, to best conform such order to the intent of this article.
F. Any owner or person against whose property a special charge is levied
under this section may appeal the order of the Public Works
Commission entered under Subsection E above to the Circuit Court of
the county in which such real property is located within 30 days of the
date of receipt of the final determination of the Public Works
Commission, pursuant to § 10-12 of the Code. The manner of appeal to
the Circuit Court, other than the time within which the appeal is to be
filed, shall be as prescribed in § 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats.
§ 76-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-23
1:73
§ 76-24. (Reserved)20
A. If the current service or public improvement has already been
performed or rendered to the real property, the special charge shall be
paid within 60 days of the levy of the special charge by adoption of the
order rendered by the department head or public official under
§ 76-22D above.
B. Any special charge imposed under this article is not payable in
installments but is rather payable in a lump sum.
C. If the special charge is not paid within the period set under Subsection
A above, the special charge is delinquent and will begin accruing
interest on the outstanding balance thereof at the annual rate of 12%
per year, imposed retroactive to the date of levy of the special charge by
the department head or public official.
D. A delinquent special charge shall become a lien upon the real property
against which it is imposed as of the date of delinquency as defined
under Subsection C above. The delinquent special charge shall be
included in the current or next tax roll for collection and settlement
pursuant to Ch. 74, Wis. Stats.
20.Editor's Note: Former § 76-24, Exceptions to imposition of special charge, was repealed
9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19.
§ 76-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 76-24
1:74
ARTICLE IV
Special Assessments
[Adopted by Ord. No. 06-16 (§ 25.15 of the former City Code)]
§ 76-25. Method of levying.
In addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for any
public work or public improvement may be levied in accordance with the
provisions of this article and pursuant to § 66.0701, Wis. Stats.
§ 76-26. Resolution.
Whenever the governing body shall determine that any public work or
public improvement shall be financed in whole or in part by special
assessments levied under this article, it shall adopt a resolution specifying
this intention and the time, either before or after the completion of the work
or improvement, when the amount of the assessments will be determined
and levied; the number of annual installments in which the assessments may
be paid, if any; the rate of interest to be charged on the unpaid balance and
the terms on which any of the assessments may be deferred while no use of
the improvement is made in connection with the property.
§ 76-27. Applicability of statute.
The provisions of § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., shall apply to special assessments
levied under this article, except that, when the governing body determines
by resolution that the hearing on the assessment be held subsequent to the
completion of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the
report required by § 66.0703(4), Wis. Stats., shall only contain a statement
of the final costs of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate
of the cost.
§ 76-28. Notices.
Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on any special assessment
proposed to be levied and notice of the final assessment and terms of
payment thereof shall be given in the manner prescribed in § 66.0703(7)
and (8)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 76-29. Lien.
Any special assessments levied under this article shall affect only the
property benefited by the public work or improvement and shall be a lien
against the property assessed from the date of the final resolution of the
governing body determining the amount of the levy.
§ 76-30. Appeals.
Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under this
article may appeal from the levy of the special assessment in the manner
prescribed by § 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats., within 40 days of the date of the
§ 76-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-30
1:75
adoption of the final resolution by the governing body determining the
amount of the levy.
§ 76-31. Delinquency; attachment of lien against real property.
A. If the public work or public improvement has already been performed
or rendered to the real property, the special assessment shall be paid
within 60 days of the levy of the special assessment by adoption of the
final resolution by the governing body under § 76-29 above.
B. Any special assessment imposed under this article may be payable in
annual installments at an applicable rate of interest or may be deferred
at an applicable rate of interest, at the discretion of the governing body,
pursuant to the terms and conditions expressed in § 66.0715, Wis.
Stats.
C. If the special assessment is not paid within the period set under
Subsection A above, the special assessment is delinquent and will begin
accruing interest on the outstanding balance thereof at the annual rate
of 12% per year, imposed retroactive to the date of levy of the special
assessment by adoption of the final resolution by the governing body
under § 76-29 above.
D. A delinquent special assessment shall become a lien upon the real
property against which it is imposed as of the date of the levy of the
special assessment as defined under § 76-29 above and § 66.0717, Wis.
Stats. The delinquent special assessment shall be included in the
current or next tax roll for collection and settlement pursuant to Ch. 74,
Wis. Stats.
§ 76-30 WATERTOWN CODE § 76-31
1:76
Chapter 80
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police and Fire Commission — See Ch. 24, Art.
II.
§ 80-1. Composition. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-6321]
The Fire Department of the City shall consist of the Chief, Assistant Chiefs,
Lieutenants, paid members and paid part-time members as shall be
provided for and appointed.
§ 80-2. Appointments. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-25]
All appointments of paid members to the Department shall be made
according to § 62.13, Wis. Stats. Auxiliary members shall be appointed
pursuant to the rules adopted by the Department. All civilian appointments
(non-sworn officers) shall be made per the personnel policies of the City.
§ 80-3. Powers and duties of Chief.
A. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have command of fires and
alarms of fire over all members and employees of the Fire Department
and all apparatus and property belonging to the same and shall direct
all measures he may deem proper for the extinguishment of fire,
protection of property, preservation of order and observance of the laws
and ordinances and regulations respecting fires. He shall examine the
engines, hook and ladder trucks, hose carriages and all other property
belonging to the Fire Department once in each month, and as often as
circumstances may render it expedient, and cause them to be kept in
good order and in every respect ready for use.
B. He shall purchase all general supplies and order minor repairs when
approved by the Mayor.
C. He shall inspect all business buildings in said City for the purpose of
determining the general character of the premises with respect to the
disposition of debris, rubbish, wastepaper, rags, oils, waste, explosives
and all kinds of inflammable materials, and may inspect any building in
the City for the purpose of ascertaining if any danger from fire exists by
reason of defective chimneys, flues, stoves, ovens, boilers, electric
wiring, ash houses and receptacles, or by reason of any other cause,
and if any hazards are found, he shall order the same removed.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 76-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:77
§ 80-4. Reports.
The Chief shall submit a quarterly and an annual report to the Mayor and
Common Council regarding the operation of his Department.
§ 80-5. Fire Chief. [Added by Ord. No. 90-26; amended by Ord. No.
97-21]
The Fire Chief shall be the chief executive officer of the Fire Department
under the direction and control of the Mayor and Common Council. The
personnel of the Fire Department shall be under the immediate supervision,
direction and control of the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be a member
of the Wisconsin and International Fire Chiefs Associations. The City shall
D. He shall instruct and drill all members of the Department periodically in
the use of apparatus and equipment, fire-prevention and firefighting
methods, state laws and ordinances and inspection of buildings. He
shall instruct all members as to conditions in the waterworks system, its
possibilities, location and sizes of water mains, fire hydrants and other
water supplies, and such other business in the line of duty. In this
connection he shall cause to be safely and neatly filed publications,
maps, etc., on fire prevention and protection and such other
educational literature provided the Department and to make use of it to
the best advantage of all members.
E. He may in his judgment suspend members from duty and shall
immediately report in writing such action to the Police and Fire
Commission. Section 62.13(5), Wis. Stats., shall thereafter govern as to
paid members.
F. He shall report in writing to the Police and Fire Commission any officer
or member of the Department who by reason of age, disease, accident
or other incompetence does not properly perform his duty.
G. The Chief shall have sole and absolute control and command over all
persons connected with the Fire Department and shall possess full
power and authority over its organization, government and discipline.
H. The Chief shall have custody, subject to the direction of the Mayor, of all
property and equipment belonging to the Fire Department.
I. The Chief or his assistant shall inquire into the cause of all fires in the
City as soon after they occur as possible and keep a correct record of
the same in each case at his office.
J. The Chief of the Fire Department shall make suitable regulations under
which the officers and members of the Department will be required to
wear some appropriate uniform or badge.
K. The Chief shall promulgate rules and regulations governing all
members of the Department.
§ 80-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 80-5
1:78
pay the annual dues for the Fire Chief's membership and his expenses while
attending any official meetings thereof.
§ 80-6. Assistant Chiefs. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-65; Ord. No.
97-2122]
An Assistant Chief shall be in command of his or her assigned platoon. He/
she shall have the responsibility and control of the apparatus and personnel
assigned to his or her platoon. An Administrative Assistant Chief shall be
in charge of the training program, nonemergency operations of the Fire
Department and administrative duties of the Fire Department as assigned,
from time to time, by the Fire Chief. In the absence of the Fire Chief,
the Fire Chief shall appoint an Assistant Chief as Acting Chief of the Fire
Department. After such appointment and during the absence of the Fire
Chief, the Acting Chief shall have the powers and duties of the Chief of the
Fire Department.
§ 80-7. Lieutenants.23
A Lieutenant, in the absence of his Assistant Chief, shall exercise the same
duties and have the same powers as the Assistant Chief. At all other times,
he shall perform such duties as the Assistant Chief may direct.24
Chapter 97
INSPECTION DIVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
§ 97-1. Supervision; composition.
The Building Inspection Division shall be under the supervision of the City
Engineer. The Division shall consist of the Building Inspector, together
with two subordinate inspectors who will be under the supervision of the
Building Inspector. The duties of the inspectors will be to conduct all
building inspections required by this Code and as set forth in Wisconsin
Statutes and the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Chapter 114
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
24.Editor's Note: Original § 5.03(8), (9), (10), (13) and (14), which immediately followed this
section, were repealed by Ord. No. 97-20. Original § 5.03(11) and (12) were repealed by
Ord. No. 79-59.
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-1
1:79
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
§ 114-1. Form of government. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-54]
Pursuant to a charter ordinance adopted by the electors April 5, 1960, and
effective April 18, 1961, the City is reorganized under Ch. 62 and § 66.0101,
Wis. Stats., providing for the City Mayor and Aldermanic Plan, with a
Common Council composed of one Alderperson from each Aldermanic
District, said Alderpersons to be elected for a term of two years and said
Mayor to be elected for a term of three years.
§ 114-2. Powers.
All legislative and general ordinance powers shall be vested in the Mayor
and the Common Council as prescribed by law.
§ 114-3. Mayor. [Amended by Ord. No. 88-78; 11-1-1988 by Charter
Ord. No. 7; Ord. No. 89-60; Ord. No. 02-4725]
There shall be a full-time Mayor elected at the regular City election for
a term of three years commencing on the third Tuesday in April next
succeeding his/her election. City business shall be the Mayor's primary
occupation. The Mayor shall have the direct responsibility for the following
functions:
§ 114-4. Election of Council members. [Amended by Ord. No. 02-47]
There shall be one Alderperson from each of the even-numbered Aldermanic
Districts elected in even-numbered years for two-year terms. There shall
be one Alderperson from each of the odd-numbered Aldermanic Districts
elected in the odd-numbered years for two-year terms. Terms shall begin on
the third Tuesday in April next succeeding election.
A. Budgeting with the assistance of the Finance Committee.
B. Personnel administration.
C. Property management and inventory.
D. Supporting services to the Common Council.
E. Administration of the job descriptions and compensation plan of the
City with the assistance of the Finance Committee.
F. Negotiate the sale and/or purchase of public property subject to Plan
Commission and Common Council approval.
25.Editor's Note: See also Charter Ordinance No. 7 in Ch. A600.
§ 97-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 114-5
1:80
§ 114-5. Term limits imposed. [Added 11-8-1994;26 amended by Ord.
No. 02-47]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
be eligible to be nominated, elected or to serve in the office of Mayor
if that person shall previously have held such office for two or more full
consecutive terms, unless one full term or more has elapsed since that
person last held such office. No person shall be eligible to be nominated,
elected or to serve in the office of Alderperson if that person shall previously
have held such office for three or more full consecutive terms, unless one
full term or more has elapsed since that person last held such office. For the
purposes of this section, terms shall be deemed consecutive unless more
than two years apart, and a term shall be deemed full if a person has served
at least half of the time allotted for the term. Service prior to the passage of
this section shall not count in determining length of service.
§ 114-6. Term limits waived. [Added by Ord. No. 05-53]
§ 114-7. Common Council rules of procedure.
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations
and the meetings of the Common Council and of committees thereof:
A. When an Alderperson is term-limited pursuant to § 114-5, the
Alderperson shall be permitted to circulate nomination papers if no
other candidate has filed nomination papers by closing hours at the City
Clerk/Treasurer's office the last Monday in December.
B. If one or more persons file nomination papers after the last Monday in
December and before the statutory deadline, then the sitting
Alderperson shall not be permitted to file his/her nomination papers in
violation of § 114-5 of this chapter.
C. In the event one or more persons have not filed nomination papers for
Alderperson prior to 10 minutes before the statutory filing deadline,
then at that point in time the sitting Alderperson may file nomination
papers and, if elected, serve one additional term, subject to the
continuing requirements of § 114-5.
A. Rule 1. Following a regular City election, for the purpose of orientation,
the Common Council shall meet on the third Tuesday of April. Regular
meetings of the Common Council shall be held on the first and third
Tuesdays of each calendar month, at the hour of 7:00 p.m., except that
if a regular meeting of the Common Council falls on a scheduled
election day, legal holiday or during a major community event, such
meeting may be held on the preceding or following day, at the same
hour and place. All meetings of the Common Council shall be held at the
Municipal Building, including special and adjourned meetings.
[Amended by Ord. No. 91-32; 11-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-24]
26.Editor's Note: This section was adopted at the election as a referendum question.
§ 114-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-7
1:81
B. Rule 2. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor upon written
notice of the time and purpose thereof to each member of the Common
Council; provided, however, that there is compliance with the Wisconsin
Open Meeting Law.27 Any special meeting attended by a quorum of the
Alderpersons shall be a regular meeting for the transaction of business
noticed for that meeting. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-55]
C. Rule 3.
(1) The Common Council may, by a majority vote of those present but
not fewer than six affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a
specific date and hour.
(2) No action shall be taken unless a quorum is present.
(3) Two-thirds of the Alderpersons of the Common Council shall
constitute a quorum. A lesser number may compel the attendance
of absent members or may adjourn. The Mayor shall not be counted
in determining whether a quorum is present at a meeting.
D. Rule 4. The business of the Common Council shall be conducted in the
following order: [Amended by Ord. No. 95-30; Ord. No. 13-08]
(1) Call to order by presiding officer.
(2) Roll call.
(3) Pledge of allegiance.
(4) Consideration of the minutes of the preceding meeting and
approving the same if correct and rectifying mistakes if any exist.
(5) Comments and suggestions from citizens present.
(6) Reports of committees.
(7) Unfinished business from previous meetings.
(8) Communications and recommendations of the Mayor.
(9) New business.
(10) Accounts payable.
(11) Communications and miscellaneous business.
(12) Ordinances.
(13) Resolutions.
(14) Comments and suggestions from citizens present.
E. Rule 5. The Mayor at the stated hour shall call the meeting to order;
however, immediately prior to such call to order, any invocation or
27.Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats.
§ 114-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 114-7
1:82
prayer pursuant to Resolution 7474 (April 6, 2009) may be offered.
The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of
order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with
the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order Revised,
unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any member
shall have the right of appeal from a decision of the presiding officer.
The appeal may be sustained by a majority of the members present,
exclusive of the presiding officer. [Amended by Ord. No. 13-08]
F. Rule 6. If the Mayor is absent at the designated time of any meeting, the
President of the Common Council shall preside over the meeting. He/
she shall, when so officiating, be styled "Acting Mayor." The President,
while serving as Acting Mayor, shall retain the voting rights of an
Alderperson and vote on each matter before the Common Council. The
President shall be selected by a majority vote of all members of the
Common Council at the annual meeting on the third Tuesday in April. In
the absence of both the Mayor and the President of the Common
Council, the Clerk/Treasurer shall call the meeting to order and preside
until the Common Council shall, by motion, select an Acting Mayor for
that meeting. In the event the Mayor is unable to perform the duties of
office, the Common Council, by two-thirds vote, may designate the
President as Acting Mayor, to exercise the powers and duties of Mayor
until he/she is able to resume those duties. [Amended by Ord. No.
95-60]
G. Rule 7. Whenever the presiding officer shall desire to speak upon any
question, or to make any motion, he shall vacate the chair and
designate the President of the Common Council, if present, and if not,
any Alderperson, to preside temporarily.
H. Rule 8.
(1) The following committees shall be appointed by the Mayor at the
first regular meeting of the newly elected Council: [Amended by
Ord. No. 89-57; Ord. No. 93-12]
(a) Committee on Finance.
(b) Committee on Public Works.
(c) Committee on Public Safety and Welfare.
(2) Each committee shall consist of at least three members. The Mayor
shall be Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, except that
during budget deliberations the Mayor shall be a nonvoting ex
officio member of the Committee on Finance and shall designate a
Chairperson of the Committee during budget deliberations. The
chairpersons of the other committees shall be designated by the
Mayor. Each member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a
majority of the members of the Common Council. All Alderpersons
shall serve on at least one standing committee. [Amended by Ord.
No. 91-16A]
§ 114-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-7
1:83
(a) In the event regular members will be absent from a meeting,
and also that the absence will cause a lack of a quorum, then
the absent member may ask the Mayor to appoint a
replacement. This replacement shall only serve for the affected
meeting and will have all the rights and responsibilities as the
regular member. This procedure will only apply to the
committees listed in Subsection H(1). If the absent member is
an Alderperson, the temporary replacement must also be an
Alderperson. This temporary appointment shall not require
Common Council approval. [Added by Ord. No. 04-11].
(3) The Mayor may, from time to time, appoint such special committee
or committees as provided for by motion or resolution, stating the
number of members and object thereof, to perform such duties as
may be assigned to them.
I. Rule 9.
(1) All ordinances and resolutions shall be read by title, author and
committee from which it comes, if said matter was discussed in a
committee. All other communications and other matters submitted
to the Common Council shall be referred to the appropriate
committee by the presiding officer. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
record each such reference by title. Any Alderperson may require
the reading in full of any matter at any time it is before the
Common Council.
(2) All bills and other financial claims against the City shall be itemized
and, upon receipt thereof, shall be examined by the Clerk/
Treasurer and the Mayor and then referred to the Common Council
for action, provided that payment of regular wages and salaries of
officials and employees according to schedules adopted by the
Common Council, utility bills that could receive a late penalty, bills
from other governmental agencies that shall by law be paid,
investment of City funds, employee insurance as provided by union
contract and/or personnel code, and bond and interest payments as
required by prior Council action shall be made by the Clerk/
Treasurer without submission to the Common Council after
verification by the department head submitting the same and
approval by the Clerk/Treasurer and Mayor. Said bills or claims
paid without Common Council approval shall be itemized and
reported to the Common Council.
(3) Each committee shall, at the next regular Common Council
meeting, submit a written report on all matters referred to it,
unless a longer time is granted, by acceptance of the report by the
Common Council, and such report shall be entered in the
proceeding. Such report shall recommend a definite action by the
Common Council on each item; shall be signed by the Chairperson,
Secretary or Temporary Chairperson, as appropriate; and shall be
filed with the Clerk/Treasurer prior to each Council meeting. All
§ 114-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 114-7
1:84
recommendations in the Committee report are to be accepted,
rejected or referred back to Committee. Minority reports may be
submitted. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-58; Ord. No. 95-69]
(4) Prior notice of each committee meeting shall be filed with the
Clerk/Treasurer by the Chairperson, and each meeting shall be
open to the public unless said meetings shall properly adjourn into
closed session for such items as shall be allowed under Wisconsin
Statutes.
(5) Any committee may require any City officer to confer with it and
supply information needed in connection with any matter pending
before the committee.
J. Rule 10.
(1) An aye and nay vote shall be taken on each standing committee
report immediately following its submission and discussion,
provided that any Alderperson may require a separate vote on any
item in any report.
(2) Subject to the provisions of Subsection J(1) with respect to a
separate item vote, the approval of a committee report in which a
course of action other than the adoption of an ordinance or
resolution is recommended shall comprise final action on such
course of action.
K. Rule 11. No ordinance or resolution shall be considered by the Common
Council unless presented, in writing, by the Mayor or by an
Alderperson. Resolutions shall be adopted by a favorable majority vote
of all the members of the Common Council present at the meeting,
unless a larger number is required by state statute or this Code. All
ordinances shall be adopted by two favorable majority votes of all the
members of the Common Council present at consecutive meetings,
unless a larger number is required by state statute or this Code. In
special or emergency situations, the Common Council rules may be
suspended and two readings of an ordinance may occur at the same
meeting for an accelerated adoption. [Amended by Ord. No. 97-28]
L. Rule 12. The deliberations of the Common Council shall be conducted in
the following manner:
(1) No Alderperson shall address the Common Council until he has
been recognized by the presiding officer. He shall thereupon
address himself to the Chairperson and confine his remarks to the
question under discussion and avoid all personalities.
(2) When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
(3) No person other than a member shall address the Common Council
except under order of business, Rule 4, Subsection D(5) and (14).
§ 114-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-7
1:85
The presiding officer shall decide if comments are relevant, shall
have authority to set a time limit on the comments, and shall have
such other authority as may be necessary to efficiently conduct
this area of the Common Council agenda and order of business.
[Amended by Ord. No. 95-29]
(4) No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless and until it has
been seconded, unless the rules permit one Alderperson to initiate
action. No motion shall be withdrawn or amended without the
consent of the person making the same and the person seconding
it.
(5) When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order
except to adjourn; to recess; to lay on the table; to move the
previous question; to postpone to a certain day; to refer; to amend;
or to postpone indefinitely. These motions shall have precedence in
the order listed.
(6) Any member wishing to terminate the debate may move the
previous question, in which event the presiding officer shall
announce the question as "Shall the main question now be put?" If
2/3 of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main
question shall be taken without further debate, its effect being to
put an end to all debate and to bring the Common Council to a
direct vote, first upon any pending amendments and then upon the
main question.
(7) Any Alderperson may demand an aye and nay vote on any matter,
and all aye and nay votes shall be recorded in the journal. On the
confirmation of appointments and on the adoption of any measure
assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing money, or
creating any liability or charge against the City or any fund thereof,
the vote shall be by aye or nay. Every Alderperson shall vote when a
question is put unless the Common Council by a majority vote of
those present shall excuse him for special cause, if the
circumstances exist as defined in § 946.13, Wis. Stats. However,
Council approval is not required for an Alderperson to abstain from
voting. If an Alderperson has participated in the debate of an issue,
however, he may not thereafter abstain from voting on the issue. An
Alderperson may not change his vote on any questions after the
result has been announced. The Mayor shall not vote, except that in
the case of a tie his vote shall be counted in determining whether a
sufficient number of the Common Council has voted favorably or
unfavorably on any measure. A majority vote of all the members of
the Common Council present at the meeting in favor of any matter
before the Common Council shall be necessary for passage or
approval, unless a larger number is required by state statute or the
City's Code. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-7]
§ 114-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 114-7
1:86
Chapter 125
NOTICES
§ 125-1. Official notice for public meetings.
Official notice to the general public for meetings held by City boards,
commissions and committees will be via posting on the bulletin board in the
City Clerk/Treasurer's office in the Municipal Building. All departments that
have postings that have City-wide interest are required to forward a copy to
the City Clerk/Treasurer for posting on said bulletin board. Posting will be
done in compliance with the Open Meetings Law as in effect and as changed
(8) A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to
adjourn, to recess, to lay on the table, and a call for the previous
question shall be decided without debate.
M. Rule 13. It shall be in order for any member voting in the majority to
move for a reconsideration of the vote of any question, except
confirmation of the appointment of City officials, of accounts payable, of
mayoral appointments, or approval of bartender's licenses, at that
meeting or at the next succeeding regular meeting. Any member of the
prevailing side, who voted in the majority, may schedule the original
question on the agenda of the next succeeding meeting of the Common
Council or one of its committees for a motion for reconsideration,
pursuant to Rule 14 below, and provided that the member of the
prevailing side files a written request for reconsideration with the City
Clerk/Treasurer by not later than 12:00 noon on the Monday that
follows the vote in question. [Amended by Ord. No. 08-21; Ord. No.
09-34]
N. Rule 14. Not later than the Friday preceding the next regular meeting
of the Common Council, the Clerk/Treasurer shall deliver to each
Alderperson a copy of the prior meeting's minutes, together with the
agenda, committee reports, ordinances and resolutions and any other
pertinent matters that may come before the Common Council. The
minutes of the prior meeting shall not be read at the Common Council
meeting unless specifically requested by an Alderperson. [Amended by
Ord. No. 08-21]
O. Rule 15. These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote
of 2/3 of the members present.
P. Rule 16. The assent of 2/3 of all the members of the Common Council
shall be required to amend these rules or any part thereof.
Q. Rule 17. The Mayor may veto any ordinance or resolution adopted by
the Common Council pursuant to § 62.09(8)(c), Wis. Stats. The Council
may thereafter override the Mayoral veto with the affirmative vote of 2/
3 of the members of the Common Council.
§ 114-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-1
1:87
from time to time. In addition to the posting, notices will be provided to all
news media that have requested to be notified in accordance with the Open
Meetings Law.28
Chapter 136
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 10.
Mayor and Council — See Ch. 114.
Public notices — See Ch. 125.
28.Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats.
§ 125-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 125-1
1:88
ARTICLE I
Appointed Officials
[Adopted as § 2.02 of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
71-24; Ord. No. 89-61; Ord. No. 89-62; Ord. No. 02-42; Ord. No.
02-47]
§ 136-1. Appointments by Mayor subject to confirmation.
The following officers shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Common Council for the terms indicated:
A. Public Works Commission: four years for citizen members.
B. Library Board: three years.
C. Police and Fire Commission: five years
D. Airport Commission: six years.
E. City Plan Commission: three years.
F. Zoning Board of Appeals: three years.
G. Board of Review: three years.
H. Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission: three years.
I. Licensing Board: one year.
J. Weed Commissioner (Assistant Street Superintendent): indefinite.
K. Transit Commission: four years.
L. Assistant City Attorney (part-time): indefinite.
M. Cable TV Regulatory Board: three years.
N. Historic Preservation Commission: three years.
O. Ethics Board: three years.
P. Administrative Review Commission: five years.
Q. Redevelopment Authority: terms shall be fixed consistent with and
pursuant to § 24-20K. [Amended 5-20-2014 by Ord. No. 14-15;
4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-8]
R. Economic Revolving Loan Committee: indefinite.
S. Board of Health: three years.
T. Health Officer: indefinite.
U. Tourism Commission: two- or three-year initial term [per designation of
Mayor at time of appointment; thereafter, three years (one-year term
for Aldermanic member)]. [Added 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-4]
§ 136-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-1
1:89
§ 136-2. Appointments by other officers.
The following officers shall be appointed by the board or commission
indicated:
Officer By Whom Appointed Term
Chief of Police Police and Fire Commission Indefinite
Fire Chief Police and Fire Commission Indefinite
Librarian Library Board Indefinite
Airport Manager Airport Commission Term of
contract
Park, Recreation and
Forestry Director
Park, Recreation and
Forestry Commission
Indefinite
§ 136-3. Commencement of terms.
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or statute, the term of appointed
officials shall commence following their appointment and qualification.
§ 136-4. Length of service. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-24]
The appointments of Alderpersons to all boards and commissions are to be
made on an annual basis.
V. Housing Authority: terms shall be fixed consistent with and pursuant to
§ 24-21E. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-8]
§ 136-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 136-4
1:90
ARTICLE II
Clerk/Treasurer
[Adopted as § 2.04(2) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
87-26; Ord. No. 89-66; Ord. No. 02-47]
§ 136-5. Supervision; monthly report.29
The Clerk/Treasurer's office shall be supervised by the Mayor. The City
Clerk/Treasurer shall account for all taxes, fees, accounts or charges due or
owing to the City and perform such other duties as are required by state
law or as directed by the Mayor and the Common Council. He/she shall
prepare a monthly report to be filed with the Common Council, showing the
condition of the treasury at the close of the preceding month.
§ 136-6. Bond.
The City may require the City Clerk/Treasurer to give a fidelity and surety
bond which shall run to the City in an amount and upon such terms as shall
be determined by the Common Council, but the City, if it shall demand such
bond, shall pay the premium for such fidelity bond.
§ 136-7. Receipts.
For all monies paid into the City treasury, except monies received in
payment of taxes and on the water bills, the Clerk/Treasurer shall execute
duplicate receipts, one of which shall be retained in his office and one shall
be given to the payer.
§ 136-8. Office.30
The Clerk/Treasurer shall have an office in the Municipal Building, in which
place are to be collected all taxes, fees, accounts or charges due or owing
to the City.
§ 136-9. Powers and duties.
The City Clerk/Treasurer shall serve as Clerk of the Common Council and
be responsible for the publication, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all
proceedings of the Common Council. The Clerk/Treasurer shall:
A. Be responsible for all election duties as required by the laws of the
State of Wisconsin and shall keep and maintain all election records and
be responsible for all property used in connection with the holding of
elections.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-9
1:91
B. Publish all legal notices unless otherwise provided and file and preserve
all contracts, bonds, oaths of office and other documents not required to
be filed elsewhere.
C. Issue all licenses required by ordinance or state statute, except as
otherwise provided, and keep a record of the same in a book provided
for that purpose.
D. Be the custodian of the City Seal.
E. Notify the Mayor 30 days prior to the expiration of the term of office of
any board or commission member.
F. Serve as custodian of all records deposited in his office that are
regularly kept at the Municipal Building.
G. Prepare the tax roll and tax notices as required by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
H. Prepare monthly reports showing the condition of the treasury at the
close of the preceding month, which contain a statement of all receipts
and disbursements, and place the same before the Mayor and City
Council for consideration at its next meeting. He/she shall preserve the
same with vouchers referred to therein in his office.
I. Maintain a set of books and accounts, keep an accurate account of all
orders drawn upon the City treasury and all receipts reported by his
office and charge or credit the same as the case may be to the proper
accounts.
J. At each Council meeting, make a full and complete statement of
accounts payable and submit the same to the Common Council for
approval.
K. Before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the
oath required by statute.31
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 136-9
1:92
ARTICLE III
Assessor
[Adopted as § 2.04(1) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
02-47]
§ 136-10. Duties.32
The Assessment Department shall be supervised by the Mayor. The City
Assessor shall perform all work in connection with the assessing of property
and the preparation of all assessments as required by state law. He/she shall
perform such other duties as directed by the Mayor and Common Council.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-10
1:93

ARTICLE IV
Attorney
[Adopted as § 2.07(1) of the former City Code; amended by Ord. No.
02-47]
§ 136-11. Responsibilities.
The office of the City Attorney shall be under the supervision of the City
Attorney. The City Attorney shall be responsible for the conduct of all legal
services of the City and shall serve as legal advisor of the Common Council,
Mayor and all departments and officers of the City. The City Attorney,
however, shall not be responsible for matters covered by insurance
company counsel, labor negotiations and related labor law matters or
bonding matters. He shall be in charge of prosecution of all cases arising
out of the violation of the City ordinances and shall represent the City in
matters in which the municipality is interested before any court or tribunal
and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor or
Council.
§ 136-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-11
1:95

ARTICLE V
Humane Officer
[Adopted by Ord. No. 00-19 (§ 2.06(2) of the former City Code);
amended by Ord. No. 02-47]
§ 136-12. Position created.
There is created the position of Humane Officer within the City of
Watertown. The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council,
shall appoint the Humane Officer to serve at the discretion of the Mayor.
§ 136-13. Certification; duties.
The Humane Officer shall be certified as required by § 173.05, Wis. Stats.,
as amended from time to time. The duties of the Humane Officer shall be as
outlined in Chapter 173 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the Humane Officer
shall enforce all laws and ordinances relating to animals within the City,
including but not limited to the provisions of Chapter 173 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, which are hereby adopted by reference, as amended from time to
time.
§ 136-14. Authority.33
The Humane Officer of the City of Watertown shall have the authority
to issue abatement orders pursuant to § 173.11, Wis. Stats. Any person
adversely affected by such abatement order may, within 10 days of service
of the order on said person, request an administrative review hearing,
pursuant to Chapter 10 of the Watertown Code, which hearing shall be held
within 10 days thereafter, pursuant to § 173.11, Wis. Stats.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-14
1:97
Chapter 147
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police and Fire Commission — See Ch. 24, Art.
II.
Citations — See Ch. 33.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 38.
§ 147-1. Composition of Department. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-19]
The Police Department of the City shall consist of a Chief of Police and such
other officers and personnel as may be provided for.
§ 147-2. Appointments.
Appointments to the Department shall be made as provided in § 62.13, Wis.
Stats.
§ 147-3. Physical examination. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-20]
Each police officer, at the time of his appointment, shall have a complete
physical examination to be paid for by the City.
§ 147-4. Chief of Police. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-21]
The Chief of Police shall be chief executive of the Police Department under
the direction and control of the Mayor and Common Council. The police
officers and Department personnel shall be under the direction of the Chief
of Police.
§ 147-5. Duties of Chief of Police. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-22; Ord.
No. 00-16]
A. The Chief of Police shall cause the public peace to be preserved and see
that all laws and ordinances are enforced. When any violation thereof
shall come to his notice, he shall cause the requisite complaint to be
made and see that evidence is procured for the prosecution of the
offender or offenders. In case of tumult or affray, riot or threatening
thereof, he shall take charge in person of the police officers and direct
them in the discharge of their respective duties.
B. He shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by law, by ordinance of the City or by
direction of Mayor or Common Council. It shall be his duty to serve all
papers directed to him in connection with the commission of any crime
or violation of law or ordinance in the City and all papers directed to
him by the Municipal Judge having jurisdiction in any civil action
§ 136-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 147-5
1:98
§ 147-6. Workday. [Added by Ord. No. 68-28; amended by Ord. No.
73-2; Ord. No. 94-32; Ord. No. 99-55]
The working day for union-affiliated members of the Police Department
shall be established by agreements between the City and the respective
labor unions representing those members.
§ 147-7. Vacations. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-8; Ord. No. 94-32; Ord.
No. 99-55]
Vacations for union-affiliated members of the Police Department shall be
established by agreements between the City and the respective labor unions
representing those members.
§ 147-8. Acceptance of cash bond.
wherein one or both parties to such action reside in the City, and he
shall serve no other papers.
C. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian and have charge of all
property pertaining to the Police Department. He shall give a bond in
the penal sum of $1,000 running to the City, which said bond shall be
approved by the City Attorney, conditioned for the faithful performance
of his duties and that he will properly account for all monies and
property which may come into his charge and keeping as such Chief of
Police. All monies collected shall be accounted for and deposited with
the City Clerk/Treasurer on a daily basis.
A. If a person is arrested by the Police Department and the Municipal
Judge is not available for the purpose of entertaining the defendant's
plea or fixing of bond preceding the trial of the action, any member of
the Police Department may accept from the arrested person a cash
bond in the amount of the forfeiture and costs for violation of the
ordinance.
B. The cash bond shall be given only to assure the appearance of the
defendant in court and shall be of no effect if the defendant appears in
court when his case is called. Said bond may provide that the bond shall
be construed as a plea of guilty by the defendant in the event of his
nonappearance in court at the time his case is called, and the amount of
bond shall be forfeited and applied against the forfeiture in the
discretion of the court.
C. The court in imposing the forfeiture and costs in said action shall not be
limited by the deposit of the cash bond, but the defendant will be
responsible for any amount by which the forfeiture costs may exceed
the cash bond deposited.
§ 147-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-9
1:99
§ 147-9. Disciplinary actions.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to punish minor violations
summarily. Any disciplinary action involving suspension or removal shall be
governed by § 62.13(5), Wis. Stats.
§ 147-10. Auxiliary police. [Added by Ord. No. 73-52]
The Chief of Police may establish an auxiliary police organization consisting
of volunteer members residing in the City who shall assist members of
the Watertown Police Department and perform services under the direction
and control of the Chief of Police. Auxiliary police members shall not make
arrests or carry firearms except when they are directly ordered by the Chief
of Police so to do. The auxiliary police shall be compensated at a rate to be
determined by the Common Council. The Chief of Police shall establish the
rules and regulations of the auxiliary police.
§ 147-11. Civilian appointments. [Added by Ord. No. 90-24]
All civilian appointments (non-sworn officers) shall be made per the
personnel policies of the City.
§ 147-12. Warrant service fee. [Added by Ord. No. 97-30; amended
by Ord. No. 99-22; Ord. No. 06-1134]
Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 814.70, 814.705 and 814.71, Wis. Stats.,
if the Police Department serves a warrant or a commitment order upon an
individual, a fee for the service of said warrant shall be established by the
Common Council, upon the payment of which it shall be deposited into the
City's general fund.
Chapter 152
PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT
§ 152-1. General provisions. [Amended by Ord. No. 02-47]
A. The Health Officer, his or her agents, the Environmental Health
Specialist and the public health nurses shall enforce the laws of the
state and City relative to public health and sanitation. The Health
Officer, his or her agents, and/or the Environmental Health Specialist
shall have the powers and duties provided by state law for a local board
of health, health officers and environmental health specialist. The
Health Officer shall promulgate such additional rules and regulations as
may be necessary for the preservation of health and the prevention of
the spread of communicable diseases and shall cause the removal of all
objects detrimental to health. The Health Officer shall supervise the
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 147-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 152-1
1:100
§ 152-2. Health Officer appointment and qualifications. [Amended
by Ord. No. 88-2; Ord. No. 94-8; Ord. No. 95-27]
various divisions of the Public Health Department, including the
Environmental Health Specialist.
B. There shall be a Board of Health, which shall oversee the operation of
the Department and interview potential employees of the Department
as provided by § 152-4.
A. Full-time Health Officer. The Public Health Department shall be
supervised by a Health Officer, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the Common Council. Such Health Officer shall be vested with the
duties provided by Wisconsin Statutes, this Code and the Board of
Health. The Health Officer shall provide such additional rules and
regulations as shall be necessary for the preservation of health, to
prevent the spread of communicable diseases and to cause the removal
of objects detrimental to health, and to enforce the health laws as
provided in the state statutes and City ordinances.
B. Qualifications of Health Officer. A local health officer shall have:
(1) At least three years of experience in a full-time position with a
public health agency, including responsibility for a communicable
disease prevention and control program, preferably in a
supervisory or other administrative position, and a bachelor's
degree from a nursing program accredited by the national
professional nursing education accrediting organization or from a
nursing program accredited by the Board of Nursing, either of
which shall include preparation in public nursing. [Amended by
Ord. No. 98-61; 12-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-27]
(2) Extensive knowledge of Wisconsin state and federal laws and
regulations, state and national practices that relate to the field of
public health and home-care programs.
(3) Extensive knowledge of organizational functions of the state and
local governments with reference to their implementation on the
county and City level.
(4) Extensive knowledge of modern administrative practices and
procedures, including budgeting, fiscal management, public
administration and personnel management, with ability to execute/
facilitate the same. This includes the ability to write requests for
monies to fund agency programs and to administer successful
proposals.
(5) Extensive knowledge of the epidemiology of communicable and
chronic diseases, the practice of public health nursing, public
health sciences, and public health programs.
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:101
§ 152-3. Powers and duties of Health Officer. [Amended by Ord. No.
90-37; Ord. No. 91-56; Ord. No. 91-64; Ord. No. 95-26]
(6) Extensive knowledge of community organization and community
resources.
(7) Ability to communicate effectively orally and in writing.
(8) Ability to exercise good judgment in assessment of situations,
making decisions, planning and directing work.
(9) Ability to exercise leadership.
(10) Ability to present technical and abstract communications to groups
and individuals in oral and written format.
(11) Current certification for CPR.
A. The Health Officer shall be responsible for the following duties:
(1) Supervises public health nurses, health aide, secretary, volunteers
and Environmental Health Specialist.
(2) Elicits, receives, investigates and transmits reports of
communicable diseases and takes appropriate actions or measures
to decrease or prevent the transmission of communicable diseases
as needed. Cooperates with the State Department of Health
Services in investigations and follow-up as appropriate.
(3) Following guidelines from the State Department of Health
Services, conducts immunization clinics to prevent the spread of
vaccine-preventable diseases.
(4) Works closely with the medical community and others in the
community to protect the public's health, making recommendations
as appropriate and acting as resource person for public health
concerns.
(5) Receives health-related complains and acts to reduce or eliminate
such complaints within statutory and ordinance guidelines as
needed.
(6) Makes recommendations to City department heads for measures to
help control or eliminate communicable diseases in their
personnel. Acts as resource person for department heads.
(7) Prepares and implements an annual budget for public health
programs.
(8) Sanitary survey of locally licensed Class A and B liquor
establishments.
(9) Other duties as assigned.
§ 152-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 152-3
1:102
§ 152-4. Board of Health. [Amended by Ord. No. 95-27]
B. The Health Officer shall have the power to abate human health hazards
in accordance with Ch. 254, Wis. Stats, which is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated into this Code, and, further, the Health
Officer may rely upon analysis, reports or citations issued by the
environmental health specialists and public health nurses in taking any
action to abate human health hazards.
A. Pursuant to § 251.03, Wis. Stats., the City of Watertown shall have a
Board of Health consisting of six members, two of whom shall be
members of the Common Council, one of whom shall be a medical
doctor, one of whom shall be a registered nurse and one of whom shall
be a citizen of Watertown. The Health Officer shall be the sixth member
of the Board of Health. [Amended by Ord. No. 97-44; Ord. No.
98-61]
B. The Aldermanic members of the Board shall be appointed annually by
the Mayor. The remaining members of the Board shall also be appointed
by the Mayor and subject to confirmation by the Common Council, and
the terms shall be for three years, except upon the initial appointments,
which shall be for one, two and three years, respectively.
C. The Board of Health shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) It shall assure that the state and local public health laws are
enforced.
(2) It shall recommend or adopt health regulations for the City, subject
to review and approval by the Common Council.
(3) It shall report to the State Department of Health Services as
required by state statute.
(4) It shall meet at least quarterly.
(5) It shall assess and be an advocate for reasonable and necessary
public health needs within the City.
D. The Board of Health shall have no independent financial authority. The
Health Officer shall prepare an annual budget, which shall be reviewed
by the Board of Health and then submitted to the Mayor. No
independent applications shall be made for grants or contracts without
Finance Committee approval. The Mayor shall be responsible for
evaluation and discipline of the Health Officer.
E. The Board of Health shall conduct interviews for the Health Officer and
shall submit the names of three qualified applicants to the Mayor. Other
vacancies within the Public Health Department shall be filled by having
the Health Officer and the Board of Health interview applicants and
then make three recommendations to the Council's Finance Committee,
which shall make the final selection.
§ 152-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-4
1:103
Chapter 160
RECORDS
§ 160-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify retention periods for certain City
records and to allow access to records to the same extent and in the same
manner as allowed by state law.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEGAL CUSTODIAN — The individual responsible for maintaining records
pursuant to § 19.33, Wis. Stats.
RECORD — Has the meaning defined in § 19.32(2), Wis. Stats.
REQUESTER — Has the meaning defined in § 19.32(3), Wis. Stats.
RETENTION PERIOD — The minimum required period of time that a
document will be maintained as described in § 160-4 of this chapter.
§ 160-3. Duty to maintain.
City of Watertown legal custodians shall maintain all records for the
retention period and for any additional time period as described in § 160-6
below, if applicable. Thereafter, after the State Historical Society has
waived receipt of the records (see § 160-5 below), the legal custodian may
destroy the records.
§ 160-4. Retention period.
§ 160-5. Notice to State Historical Society.
All records not precluded from public records status will be offered to
the State Historical Society (SHS). Once the SHS has either accepted
the documents or allowed destruction, the records may be disposed of
appropriately.
A. The City of Watertown Common Council shall adopt the attached
schedule which describes the minimum time periods for which records
shall be maintained by a legal custodian.
B. Any record that is not described in the Retention Schedule shall be
maintained for a minimum of seven years and may be destroyed
thereafter, unless a longer retention period is required by § 160-6 below
or by state statute, rule or other applicable law.
§ 152-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 160-6
1:104
§ 160-6. Additional retention periods.
In addition to the retention period described in the Retention Schedule,
records shall be maintained for the following additional time periods:
§ 160-7. Reproduced original records.
Records may be kept and preserved through the use of microfilm or another
reproductive device, optical imaging, electronic formatting, or any other
reproduction format authorized by § 19.21(4)(c), Wis. Stats., and said
reproduction shall be deemed an original record for all purposes, in
accordance with § 19.21(4)(c), Wis. Stats.
§ 160-8. Public access.
All records maintained by a legal custodian shall be made available for
inspection, copying or other use that is authorized by state law, to the
same extent as allowed by Wisconsin Statutes, including but not limited to
§ 19.35, Wis. Stats., and in the same manner.
§ 160-9. Fees.
A requester shall pay a reasonable fee per page for a photocopy of a record,
unless the requester is specifically excluded from payment of the fee by
state law. The requester also shall pay such other fees as may be charged
pursuant to state law, including but not limited to § 19.35(3), Wis. Stats.
§ 160-10. Statutes incorporated.
All state statutes incorporated or referenced herein shall be deemed to
include all subsequent amendments, repeals and renumbering that may
be enacted regarding the same, in order to ensure uniform statewide
regulation of public records.
Chapter 174
STREET DEPARTMENT
A. A record that is existing at the time of a request shall not be destroyed
until after the request is granted or, in the event the request is denied,
until at least the time period described in § 19.35(5), Wis. Stats., has
passed from the date of the denial.
B. A record that is existing at the time that the legal custodian receives
written notice that a mandamus action relating to the record has been
commenced pursuant to § 19.37, Wis. Stats., shall not be destroyed
until the final court order is issued in the action and the appeals are
exhausted, as further described in § 19.35(5), Wis. Stats.
C. A record that is known by the legal custodian to be relevant to litigation
or audit that is pending at the time that the record would otherwise be
destroyed shall not be destroyed until the litigation or audit is resolved.
§ 160-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-1
1:105
§ 174-1. Supervision.
The Street Department shall be supervised by the Public Works
Commission.
§ 174-2. Duties of Street Superintendent.
The Street Superintendent shall be responsible for the maintenance,
reconstruction and cleaning of streets, the removal of snow and ice
therefrom, the maintenance of bridges and storm sewers, the collection
of garbage and refuse materials, recycling, the destruction and removal
of noxious weeds and the performance of such other services as may be
required by the Public Works Commission.
Chapter 193
WATER DEPARTMENT
§ 193-1. Established; supervision.
The Water Department is established as an independent utility and shall be
supervised by the Public Works Commission. The Public Works Commission
shall have the powers and duties provided by state law and City ordinance.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 205
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 10.
Alcohol beverage licenses — See Ch. 220, Art.
I.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 410,
§ 410-39.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 205-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOK OR VIDEO STORE —
An establishment which is used for selling, renting or loaning the
following materials when such activity constitutes a significant part of
the business conducted therein:
Any pictures, photographs, drawings, motion-picture films or
similar visual representations or images of a person or portions of
(1)
A.
§ 174-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 205-1
1:106
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — An adult book or video
store or an adult motion-picture theater.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used for
presenting or exhibiting a motion-picture film, show or other presentation
having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on exposure to view of human genitals, pubic area, buttocks or
anus; or a female's vulva or breasts below the top of the areola; or male
genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely covered; or on acts
of or acts which simulate erotic touching, sexual intercourse, masturbation,
flagellation, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio,
cunnilingus, or any sexual acts prohibited by Wisconsin Statutes.
BOOTHS, CUBICLES, ROOMS, COMPARTMENTS OR STALLS SEPARATE
FROM THE COMMON AREAS OF THE PREMISES — Such enclosures as
are specifically offered to the public or members of that establishment for
hire or for a fee as part of a business operated on the premises which
offers as part of its business the entertainment to be viewed within the
enclosure, which shall include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein
the entertainment is dispensed for a fee but a fee is not charged for mere
access to the enclosure. The phrase "booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments
or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises" does not mean
enclosures which are private offices used by the owners, managers or
persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their
employment and which are not held out to the public or members of
the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purposes of viewing
entertainment for a fee, and which are not open or available to any persons
other than owners, managers or employees.
COUNCIL — The Common Council of the City of Watertown.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity
operating, managing, renting, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult
entertainment establishment.
SIGNIFICANT PART OF THE BUSINESS — Dedication or use of the
premises on which the adult entertainment establishment is located in any
one of the following manners:
a human body which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matters depicting or describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined
herein; or
Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording, which contains any matter
enumerated in Subsection A(1) above.
(2)
Material, however distributed, which is published by a medical
products manufacturer, a medical or health association, an insurance
company, or by a consumer education organization shall not be
considered part of the business of operating an adult book or video
store.
B.
§ 205-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-1
1:107
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual:
§ 205-2. License required.
The gross income from the sale and/or rental of materials set forth in
Subsection A(1) and (2) of the definition of "adult book or video store"
herein comprises more than 25% of the gross income from the sale and
rental of the goods or services at the business entity location;
A.
The individual items offered for sale and/or rental at the adult
entertainment establishment location comprise more than 25% of the
total individual items publicly displayed as stock-in-trade in any of the
following categories: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter; or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
videodisks, slides or other visual representations; or sound recordings
or other audio materials; or
B.
The dedication or use of more than 25% of the available floor, wall
and display space within the public or common areas at the adult
entertainment establishment location, including adult booths, space
for live presentations, and space devoted to the viewing display, or
advertisement of materials listed hereinabove.
C.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, vulva, anus
and cleavage of the buttocks.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
Less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple of the
female breast.
C.
A. Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus, or excretory
functions.
B.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks or female breasts.
C.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, no adult entertainment
establishment shall be operated or maintained in the City without first
obtaining a license to operate issued by the City.
B. A license may be issued only for one adult entertainment establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate
more than one adult entertainment establishment must have a license
for each.
C. No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person.
§ 205-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 205-3
1:108
§ 205-3. Application for license.
A. Any person desiring to secure a license shall make application to the
City Clerk/Treasurer. The application shall be filed with the City Clerk/
Treasurer. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the
City Clerk/Treasurer to the City Police Chief, the City Health Officer, the
City Zoning Administrator and to the Licensing Board.
B. The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the City
Clerk/Treasurer. An applicant for a license interested directly in the
ownership or operation of the business shall furnish the following
information:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(3) The address of the adult entertainment establishment to be
operated by the applicant.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
name and address of the registered agent and the name and
address of all shareholders owning more than 5% of the stock in
such corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation.
C. Within 60 days of receiving an application for an adult entertainment
establishment license, the Licensing Board shall notify the applicant
whether the application is granted or denied.
D. Whenever an application is denied, the Licensing Board shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. This decision of the
Licensing Board shall constitute an initial determination under § 10-6 of
the Watertown Code.
E. Appeal. An appeal to the City of Watertown Licensing Board may be
taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or
bureau of the City of Watertown affected by the initial determination of
the Licensing Board. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the
mailing of the initial determination by the Licensing Board by filing with
the City Clerk/Treasurer a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof, together with payment of a filing fee as may be established by
the Common Council. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall forthwith transmit
to the Licensing Board all papers constituting the record of appeal upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(1) The Licensing Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for the
hearing within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall
serve the person aggrieved with notice of such hearing by firstclass
mail or personal service at least 10 days before such hearing.
(2) Hearings on appeal shall be public and shall be conducted
according to the rules of procedure adopted by the Licensing
§ 205-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:109
§ 205-4. Standards for issuance of license.
To receive a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment, an
applicant must meet the following standards:
Board. At the hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in
person, by agent or by attorney. Decisions of the Licensing Board
following public hearing may be made either in public or closed
session, as the Licensing Board shall determine. This hearing shall
be conducted in accordance with § 10-10 of the Watertown Code.
(3) The Licensing Board shall issue its written decision and
recommendations to the Common Council to either affirm, reverse
or modify the initial determination of the Licensing Board within 20
days of completion of the hearing and the filing of briefs, if any, and
shall mail or deliver to the appellant its written decision together
with the reasons for its decision.
(4) The Common Council shall consider the City of Watertown
Licensing Board's decision and recommendations at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. The Common Council on a majority
vote may affirm, reverse or modify the initial determination of the
Licensing Board.
(5) Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the Common Council may
present to a court of record a petition for writ of certiorari, setting
forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the
illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30
days after the adoption of the resolution by the Common Council
upon the recommendations of the Licensing Board. The parties
shall be bound by § 10-12 of the Watertown Code regarding the
transcript of the proceedings.
(6) No application that has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall
be resubmitted by the applicant/appellant for a period of 12 months
from the date of adoption of the resolution by the Common Council.
A. If the applicant is an individual:
(1) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(2) The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated
this chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
B. If the applicant is a corporation:
(1) All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under
§ 205-3B shall be at least 18 years of age.
(2) No officer, director or stockholders required to be named under
§ 205-3B shall have been found to have previously violated this
§ 205-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 205-4
1:110
§ 205-5. Fees.35
A license fee as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule shall be submitted with the application for an adult entertainment
establishment. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be returned.
§ 205-6. Display of license.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult
entertainment establishment. This license shall be framed and covered with
clear glass so as to be easily readable.
§ 205-7. Renewal of license.
chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
C. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
(1) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of
age.
(2) No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have
violated any provision of this chapter within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
D. Provide a copy of a valid zoning certificate obtained from the Zoning
Administrator.
A. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate on June 30
of each year, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before
operation is allowed on July 1. Any operator desiring to renew a license
shall make application to the City Clerk/Treasurer. The application for
renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires.
The application for renewal shall be filed with and dated by the City
Clerk/Treasurer. A copy of the application for renewal shall be
distributed promptly by the City Clerk/Treasurer to the City Police
Chief, the City Health Officer, the Zoning Administrator, the Licensing
Board and to the operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a
form provided by the City Clerk/Treasurer and shall contain such
information and data as is required for an application for a new license.
B. A license renewal fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule shall be submitted with the application for
renewal. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the total fees collected shall
be returned.36
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-7
1:111
§ 205-8. Revocation of license.
C. If the City Police Chief, City Health Officer, Zoning Administrator or
Licensing Board is aware of any information bearing on the operator's
qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the City
Clerk/Treasurer.
D. Appeal of a denial of an application for renewal shall be deemed an
initial determination by the Licensing Board and shall provide a remedy
as set forth in § 205-3E herein.
A. The Common Council may revoke a license for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from any
application.
(2) The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision
of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the Common
Council pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the
case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely
that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30
days if the Council shall find that the operator had no actual or
constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the
exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
knowledge.
(3) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid.
(5) Any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage is served or
consumed on any premises of an adult entertainment
establishment not licensed pursuant to Chapter 220, Article I, of
this Code.
B. The Council, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give the
operator at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against the
operator and the opportunity for appeal as set forth in § 205-3E herein.
C. The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically
and immediately revoke the license.
D. Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or
premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult
entertainment establishment or adult entertainment tavern for one year
from the date of revocation of the license.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 205-9
1:112
§ 205-9. Physical layout of adult entertainment establishment.
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers,
patrons or members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of
any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
§ 205-10. Operator responsibility.
A. Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and
from aisles and public areas of the adult entertainment establishment
and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type
devices.
B. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
(1) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
(2) Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open
to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all
times of anyone occupying the same.
(3) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extend from the
floor to a height of not less than six feet, and be light-colored,
nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable.
(4) The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured
and easily cleanable.
(5) The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use
shall be a minimum of 10 footcandles at all times as measured from
the floor.
C. Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant of the same shall engage in any type of sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in a booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
A. Every act of omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
B. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
§ 205-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-10
1:113
§ 205-11. Patron responsibility.
§ 205-12. Administrative procedure and review.
This Municipal Code and the Wisconsin Statutes shall govern the
administrative procedures and review regarding the granting, denial,
renewal, nonrenewal, revocation or suspension of a license.
C. No employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall allow any
minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult entertainment
establishment or allow any minor to view any activity allowed in an
adult motion-picture theater.
D. The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times. The Health Officer shall make a determination as
to the clean and sanitary condition of the establishment.
E. The operator shall maintain at least 10 footcandles of light in the public
portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if
a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a
patron to view any activity in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an
aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles;
provided, however, that at no time shall there be less than one
footcandle of illumination in such aisles as measured from the floor.
F. The operator shall conspicuously post inside each booth, stall,
partitioned portion of a room, or individual room an unmutilated and
undefaced sign or poster supplied by the Public Health Department
which contains information regarding sexually transmitted diseases
and the telephone numbers from which additional information can be
sought.
G. The operator shall post regulations concerning booth occupancy on
signs, with lettering at least one inch high, that are placed in
conspicuous areas of the establishment and in each of the viewing
enclosures.
H. The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its
patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
A. No person shall occupy an enclosure already occupied by another
person, regardless of whether permission to enter has been given.
B. No person shall at any time engage in specified sexual activities or
cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the enclosure.
C. No person shall remove, destroy or deface any signs or posters, or
destroy or deface any information, brochures or pamphlets, whether
supplied by the Public Health Department or posted by the operator.
D. No person shall damage or deface any portion of the enclosure.
§ 205-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 205-13
1:114
§ 205-13. Exclusions.
All private and public schools, as defined in Ch. 115, Wis. Stats., hospitals,
medical clinics and public health facilities located within the City of
Watertown are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when instructing
pupils or patients/clients in sex education, prenatal, family planning or
childbirth classes as part of their curriculum or services.
§ 205-14. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Public Health Department, the Building, Safety
and Zoning Division, and the Police Department to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 205-15. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 211
AIRPORT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 211-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRPORT — The Watertown Municipal Airport, located in Section 9, Town 8
North, Range 15 East, Jefferson County, Wisconsin.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land
which obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or
taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking
off.
A. In addition to the revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of any license
issued under this chapter, any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than
$100 nor more than $300 and in the case of an operator such violation
shall result in the suspension or revocation of any license from one
week up to one year.37
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense,
and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a
separate offense.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-1
1:115
EFFECTIVE DATE — The effective date of this chapter is May 27, 1958.
HEIGHT — The overall height of the top of a structure, including any
appurtenance installed thereon, or the top of any object of natural
growth.[Added by Ord. No. 99-10]
NONCONFORMING USE — Any structure, tree or use of land which does
not conform to a regulation contained in this chapter or an amendment
thereto as of the effective date of such regulation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or body politic, and includes any
trustees, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
RUNWAY — A level portion of an airport having a surface specially
developed and maintained for the landing and takeoff of aircraft.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed or installed by man.
TREE — Any object of natural growth, except farm crops which are cut at
least once a year, and except shrubs, bushes or plants which do not grow to
a height of more than 20 feet.[Amended by Ord. No. 99-9]
§ 211-2. Zones. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-9; Ord. No. 08-01]
All zones established by this chapter are as shown on the map dated
December 12, 2007, titled "Height Limitation Zone Map, Watertown
Municipal Airport, Jefferson County, Wisconsin," which is adopted as part of
this chapter.38
§ 211-3. Height zones.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be
constructed, altered, located or permitted to remain after such
construction, alteration or location, and no trees shall be allowed to grow,
to a height in excess of the height limit indicated on the map referred to in
§ 211-2.
§ 211-4. Use restrictions.
A. Activities. Notwithstanding § 211-5, no use may be made of land in any
zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio
communications between the airport and aircraft, or make it difficult
for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, or result in
glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, or impair visibility in the
vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft.
B. Exceptions. The restrictions contained in § 211-3 shall not apply to legal
fences or to farm crops which are cut at least once each year. The
restrictions contained in § 211-3 shall not apply to objects which are
less than 50 feet in height above ground level at the object site and
38.Editor's Note: The map is on file at the office of the City Engineer.
§ 211-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-4
1:116
§ 211-5. Nonconforming uses.
§ 211-6. Administration. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-9]
It shall be the duty of the City Zoning Administrator to administer and
enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and
variances shall be made to the City Zoning Administrator on a form
furnished by him. Applications for permits shall be granted or denied within
10 days of the date of filing of the applications unless Federal Aviation
Administration approval is requested. Applications for variances by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the City's Zoning
Administrator to the Board for hearing and decision. There shall be no
charge for applications or permits. There shall be charged the regular and
standard fees in effect at the time of application for any variance requests.
§ 211-7. Permits. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-9]
within three miles of the airport boundary. [Amended by Ord. No.
99-9]
A. Not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in §§ 211-2 and 211-3 shall
not require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any
nonconforming use, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided by § 211-7.
B. Removal. This section shall not interfere with the removal of
nonconforming uses by purchase or the use of eminent domain.
C. Changes. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure if the
construction or alteration of such was begun prior to the effective date
of this chapter and if such is diligently prosecuted. [Added by Ord. No.
99-10]
A. Future uses. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected or
installed or be permitted to remain in any zone created by § 211-2 of
this chapter until the owner or his agent shall have applied in writing
for a permit therefor and obtained such permit from the City Zoning
Administrator, except structures less than 50 feet in height above the
ground and within three miles of the airport. Said permit shall be
posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the
period of construction, erection, installation or establishment.
Application for such permit shall indicate the use for which the permit
is desired and shall describe and locate the use with sufficient
particularity to permit the City Zoning Administrator to determine
whether such use would conform to the regulations herein prescribed.
If such determination is in the affirmative, the City Zoning
Administrator shall issue the permit applied for. No tree may be planted
without a permit, and any tree planted without a permit or permitted to
grow without planting may be ordered removed at any time by the City
Zoning Administrator upon his findings that such tree violates or is
§ 211-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-7
1:117
§ 211-8. Hazard marking and lighting. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-9]
Any permit or variance granted under § 211-7 or 211-9 may, if such action
is deemed advisable by the City Zoning Administrator to effectuate the
purpose of this chapter and if such is reasonable in the circumstances, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or trees in question to
permit the owner of the airport, at its own expense, to install, operate and
maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate
to flyers the presence of an airport hazard.
§ 211-9. Appeals and review.
§ 211-10. Minimum requirements for airport aeronautical services.
about to violate the height restriction for the zone. The City Zoning
Administrator shall have the right to trim, prune or remove, at the
owner's expense, any tree which was planted after adoption of this
chapter and found to be in violation of the height restriction for the
zone in which it is located.
B. Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure or tree may be
replaced, altered or repaired, rebuilt or replanted, a permit shall be
applied for and secured in the manner prescribed by Subsection A,
authorizing such change, replacement or repair. No such permit shall
be denied if a structure will not become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter or than it
was when the application for permit was made. No such permit shall be
granted that would allow the structure or tree to become a greater
hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter
or than it is when the application for permit is made.
A. Variances. Variance requests shall be heard by the Zoning Board of
Appeals created by § 550-156 of the Code of the City of Watertown.
Upon appeal in special cases the Zoning Board of Appeals may, after
investigation and public hearing, grant such variance from the terms of
this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result
in unnecessary hardship and such relief will do substantial justice and
be in accord with the spirit of this chapter and does not create a hazard
to the safe, normal operation of aircraft. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-9]
B. Aggrieved person. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision or
action of the Zoning Administrator made in his administration of this
chapter may appeal such decision or action to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.39
C. Procedure. Any appeal taken pursuant to this section shall be in
conformity with the procedure established by § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 211-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-10
1:118
A. Definitions.
(1) Aeronautical services. "Aeronautical service" means any service
which involves, makes possible, or is required for the operation of
aircraft, or which contributes to or is required for the safety of such
operation.
(2) Aircraft airframe, engine and accessory maintenance and repair.
An aircraft airframe, engine and accessory maintenance (includes
painting and interiors) and repair operator provides one or a
combination of airframe, engine or accessory overhauls or repair
services on aircraft. This category shall also include the sale of
aircraft parts and accessories.
(3) Aircraft charter and air taxi. An aircraft charter and air taxi
operator engages in the business of providing air transportation (of
persons or property) to the general public for hire, either on a
charter basis or as an air taxi operator, as defined by the Federal
Aviation Regulations.
(4) Aircraft fuels and oil service. Fuel and oil services includes the sale
and into-plane delivery of aviation fuels, lubricants and other
related aviation petroleum products.
(5) Aircraft lease and rental. An aircraft lease or rental operator
engages in the rental or lease of aircraft to the public.
(6) Aircraft sales. An aircraft sales operator (also known as a "fixedbase
operator") engages in the sale of new aircraft through a
franchise or licensed dealership or distributorship (either on a
retail or wholesale basis) or used aircraft and provides such repair,
services and parts as necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty
on aircraft sold.
(7) Aircraft storage. An aircraft storage operator engages in the rental
of conventional hangars or multiple T-hangers.
(8) FAA. "FAA" means Federal Aviation Administration.
(9) Flight training. A flight training operator engages in instructing
pilots in dual and solo flight training, in fixed or rotary wing
aircraft, and provides such related ground school instruction as is
necessary to prepare to take a written examination and flight check
ride for the category or categories of pilots' licenses and ratings
involved.
(10) Flying clubs. A flying club must be a nonprofit Wisconsin
corporation or partnership organized for the express purpose of
promoting the hobby of flying among its members, providing flight
training and instruction to its members and owning aircraft among
its members. Each member must be a bona fide owner of the
aircraft or owner of the corporation.
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:119
(11) Minimum standards. "Minimum standards" means the
qualifications which are established herein by the airport owner as
the minimum requirements to be met as a condition for the right to
conduct an aeronautical service at, on or within the Watertown
Municipal Airport.
(12) Multiple services. A multiple services operator engages in any two
or more of the aeronautical services for which minimum standards
have been provided in this section.
(13) Noncommercial aviation fuel usage. A noncommercial aviation fuel
user maintains fuel storage and transfer only for his own aircraft or
aircraft leased for his exclusive use.
(14) Operator. "Operator" means any person, firm, partnership,
corporation, association or group providing any one or a
combination of aeronautical services to or for aviation users at the
airport.
(15) Owner. "Owner" means the City of Watertown Municipal Airport.
(16)Radio, instrument or propeller repair station. A radio, instrument
or propeller repair station operator engages in the business of and
provides a shop for the repair of aircraft radios, propellers,
instruments and accessories for general aviation aircraft. This
category shall include the sale of new or used aircraft radios,
propellers, instruments and accessories. The operator shall hold
the appropriate repair shop certificates issued by the FAA.
(17) Specialized commercial flying services. A specialized commercial
flying services operator engages in air transportation for hire for
the purpose of providing the use of aircraft for the activities listed
below:
(a) Nonstop sightseeing flights that begin and end at the same
airport;
(b) Crop-dusting, seeding, spraying and bird chasing;
(c) Banner towing and aerial advertising;
(d) Aerial photography or survey;
(e) Power line or pipe patrol; or
(f) Any other operations specifically excluded from Part 135 of the
Federal Aviation Regulations.
B. Minimum standards for all operators. The following standards shall
apply to all operators, with the exception of flying clubs, whose
complete list of standards are presented in the section which pertains
solely to that type of operation:
§ 211-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-10
1:120
(1) The lease shall be for a term to be mutually agreed upon between
the parties commensurate with the operator's financial investment
in his facility.
(2) The operator shall have had experience in the aeronautical service
he wishes to provide for a period of five years or have in a
supervisory position a person with five years' experience. Should
an operator not have such experience, but can demonstrate to the
owner's satisfaction that he has had equivalent related experience,
approval may be granted to the operator. A statement of
qualifications shall accompany the operator's letter of intent to the
airport owner.
(3) Any operator seeking to conduct aeronautical services at the
airport must provide the owner a letter setting forth the operator's
financial integrity, to the owner's satisfaction, from a bank or trust
company doing business in the area, or such other source as may
be readily verified through normal banking channels. The operator
must also demonstrate that it has the financial ability or backing,
where applicable, for the construction of facilities that may be
required for the proposed operation. The operator must also
provide a current financial statement, showing unencumbered
current assets in an amount at least equalling three months'
estimated maintenance and operating expenses.
(4) All operators shall provide proof of insurance coverage as required
for each type of operation, with the following minimum limits of
liability:
(a) Aircraft liability.
[1] Bodily injury and property damage, combined single limit:
$100,000.
[2] Bodily injury (each passenger): $100,000.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
[1] Bodily injury and property damage, combined single limit:
$300,000.
(c) Hangar keepers liability.
[1] Each accident: $100,000. Plus additional amounts
necessary to cover the value of aircraft and equipment in
the hangar or hangars at any time.
(d) Products liability.
[1] Each accident: $500,000.
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:121
(5) Each policy shall include the owner as an additional named
insured, shall provide for notice to the owner in advance of
cancellation, and shall otherwise be in a form satisfactory to the
owner. Termination of insurance coverage constitutes immediate
termination of all the operator's rights to operate at the airport.
(6) The operator shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the owner
in all actions brought against the owner related to the operator or
the services provided by the operator.
(7) Each lease for ground space and contract for business at the
airport entered into by the owner shall include all provisions
required by the state and federal governments, including but not
limited to nondiscrimination provisions, affirmative action
assurances, civil rights assurances and nonexclusive rights
provisions. The most current amendment form of such mandatory
lease provisions shall be obtained from the state or federal
governments and shall be included in each lease at the time of
execution.
(8) All operators shall have the right, in common with others, to use
common areas of the airport, including runways, taxiways, aprons,
roadways, floodlights, landing lights, signals and other
conveniences, for the takeoff, flying and landing of aircraft.
(9) Any construction required of any operator shall be in accordance
with design and construction requirements of the owner, state and
federal regulations and applicable codes. All plans and
specifications shall be submitted to the owner for approval prior to
any construction or modification.
(10) The operator shall provide a paved aircraft apron within the leased
area to accommodate aircraft movement and from the taxiway or
the access to the taxiway that has been or will be provided for the
operator.
(11) The minimum square footage requirements of Subsections C
through L below shall not apply to those parcels leased prior to
January 1, 1989.
C. Aircraft sales. The following minimum requirements shall apply to
aircraft sales operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space to provide for outside display
and storage of aircraft and on which shall be erected a building to
provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage
and at least 400 square feet of floor space for office, customer
lounge and restroom, which shall be properly heated and lighted,
and shall provide telephone facilities for customer use.
§ 211-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-10
1:122
(2) The operator shall provide necessary and satisfactory
arrangements for repair and servicing of aircraft, but only for the
duration of any sales guarantee or warranty period. The operator
shall provide an adequate inventory of spare parts for the type of
new aircraft for which sales privileges are granted. The operator
who is engaged in the business of selling new aircraft shall have
available or on call at least one demonstrator.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(c) Hangar keepers liability (if nonowned aircraft are left in the
operator's care).
(d) Products liability.
(4) The operator shall have his premises open and services available
eight hours daily, five days a week. The operator shall make
provision for someone to be in attendance in the office at all times
during the required working hours.
(5) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during business
hours, trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet
the minimum standards set forth in an efficient manner. The
operator shall also maintain, during all business hours, a
responsible person in charge to supervise the operations in the
leased area, with the authorization to represent and act for and on
behalf of the operator and provide check ride pilots for aircraft
sold.
D. Aircraft airframe, engine and accessory maintenance and repair. The
following minimum requirements apply to aircraft airframe, engine and
accessory maintenance and repair operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space to provide for outside display
and storage of aircraft and on which shall be erected a building to
provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage
and at least 400 square feet of floor space for office, customer
lounge and restroom, which shall be properly heated and lighted,
and shall provide telephone facilities for customer use.
(2) The operator shall provide sufficient equipment, supplies and
availability of parts equivalent to that required for certification by
the FAA as an approved repair station.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:123
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(c) Hangar keepers liability (if nonowned aircraft are left in the
operator's care).
(d) Product liability.
(4) The operator shall have his premises open and services available
eight hours daily, five days a week. The operator shall make
provision for someone to be in attendance in the office at all times
during the required working hours.
(5) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during business
hours, trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet
the minimum standards set forth in this category of services in an
efficient manner, but never less than one person currently certified
by the FAA with ratings appropriate to the work being performed
and who holds an airframe, power plant or an aircraft inspector
rating and one other person not necessarily rated.
E. Aircraft lease and rental. The following minimum requirements apply to
aircraft lease and rental operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space to provide for outside display
and storage of aircraft and on which shall be erected a building to
provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage
and at least 400 square feet of floor space for office, customer
lounge and restroom, which shall be properly heated and lighted,
and shall provide telephone facilities for customer use.
(2) The operator shall have available for rental, either owned or under
written lease to the operator, not less than two certified and
currently airworthy aircraft, at least one of which must be a fourplace
aircraft and at least one of which must be equipped for and
capable of flight under instrument weather conditions.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall have his business open and services available
eight hours daily, five days a week. The operator shall make
provisions for someone to be in attendance in the office at all times
during operating hours.
§ 211-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-10
1:124
(5) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during business
hours, a minimum of one person having a current FAA commercial
pilot certificate with appropriate ratings, including instructor
rating.
F. Flight training. The following minimum requirements apply to flight
training operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space to provide for outside display
and storage of aircraft and on which shall be erected a building to
provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage
and at least 400 square feet of floor space for office, customer
lounge and restroom, which shall be properly heated and lighted,
and shall provide telephone facilities for customer use.
(2) The operator shall have available for rental, either owned or under
written lease to the operator, not less than two certified and
currently airworthy aircraft, at least one of which must be a fourplace
aircraft and at least one of which must be equipped for and
capable of flight under instrument weather conditions.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall have his business open and services available
eight hours daily, five days a week. The operator shall make
provisions for someone to be in attendance in the office at all times
during operating hours.
(5) The operator shall have on a full-time basis at least one flight
instructor who has been properly certified by the FAA to provide
the type of training offered.
G. Aircraft fuels and oil service. The following minimum requirements
apply to aircraft fuels and oil service operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space to provide for outside display
and storage of aircraft and on which shall be erected a building to
provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for aircraft storage
and at least 400 square feet of floor space for office, customer
lounge and restroom, which shall be properly heated and lighted,
and shall provide telephone facilities for customer use.
(2) As part of the leasehold, the owner shall set aside land in a
designated area for the bulk fuel storage facility. The storage
facility shall have at least a minimum 10,000 gallons' capacity for
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:125
each grade of fuel (avgas and jet fuel) maintained by the owner.
The owner shall provide the required pumping equipment to meet
all applicable safety requirements relative to fuel dispensing as
required by federal, state and local regulations and shall provide
reliable metering devices which conform to federal, state and local
regulations.
(3) The operator shall provide the following services to general
aviation aircraft only within the premises leased to the operator:
(a) Minor repair services which do not require a certified
mechanic rating.
(b) Cabin services which can be performed efficiently on the ramp
or apron parking area.
(c) Ramp assistance services which includes the parking, storage
and tie-down of aircraft.
(4) The operator shall procure and maintain tools, jacks, towing
equipment, tire repairing equipment, energizers and starters,
heaters, oxygen supplies, fire extinguishers, and passenger loading
steps, as appropriate and necessary. They shall be maintained and
operated in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.
(5) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(b) Hangar keepers liability (if nonowned aircraft are left in the
operator's care).
(c) Product liability.
(6) The operator shall have his premises open for eight hours a day,
seven days a week, and provide on-call aircraft servicing during all
other hours. The operator shall make provisions for someone to be
in attendance in the office at all times during the required
operating hours.
(7) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during the
appropriate business hours, trained personnel in such numbers as
are required to meet the minimum standards set forth in this
category of service in an efficient manner.
(8) The operator shall maintain an accurate record of all deliveries of
aviation fuel and oil, and such records shall be subject to
examination and audit by the owner or its representatives.
§ 211-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-10
1:126
H. Radio, instrument or propeller repair station. The following minimum
requirements apply to radio, instrument or propeller repair station
operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space on which shall be erected a
building to provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for
aircraft storage and at least 400 square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restroom, which shall be properly
heated and lighted, and shall provide telephone facilities for
customer use.
(2) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(b) Hangar keepers liability (if nonowned aircraft are left in the
operator's care).
(c) Product liability.
(3) The operator shall have his business open and services available
eight hours daily, five days a week.
(4) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during business
hours, trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet
the minimum standards set forth in this category in an efficient
manner but never less than one person who is an FAA-rated radio,
instrument or propeller repairman.
I. Aircraft charter and air taxi. The following minimum requirements
apply to aircraft charter and air taxi operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space on which shall be erected a
building to provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for
aircraft storage and at least 400 square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restroom, which shall be properly
heated and lighted, and shall provide telephone facilities for
customer use.
(2) The operator shall provide, either owned or under written lease to
the operator, not less than one single-engine four-place aircraft and
one multi-engine aircraft, both of which must meet the
requirements of the air taxi commercial operator certificate held by
the operator, including instrument operations.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
(a) Aircraft liability.
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:127
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall have his business open and services available
eight hours daily, five days a week. The operator shall make
provisions for someone to be in attendance in the office at all times
during operating hours.
(5) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during business
hours, trained personnel in such numbers as are required to meet
the minimum standards set forth in this category in an efficient
manner but never less than one person who is an FAA-certified
commercial pilot and otherwise appropriately rated to permit the
flight activity offered by the operator.
J. Aircraft storage. The following minimum requirements apply to aircraft
storage operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
3,000 square feet of ground space on which shall be erected a
building to provide at least 1,200 square feet of floor space for
aircraft storage.
(2) The following types of insurance are required in the amounts stated
in Subsection B(4):
(a) Comprehensive liability and comprehensive property damage,
including vehicular.
(b) Hangar keepers liability. [Hangar keepers liability is not
necessary if the owner(s) is/are in control of his/their own
aircraft.]
(3) The conventional hangar operator shall have his facilities available
for the tenant's aircraft removal and storage 24 hours per day,
seven days a week, 52 weeks per year.
K. Specialized commercial flying services. The following minimum
requirements apply to specialized commercial flying services operators:
(1) The operator shall lease land from the owner, and the lease shall
include a building sufficient to accommodate all activities and
operations proposed by the operator. In the case of crop-dusting or
aerial application, the operator shall make suitable arrangements
and have such space available in his leased area for safe loading
and unloading and storage and containment of chemical materials.
All operators shall demonstrate that they have the availability of
aircraft suitably equipped for the particular type of operation they
intend to perform.
(2) The owner shall set the minimum insurance requirements as they
pertain to the particular type of operation to be performed. These
minimum requirements shall be applicable to all operations of a
§ 211-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-10
1:128
similar nature. All operators will, however, be required to maintain
the aircraft liability coverage and comprehensive public liability
coverage as set forth for all operators.
(3) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during business
hours, trained personnel in such numbers as may be required to
meet the minimum standards herein set forth in an efficient
manner.
(4) The operator must provide, by means of an office or a telephone, a
point of contact for the public desiring to utilize the operator's
services.
L. Multiple services. The following minimum requirements apply to
multiple services operators:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area of not less than
10,000 square feet of ground space on which shall be erected a
building to provide at least 3,000 square feet of floor space for
aircraft storage and at least 400 square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restroom, which shall be properly
heated and lighted, and shall provide telephone facilities for
customer use.
(2) The operator shall comply with the aircraft requirements, including
the equipment thereon, for each aeronautical service to be
performed, except that multiple uses can be made of all aircraft
except aircraft used for crop-dusting, aerial application, or other
commercial use of chemicals.
(3) The operator shall provide the facilities, equipment and services
required to meet the minimum standards as hereinbefore provided
for each aeronautical service the operator is performing.
(4) The operator shall obtain, as a minimum, that insurance coverage
which is equal to individual insurance requirements of all the
aeronautical services being performed by the operator.
(5) The operator shall adhere to the hours of operation required for
each aeronautical service being performed.
(6) The operator shall have in his employ, and on duty during the
appropriate business hours, trained personnel in such numbers as
are required to meet the minimum standards for each aeronautical
service the operator is performing as hereinabove provided.
Multiple responsibilities may be assigned to meet the personnel
requirements for each aeronautical service being performed by the
operator.
M. Flying clubs. The following minimum requirements apply to flying
clubs:
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:129
(1) The club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft
than the amount necessary for the actual cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of its aircraft. The club will keep
current a complete list of the club's membership and a record of
club finances and will make such available to the owner upon
request.
(2) The club's aircraft will not be used by other than bona fide
members and by no one for hire, charter or air taxi. Student
instructions may be given in the club aircraft by one club member
to another club member, providing no compensation takes place.
Otherwise, instructions must be given by an operator with a
current agreement with the owner.
(3) In the event the club fails to comply with these conditions, the
owner will notify the club in writing of any violation. The club shall
have 14 days to correct any violations. If the club fails to correct
the violations, the owner may demand the club's removal from the
airport.
(4) The flying club must agree and provide at a minimum insurance in
the following categories to the same level as required for all
operators:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(5) Aircraft maintenance performed by the club shall be limited to only
that maintenance that does not require a certified mechanic. All
other maintenance must be provided by a lessee based on the
airport who provides such service or by a properly certificated
mechanic who shall not receive remuneration in any manner for
such service.
N. Noncommercial aviation fuel usage. The following minimum
requirements apply to noncommercial aviation fuel usage:
(1) No person shall store, transport or dispense any fuel for use in an
aircraft unless the person holds a written agreement with the
owner specifically permitting such use.
(2) At no time shall a user share, sublease or in any other manner
provide fuel or fueling facilities to any other tenant or any other
aircraft except those aircraft owned or leased for the exclusive use
of the tenant designated in the agreement.
(3) The user shall install and maintain all fuel facilities within the fuel
farm in accordance with plans and specifications approved in
writing by the owner.
§ 211-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-10
1:130
(4) The user shall comply with all local, state and federal laws and
regulations governing the installation, operation and maintenance
of all fueling facilities, equipment and dispensing trucks.
(5) Dispensing trucks, bulk fuel trucks, emergency vehicles and other
vehicles approved by the owner shall be the only vehicles permitted
within the fuel farm area.
(6) All fuel storage shall be in underground tanks, with only necessary
equipment such as valves, meters and vents protruding above
ground.
(7) Each prospective fuel user shall submit to the owner a written
proposal which sets forth the extent of operations, to include fuel
grades; estimated annual volume; experience and training of fuelhandling
personnel; type, size and condition of all fueling facilities
and equipment to be used; assurance provisions for the security
and safety of the facility; and any cost that may be expected by the
owner.
(8) The user shall have comprehensive public liability and
comprehensive property damage insurance, including vehicular, in
the amounts required for operators.
(9) The user shall pay to the owner a fuel flowage fee on the amount of
fuel received into storage at a rate to be established. The user shall
submit to the owner the amount of gallons received each month on
or before the 10th day of the following calendar month. The user
shall also maintain copies or original receipts from the wholesale
fuel vendor as evidence of amount of gallons dispensed per month.
(10) The minimum storage tank allowed shall be of a five-thousandgallon
capacity.
(11) Use of any portable containers in fueling any aircraft on the airport
is strictly prohibited, except under circumstances constituting an
emergency under the Statutes or the Administrative Code of the
State of Wisconsin.
(12) Specific areas shall be designated to accommodate the users of
fuels other than aviation fuels.
O. Operators subleasing from another commercial operator on the airport.
(1) No operator may sublease any aeronautical service or other
business enterprise to another operator without the express
written consent of the owner. The sublease shall define the type of
business and service to be offered by the sublessee operator.
(2) The sublessee operator shall meet all of the minimum standards
established by the owner for the categories of services to be
furnished by the operator. The minimum standards may be met by
the lessee operator and sublessee operator in combination. The
§ 211-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:131
§ 211-11. Aviation fuel flowage fee. [Added by Ord. No. 92-86]
§ 211-12. Violations and penalties.
The following penalties shall apply for violations of this chapter, as
specified:
sublease agreement shall specifically define standards to be
provided by the lessee operator and sublessee operator to meet the
standards. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-8]
A. Rate established. There is hereby established an aviation fuel flowage
fee for the use and services of the Municipal Airport of the City of
Watertown. The rate for such fee shall be based upon a charge of $0.03
per gallon of aviation gas or fuel dispensed to any person, firm or entity
at the Watertown Municipal Airport.
B. Levy of fee. The fee shall be levied upon such person, firm or entity who
or which uses the facilities of the Watertown Municipal Airport at the
time the aviation gas or fuel is dispensed and is to be collected in the
manner of payment for such fuel by the fixed-base operator from such
person, firm or entity. Only the fixed-base operator is authorized by the
City of Watertown to sell, transfer or dispense aviation gas or fuel at the
Watertown Municipal Airport. Said fee shall be assessed and collected
regardless of whether or not the fixed-base operator collects any sums
for the sale, transfer or dispensing of the aviation gas or fuel from such
person, firm or entity who or which uses the same.
C. Payment of fee. The fixed-base operator shall maintain accurate records
of the amount and types of aviation gas or fuel dispensed at the
Watertown Municipal Airport, which said records shall be subject to
inspection by officials of the City of Watertown. On at least a monthly
basis, the fixed-base operator shall pay over such fees collected during
the preceding 30 days to the Clerk/Treasurer of the City of Watertown.
Such payment shall be accompanied by an itemized statement showing
the amount and types of aviation gas or fuel dispensed during the
month preceding the date of submission to the Clerk/Treasurer.
D. Person responsible for payment. The fee established herein shall be
collected from the users of the facilities at the Watertown Municipal
Airport.
A. Any person, party, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a forfeiture of not less than $10 nor more than $500,
together with the costs of prosecution.
B. Each day's failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a separate violation.
C. A violation of § 211-10 shall be considered a material breach of the
covenants contained in any lease between the City of Watertown and
§ 211-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-12
1:132
§ 211-13. Vehicular and pedestrian traffic; Aero Park Airport
Viewing Area. [Added by Ord. No. 89-39]
the operator and shall cause the cancellation thereof as provided under
the terms of said lease agreement. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-8]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT — Crash, fire and rescue or police motor
vehicles and such other equipment as the Airport Manager may
designate as necessary to safeguard airport runways, taxiways, ramps,
buildings and other property.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
SERVICE, MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT —
Approved equipment normally operated by Air Watertown, Inc., fixedbase
operator, and/or the Federal Aviation Administration on landing
areas, runways, taxiways and peripheral roads for the servicing,
maintenance and construction of airport facilities and services or for
the servicing of aircraft. This definition shall include equipment owned
and operated by a contractor performing work on the airport under a
contractual agreement with the City of Watertown.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn, excepting aircraft.
B. Operation of vehicles on runways, taxiways and ramps. No vehicle shall
enter, be driven upon, or operate upon any airport runway, taxiway,
ramp, tie-down area, or any area posted by signs prohibiting the
entrance thereon, except as noted below.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
equipment or service, maintenance and construction equipment
when engaged in the performance of its normal duties.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to aircraft owners,
hangar owners, tenants or authorized guests in the operation of
their private vehicles upon any airport taxiway, ramp, tie-down
area, apron or other paved airport property except runways, with
the express purpose of reaching their aircraft or hangar, provided
they use one of the two marked entrances to the apron or tie-down
area, and further provided that said aircraft owners, hangar
owners, tenants or authorized guests in crossing taxiways, aprons
or tie-down areas in order to reach their aircraft or hangars shall at
all times yield to any and all aircraft proceeding thereon.
(3) No person shall be allowed to operate or drive upon any airport
runway without the express authorization of the Airport Manager.
C. Speed of vehicles.
§ 211-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-13
1:133
(1) No vehicle shall be driven upon any road within the perimeter of
the airport, or upon other airport areas, in excess of the speed limit
posted, nor shall the driver of any vehicle fail to adhere to any sign
posted to regulate vehicle traffic on or about the Watertown
Municipal Airport.
(2) Any authorized vehicle operating in or upon any airport runway,
taxiway, apron, ramp or tie-down area shall not be operated at a
speed in excess of 10 miles per hour.40
D. Pedestrian traffic on airport. No pedestrian shall be allowed beyond the
administration area or upon the apron or aircraft tie-down area unless
for the purpose of embarking in or disembarking from an aircraft, or
unless authorized by the Airport Manager. Pedestrian traffic is
prohibited on taxiways, runways and outlying areas of the airport
except for those employees of the City, county, state, federal
government, or contractors engaged in airport construction or
maintenance work.
E. Vehicle parking.
(1) All vehicles parked on airport property shall be parked in
designated areas and in accordance with posted signs or other
markings. The Airport Manager may move, or order the removal of
at the vehicle owner's expense, any vehicle improperly parked.
(2) Aircraft owners, hangar owners, tenants or authorized guests may
park their vehicles in their hangars or in their tie-down spots when
their aircraft is in actual use and not occupying said space.
Common hangar tenants may park their vehicles along the side of
or between hangars. Parked vehicles shall not hinder the
movement of aircraft or interfere with snow removal activities.
F. Aero Park Airplane Viewing Area. The Aero Park Airplane Viewing Area
has been designated as open to the general public and has been
developed by the generous efforts of the Bartelme-Schwefel
Detachment of the United States Marine Corps League for the purpose
of allowing the public a viewing area for airport operations and other
recreational uses. Upon the findings of the City of Watertown Airport
Commission, it is deemed necessary to develop and promulgate
regulations for the orderly uses of the Aero Park Airplane Viewing Area.
[Added by Ord. No. 99-40]
(1) The Aero Park Airplane Viewing Area is not part of the park system
of the City of Watertown, nor is it regulated pursuant to Chapter
398, Article I, of the Watertown Code.
(2) Rules of conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person in the Aero
Park Airplane Viewing Area to:
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 211-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-13
1:134
(a) Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six
years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for
the opposite sex.
(b) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or
plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by
tool, equipment, blasting or other means, unless specifically
authorized by the Watertown Airport Commission or the United
States Marine Corps League.
(c) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such property, unless
specifically authorized by the Watertown Airport Commission
or the United States Marine Corps League.
(d) Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or
injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig
in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other manner
injure the natural beauty or usefulness of the property.
(e) Climb any tree or walk, climb, stand or sit upon monuments,
vases, planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other
property not designated or customarily used for such purpose.
(f) Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree,
fence, railing, bench or other structure unless specifically
authorized by the Watertown Airport Commission or United
States Marine Corps League.
(g) Bring any glass beverage container onto the property.
(h) Allow any domestic animal under that person's control to be
present on or within the property unless specifically authorized
by the Watertown Airport Commission. Any such animals shall
be required to be on a leash and may not run at large.
(i) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(j) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease,
shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird,
nor shall a person remove or have in one's possession the
young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or young of any
reptile or bird.
(k) Drive or operate any motor vehicle on any area except those
areas designated as parking areas.
(l) Perform any type of vehicle maintenance activity which would
involve intentionally discarding or discharging motor oil or any
other vehicle fluid, opening an engine access panel, removing
§ 211-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-13
1:135
or elevating one or more tires or a portion of the vehicle, or
crawling beneath a vehicle, except in an emergency situation.
(m) Wash the exterior of a vehicle or any holding tanks for sanitary
waste, or empty sanitary waste from a vehicle, motor home or
camper.
(n) Post, paint, affix, place, cast or leave about any bill, billboard,
placard, ticket, handbill, circular or advertisement.
(o) Kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places provided
for such purposes. Any fire shall be continuously under the
care and direction of a competent person from the time it is
kindled until it is extinguished.
(p) Camp or stay overnight anywhere on the property without
prior permission of the Watertown Airport Commission or
United States Marine Corps League.
(q) Use roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards or bicycles on any
structures, picnic tables, playground equipment, or retaining
walls.
(r) Fly or launch any model airplanes, radio-controlled airplanes
or model rockets.
(s) Be in or occupy the property between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. without prior permission of the Watertown
Airport Commission or United States Marine Corps League;
with prior permission, authorized groups may occupy the
property until 11:00 p.m.
G. Enforcement.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the City of
Watertown to enforce the provisions of this section.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not conflict with the provisions
of Title 14, Part 139 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as
promulgated and amended from time to time by the Federal
Aviation Administration. Any such provisions of this section in
conflict with Part 139, as amended, shall not take precedence over
the provisions of said regulations. [Added by Ord. No. 89-3941]
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 211-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 211-13
1:136
Chapter 216
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction, permits,
inspections — See Ch. 253, especially
§ 253-23.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 303.
§ 216-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device or system which transmits its alarm
signal from the location of the alarm to the police radio dispatch center,
other police dispatch facility or central station by any means except a direct
dial alarm device, as defined in this section.
ALARM SYSTEM — An intrusion, burglar, holdup or similar system which is
designed to summon or cause a response by the Police Department, or that
gives a signal, either visual, audible, or both, on the exterior portion of the
property, but does not leave that structure by wire, radio waves, or other
transmission to a control receiving location.
ALARM USER — The person, partnership, corporation or other entity of any
kind that owns or is in control of any building, structure or facility or portion
thereof wherein an alarm system is in operation.
AUDIBLE ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device which produces an audible
signal at the premises where it is installed, whether by means of horns,
bells, sirens or other mechanisms, thereby notifying persons within audible
range of the signal that police should be notified. (Smoke detectors or
fire detectors located in individual residences or businesses are expressly
excluded from this category of audible alarm device.)
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility that is manned at all times by
trained operators employed to receive, record and validate alarm signals
and to relay information about validated signals to the police radio dispatch
center when appropriate.
DIRECT DIAL ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated,
transmits a prerecorded message or other signal by telephone directly to
the police radio dispatch center, requesting a police or fire response.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm signal originating from an alarm device, alarm
system or audible alarm device to which the police respond and which
results from:
False activation, including reporting a robbery where no actual or
attempted robbery has occurred, or reporting a burglar alarm where
A.
§ 211-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-1
1:137
§ 216-2. Permit application and standards.
§ 216-3. Alarm requirements. [Amended by Ord. No. 02-57;
4-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-6]
there is no evidence to substantiate an attempted or forced entry to the
premises.
B. Alarm malfunction, including mechanical failure or electrical failure.
C. Alarm triggered by negligence, including overly sensitive settings.
A. No person shall install, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any
alarm device within the City of Watertown without first completing an
application supplied by the Clerk/Treasurer's office accompanied by a
permit fee as set by the Common Council and provided under separate
fee schedule.42
B. The alarm permit application shall include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm user.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of a person or firm which
can be contacted in the event of an emergency or false alarm and is
available upon request of the Police Department within 1/2 hour of
notification of such emergency or false alarm to provide a key to
the premises for which the alarm has been activated for the
purpose of inspecting the premises or resetting the alarm system.
(3) Identification of the alarm company.
(4) Any other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police for
the purpose of providing an appropriate response by the Police
Department.
(5) Notice of liability for the response fee set forth in § 216-4D and
notice that the response fee may be placed as a special charge on
the alarm user's tax roll pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., if not
paid.
(6) Notice that, in the event that the Police Department responds to an
alarm at the premises covered by the alarm system and neither the
permit holder nor an authorized agent is present, the permit holder
consents to the entry into the premises, if necessary, to ascertain
the cause of the alarm.
A. No person shall install or cause, continue, maintain or permit the
operation of a direct dial alarm device, except:
(1) Direct dial alarm devices used by the physically handicapped.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 216-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 216-3
1:138
§ 216-4. False alarms.
(2) Direct dial alarm devices used by departments and divisions of the
City of Watertown.
B. In the event any alarm or warning signal is audible to others not on the
premises where the audible alarm device is maintained, the alarm user
shall terminate or cause the audible alarm to be terminated no later
than 30 minutes after the activation of said audible signal.
C. Upon installation of a new alarm system, the alarm user will be given a
thirty-day grace period, during which time no response fees will be
imposed. This grace period allows for proper installation and necessary
adjustments of said alarm system.
A. No person owning, using or possessing an alarm system shall cause or
permit the activation of a false alarm.
B. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm system,
knowing that no emergency exists.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the discretion of the
Police Department to take into account mitigating circumstances in
enforcing this chapter.
D. Response fees for false alarms. [Amended by Ord. No. 02-57;
4-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-6]
(1) In the instance of a first false alarm response within any twelvemonth
period, the City of Watertown Police Department shall cause
to be issued a warning, setting forth a description of the violation of
this section with a copy of the ordinance to the owner as well as any
occupant, lessee or legal possessor of the address summoning a
response.
(2) In the instance of any second false alarm response within any
twelve-month period, the City of Watertown Police Department
shall cause to be issued a final warning, setting forth a description
of the violation of this section with a copy of the ordinance to the
owner as well as any occupant, lessee or legal possessor of the
address summoning a response.
(3) In the instance of any third or subsequent false alarm response
within any twelve-month period, the City of Watertown Police
Department shall cause to be issued to an alarm user a due and
payable invoice for response costs in the minimum sum as set by
the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule,
the date payment is due, the right of the alarm user to a hearing
before the Chief of Police if a request therefor is made before the
date payment is due, and a warning that any unpaid response fee
will be allocated to the alarm user's property tax roll as a special
charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., at the alarm user's last
§ 216-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-4
1:139
§ 216-5. Collection of fees.
§ 216-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 220
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES AND OTHER BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment establishments — See
Ch. 205.
Peace and good order; alcohol in public — See
Ch. 410, specifically § 410-52.
Zoning — See Ch. 550, § 550-52P.
known address with copy to the owner, at the owner's last known
address, as well as any occupant, lessee or legal possessor of
the address summoning a response. The City of Watertown Police
Department shall collect such additional amounts at the same rate
in fifteen-minute increments if the time expended by the Police
Department exceeds one-half hour.43
E. Periodic alarm testing will not result in a response fee, as long as prior
notification to the Police Department was made, along with notification
once the testing is completed.
F. Storm-related false alarms which can be reasonably verified shall be
exempt from any response fees.
A. For the purposes of this section, an alarm user who is lessee, occupant
or tenant of the premises from which the false alarm originated shall be
deemed agent of the owner thereof.44
B. All charges for response fees are due and payable to the City of
Watertown within 30 days of mailing of the notice required in
Subsection B, except that, if a hearing is requested in a timely manner,
the assessment is due within 10 days after an adverse decision is
rendered at such hearing.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
44.Editor's Note: Original Section 9.19 5(b), pertaining to invoices and notices, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-6 and
subsequent subsection renumbered accordingly.
§ 216-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 216-6
1:140
ARTICLE I
Licensing and General Regulations
[Adopted as §§ 9.01 and 9.20 of the former City Code; amended in
its entirety by Ord. No. 05-20]
§ 220-1. State statutes adopted. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18; 6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-10]
The provisions of Ch. 125 and § 66.0433, Wis. Stats., defining and
regulating the sale, procurement, dispensing and transfer of intoxicating
liquor and fermented malt beverages, excluding provisions relating to the
penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are
adopted and made a part of this article by reference. A violation of any of
such provisions shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 220-2. Licenses, permits and authorization required.
§ 220-3. Classes of licenses and fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 06-10;
Ord. No. 07-20;7-1-2014 by Ord. No. 14-17; 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18]
The following classes and denominations of licenses may be issued by
the City Clerk/Treasurer upon the granting by the Common Council after
payment of the fee as set by the Common Council and provided under a
separate fee schedule, which when so issued shall permit the holder to
sell, deal or traffic in beverages as provided in §§ 66.0433, 125.17, 125.25,
125.26 and 125.51, Wis. Stats. Except as otherwise provided in this article
or Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., the full license fee shall be charged for the whole or
fraction of any license year. For the purpose of this article, a license year is
defined as the period from July 1 to June 30. Except as otherwise provided
in this article, all licenses shall expire on the June 30 next following the date
of issuance.
A. When required. No person, except as provided by §§ 125.06 and
66.0433, Wis. Stats., shall within the City serve, sell, manufacture,
rectify, brew or engage in any other activity for which this article or Ch.
125 or § 66.0433, Wis. Stats., requires a license, permit or other
authorization without obtaining the required license, permit or
authorization as provided in this article. [Amended 10-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-18]
B. Separate license required for each place of sale. Except for licensed
public warehouses, a license shall be required for each location or
premises where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are
commercially stored, sold or offered for sale. [Amended 6-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-10]
A. Retail Class "A" fermented malt beverage license.
B. Retail Class "B" fermented malt beverage license.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:141
(1) Six-month license. A license may be issued at any time for six
months in any calendar year, for which 1/2 of the applicable license
fee shall be paid, but such license shall not be renewable during the
calendar year in which it was issued.
(2) Picnic license: a per-day fee to bona fide clubs or lodges pursuant
to § 125.26, Wis. Stats. If the licensed premises is on City-owned
property, this license shall be limited to the sale or dispensing of
fermented malt beverages in open paper or plastic cups or like
containers only.
C. Retail "Class A" liquor license.
D. Retail "Class B" liquor license, which shall permit its holder to sell
liquor by the glass to be consumed on the licensed premises and, in
original packages or containers, in multiples not to exceed four liters at
any one time to be consumed off the licensed premises. Wine may be
sold in original packages or otherwise in any quantity to be consumed
off the licensed premises. The City elects to come under the provisions
of § 125.51(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
(1) The fee for the license shall be prorated according to the number of
months or fractions thereof remaining until the following June 30.
(2) A retail "Class B" liquor license shall be issued only to holders of a
retail Class "B" fermented malt beverage license.
E. Retail "Class C" liquor license.
F. Temporary retail "Class B" wine license. Pursuant to § 125.51(10), Wis.
Stats., this license may be issued to bona fide clubs, local fair
associations or agricultural societies, churches, lodges or societies that
have been in existence for at least six months before the date of
application and to posts of veterans' organizations, authorizing the sale
of wine in an original package, container or bottle, or by the glass if the
wine is dispensed directly from an original package, container or bottle
at a particular picnic or similar gathering. The fee for the license shall
be as set by the Common Council and provided under a separate fee
schedule per day, unless the applicant has also applied for and been
granted a temporary retail Class "B" fermented malt beverage (picnic)
license, pursuant to Subsection B(2) above. If the licensed premises are
on City-owned property, this license shall be limited to the sale or
dispensing of wine in open paper or plastic cups or like containers only,
unless the original package, container or bottle is sold as part of a wine
tasting event, is placed in a opaque bag or package, and is limited to
consumption off the City-owned property.
G. Operator's license.
(1) A two-year operator's license (i.e., bartender's license) may be
granted to individuals by the Common Council for the purposes of
complying with §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 220-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-3
1:142
(2) Once issued by the City Clerk/Treasurer, an operator's license shall
be valid until June 30 next following the date of issuance. An
operator's license may then be validated for use during the second
license year only if returned to the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer together with payment by the applicant of the second
year's fee, no sooner than May 1 but no later than June 30 next
following the date of issuance.
(3) Written applications for an operator's license shall be on forms
provided by the City Clerk/Treasurer and shall be accompanied by
the first year's fee.
H. Provisional operator's license.
(1) Individuals who have applied for an operator's license under
Subsection G above and who have shown proof of enrollment in the
bartender's training course under § 220-5I may be issued a
provisional operator's license by the City Clerk/Treasurer, without
approval by the Common Council, pursuant to § 125.17(5), Wis.
Stats.
(2) Once issued by the City Clerk/Treasurer, the provisional operator's
license shall be valid until either the date of issuance or denial of a
regular operator's license by the Common Council, under
Subsection G or 60 days after the date of the issuance of the
provisional operator's license, whichever date is earlier.
(3) A provisional operator's license may not be issued to any individual
who has been denied a license under this article or Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., within the three-year period immediately preceding the date
of application.
(4) Only one provisional operator's license may be issued to any
individual for each regular license application.
I. Temporary operator's license.
(1) The fee charged for a temporary operator's license as provided
hereunder shall be as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule.
(2) Temporary operator's licenses may be granted to individuals by the
Clerk/Treasurer in substantial accordance with the licensing
guidelines established by the Licensing Board for the purposes of
complying with §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats. The Police
Chief shall provide investigatory consultation and recommendation
with respect to any temporary operator license applicant's criminal
or quasi-criminal background as pertinent to the licensing
guidelines established by the Licensing Board.
(3) Temporary operators' licenses may be issued only upon written
application on forms provided by the Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:143
§ 220-4. License application.
(4) Temporary operators' licenses may be issued only to operators
employed by, or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations.
(5) No individual may hold more than one temporary operator's license
in any single consecutive twelve-month period.
(6) A temporary operator's license shall be valid for any period from
one day to 14 days; the period for which the temporary operator's
license is valid shall be so stated on the face of the license.
(7) Temporary operator's licenses may be issued by the Clerk/
Treasurer in accordance with § 125.17(1), (2), (3) and (4), Wis.
Stats.
J. (Reserved)45
K. Provisional retail license. The Police Chief shall provide investigatory
consultation and recommendation with respect to any retail license
applicant's criminal or quasi-criminal background as pertinent to the
licensing guidelines established by the Licensing Board and the
governing provisions of Ch. 125. The Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a
provisional retail license only if a positive recommendation for issuance
is made by the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall provide a
recommendation as to the issuance or nonissuance of a new retail
license to the Clerk/Treasurer and Licensing Board as soon as
practicable. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-9]
A. Form. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on forms prescribed
by the State Department of Revenue. All other license applications
required hereunder shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the
City. All applications shall be filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer and
shall, with the exception of the operator's license, physically describe
the premises to be licensed, including every room and storage space to
be covered by the license and all rooms joined by connecting entrances
or not separated by a solid wall.
B. Application to be notarized. Applications shall be signed and sworn to
by the applicant as provided by § 887.01, Wis. Stats.
C. License investigation. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall notify the Chief of
Police, City Health Officer, City Fire Inspector, and City Building
Inspector of each application for any license provided under this article,
and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each
application and the premises together with such other investigation as
shall be necessary to comply with the regulations, ordinances and the
laws applicable thereto and to determine whether the applicant is a
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding nonintoxicating and soda water beverage
licensing, was repealed 6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-10.
§ 220-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-4
1:144
§ 220-5. License restrictions.
proper recipient of the license requested. These officials shall furnish
to the City Clerk/Treasurer and the Licensing Board, in writing, the
information derived from such investigations, accompanied by a
recommendation as to whether the license should be granted or
refused.
(1) No license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises,
except that each premises need not be inspected more than once
each license year unless required by other rules or regulations.
(2) In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall
be given to the moral character and financial responsibility of the
applicant, the appropriateness of the location and premises
proposed, and generally the benefits, if any, the City will realize
from the issuance of the license.
D. Granting and issuance. The granting and issuance of licenses
authorized under this article shall be governed by the following:
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(1) All license applications submitted hereunder shall be granted or
denied no later than by the date of the first regular Common
Council meeting subsequent to the forty-five calendar day period
following the date of application. A granted license shall be issued
at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer within six months after
such granting. Failure by the applicant to appear and take receipt
of a granted license during this six-month period shall be treated as
a voluntary withdrawal of the application. If an applicant needs
more than six months to take receipt of the license, due to
construction delays or purchase delays of the licensed premises,
the applicant must request an extension from the Licensing Board.
The Licensing Board shall then have complete authority as to
whether or not to grant or deny such extension request.
(2) Subject to the limits set forth in Subsection D(1) above, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall hold the license after the same has been
granted by the Common Council until the applicant has complied
with all state laws and local ordinances, as determined by the
license investigation required by Subsection C of this section, and
all conditions associated with the issuance as may be imposed by
the Common Council independently or as a result of the
recommendations of the Licensing Board.
A. Statutory requirements. Licenses shall be issued only to persons
eligible therefor under §§ 66.0433 and 125.04, Wis. Stats. [Amended
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
B. Location. No retail "Class A" liquor license, retail "Class B" liquor
license or retail Class "B" fermented malt beverage license (except
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:145
picnic) shall be issued for premises the main entrance of which is less
than 300 feet from the main entrance of any established public or
parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured
by the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the
main entrance of such school, hospital or church to the main entrance
of the premises covered by the license application. This subsection shall
not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall
it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of
real property within 300 feet thereof by any school, hospital or church
building.
C. Violators of liquor or beer laws or ordinances. A retail Class "A," "Class
A," Class "B," "Class B," "Class C" or operator's license will not be
issued to persons who have an arrest or conviction record, subject to
Wis. Stat. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335. The Licensing Board may
consider the circumstances surrounding the offense in keeping with the
Licensing Board guidelines and Chapter 125 Wis. Stats. Those
convicted of any violations while holding a license will be subject to the
suspension and revocation process as outlined in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.,
and this article. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1]
D. Health and sanitation requirements. No retail Class "B," "Class B" or
"Class C" license shall be issued for any premises which does not
conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the rules and
regulations of the State Department of Health Services applicable to
restaurants and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted by the
City. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
E. License quota. The number of retail "Class A" and "Class B" liquor
licenses that may be issued under this article is as follows:
(1) The number of persons and places that may be issued a retail
"Class B" liquor license is limited as provided in § 125.51(4), Wis.
Stats.
F. Corporations. No license shall be issued to any corporation when more
than 50% of the voting stock interest, legal interest or beneficial
interest is held by any person or persons not eligible for a license under
this article.
G. Age requirement. No license hereunder shall be issued to any person
under the legal drinking age, except that licenses issued under
§ 220-3G, H and I may be issued to persons between 18 years of age and
the legal drinking age.46
H. Issuance for sales in dwellings prohibited. No license shall be issued or
transferred to any person for the purposes of possessing, selling or
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II); this ordinance also repealed former subsection (h), Effect of revocation of license,
which immediately followed this subsection..
§ 220-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-5
1:146
§ 220-6. Form and expiration of licenses.47
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of
issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee and, unless sooner
revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter, except as otherwise provided.
§ 220-7. Transfer of licenses.
offering for sale any alcohol beverages in any dwelling house, flat or
residential apartment.
I. Bartender's course.
(1) No operator's license or Class "A," "Class A," Class "B," "Class B" or
"Class C" license shall be issued or appointment of a corporate
agent accepted unless the individual applicant or corporate agent
has placed with the City Clerk/Treasurer a certification or other
written evidence of completion by the individual applicant or
corporate agent of an approved bartender's or alcohol beverage
operator's training course. The applicant can also provide a copy of
proof that he or she has a current operator's license in another
municipality.
(2) The City Clerk/Treasurer shall maintain a list of training courses
currently approved by the Licensing Board for use by prospective
license applicants.
(3) The applicant must attend the bartender's awareness course if:
(a) He/she has never held a license in the City of Watertown.
(b) He/she did hold a license in the City of Watertown but it
expired more than two years ago.
(c) He/she did hold a license in the City of Watertown, which has
lapsed, and the applicant never attended the course or
attended the course more than two years ago.
(d) He/she already attended the course more than two years ago,
and the applicant never held a license.
(4) The term "corporate agent," as used in this subsection, shall mean
and refer to the term "agent" as described in § 125.04(6), Wis.
Stats.
(5) In the event the license applicant is a partnership, the term
"individual applicant," as used in this subsection, shall mean and
refer to both partners.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-7
1:147
§ 220-8. Posting and care of licenses.
§ 220-9. Regulation of licensed premises and licensees.
A. As to person. No license shall be transferable as to licensee except as
provided by § 125.04(12), Wis. Stats.
B. As to place. Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be transferred
as provided in § 125.04(12), Wis. Stats. Application for such transfer
shall be made on blanks furnished by the State Department of Revenue.
Proceedings for transfer shall be had in the same manner and form as
the original application.
A. Every license or permit required under this article (except for
operators' licenses) shall be framed and posted and at all times
displayed as provided by § 125.04(10), Wis. Stats. No individual shall
post such license or permit any other individual to post it upon premises
other than that mentioned in the application or knowingly deface or
destroy such license.
B. An operator's license shall at all times be within the immediate work
area of the individual so licensed when engaged in the sale, dispensing
or serving of alcohol beverages or when present upon a licensed
premises for the purpose of supervising such sale, dispensing or
serving by others.
A. Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed or
permitted premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly
manner, and no unlawful, disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall
be allowed at any time on any such premises.
B. Employment of minors. No licensee shall employ any person under 18
years of age to serve, sell, dispense or give away any alcohol beverages.
C. Sales by clubs. No club shall sell any alcohol beverage except to
members and guests invited by members.
D. Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be
maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and
proper place for the purpose for which used.
E. Supervision of sales. The point of sale of alcohol beverages must, at all
times, be under the direct supervision and visual sight of either the
licensee or the agent, if the licensee is a corporation, or a person
holding an operator's license.
F. Outside sales; consumption; possession of open intoxicants. Sales,
consumption or possession of open intoxicants with respect to alcohol
beverages authorized under a retail Class "A," "Class A," Class "B,"
"Class B" or "Class C" license (except for picnic licenses) shall be
limited to the internal confines of the licensed premises, except for
those holders of a retail "Class B" liquor license who have been issued
§ 220-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-9
1:148
an outside sales event license pursuant to Article II of this chapter or as
otherwise permitted under this article. Possession of open intoxicants
shall be defined as provided under § 410-52. [Amended by Ord. No.
13-25]
G. Non-alcohol events; underaged persons. The presence of underage
persons on a licensed premises as provided under § 125.07(3)(a)(10),
Wis. Stats., shall be subject to the following:
(1) The licensee or agent of a corporate licensee shall notify the Police
Department at least 48 hours in advance of any date on which
underage persons will be present on the licensed premises. Each
such non-alcoholic event's notice shall specify the date(s) on which
the event is to occur and the time(s) of commencement. All notices
shall be filed with the Police Department during normal working
hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday) and shall be
given on forms prescribed by the Police Department. After a nonalcohol
event notice has been given, the licensee may cancel an
event(s) only by giving like notice to the Police Department in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Regardless of
date given, all notices shall expire and be deemed canceled no later
than the date of expiration or revocation of the applicable retail
Class "B" license.
(2) During the period of any non-alcohol event, a notice card
prescribed by the Police Department shall be posted at all public
entrances to the licensed premises notifying the general public that
no alcohol beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or
carried into the licensed premises during the event. Such notice
cards shall be made available by the Police Department to a
requesting licensee at no cost.
(3) Once a non-alcohol event has commenced, no alcohol beverages
may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the
licensed premises until the next day following the closing hours as
specified in § 220-10A(3).
(4) During the period of any non-alcohol event, all alcohol beverages
not stored in a locked portion of the licensed premises shall be
stored in a secure place out of the sight and physical reach of any
patron present and shall be under the direct and immediate control
and supervision of the licensee or a licensed bartender in the
employ of the licensee. All beer taps and automatic dispensers of
alcohol beverages ("speed guns") shall be either disconnected,
disabled or made inoperable.
H. Sexually oriented businesses on licensed premises.
(1) Findings.
(a) The Common Council has authority under its general police
powers set forth in § 62.11(5), Wis. Stats., to act for the good
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-9
1:149
order of the municipality and for the health, safety and welfare
of the public and may carry out its powers by regulation and
suppression.
(b) The Common Council recognizes it lacks authority to regulate
obscenity in light of § 66.0107(3), Wis. Stats., and does not
intend by adopting this subsection to regulate obscenity, since
nudity in and of itself is not obscene. It declares its intent to
enact an ordinance addressing the secondary effects of live,
totally nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing in bars and taverns.
(c) Bars and taverns featuring totally nude, nonobscene, erotic
dancing or motion-picture or video presentations thereof have
in other communities tended to further the increase of criminal
and other offensive activity, to disrupt the peace and order of
the communities, to depreciate the value of real property, to
harm the economic welfare of the communities and to
negatively affect the quality of life of the communities, and
such secondary effects are detrimental to the public health,
safety and general welfare of citizens.
(d) The Common Council recognizes that the United States
Supreme Court has held that nude dancing is expressive
conduct within the outer perimeters of the First Amendment to
the United States Constitution and therefore entitled to some
protection under the First Amendment, and the Common
Council further recognizes that freedom of speech is among
our most precious and highly protected rights and wishes to
act consistently with full protection of those rights.
(e) However, the Common Council is aware, based on the
experiences of other communities, that bars and taverns in
which live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing or video or
motion-picture presentation thereof occurs may and do
generate secondary effects which the Common Council
believes are detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Watertown.
(f) Among these secondary effects are: the potential increase in
prostitution and other sex-related offenses, as well as other
crimes and offenses; the potential depreciation of property
values in neighborhoods where bars and taverns featuring
nude dancing exist; health risks associated with the spread of
sexually transmitted infections; and the potential for
infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of unlawful
conduct.
(g) The Common Council desires to minimize, prevent and control
these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Watertown;
protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality
§ 220-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-9
1:150
of life; preserve the property values and character of
surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of urban
blight.
(h) The Common Council has determined that enactment of an
ordinance prohibiting live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic
dancing, or the video or motion-picture presentation thereof, in
bars and taverns licensed to serve alcohol beverages, promotes
the goal of minimizing, preventing and controlling the negative
secondary effects associated with such activity.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, agent of the licensee, or
person holding an operator's license under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., or
this article to knowingly permit or knowingly allow any person to:
(a) Perform or to engage in the display or exposure of any
specified anatomical areas upon the licensed premises.
(b) Engage in any specified sexual activity upon the licensed
premises.
(c) Simulate, perform or depict, with or without artificial devices
or inanimate objects, any specified sexual activity with any
other person upon the licensed premises, including with
another employee or independent contractor.
(d) Show, display or exhibit, on the licensed premises, any film,
video, still picture, electronic reproduction or any other visual
reproduction or image of any specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(e) Engage in any of those adult uses described in § 550-52P(1) of
this Code, as from time to time amended, upon the licensed
premises so as to intentionally touch any patron, guest or
customer of the licensed premises, either directly or through a
medium, for purposes of passing a gratuity from the patron,
guest or customer to the person, entertainer or performer,
unless the patron, guest or customer maintains a distance of at
least three feet from the person, entertainer or performer.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(f) Intentionally straddle the legs of another employee or
independent contractor or any patron, guest or customer at the
licensed premises, regardless of whether there is a touch or
touching.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, patron, guest, customer,
employee or independent contractor of a licensed premises under
Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., or this article to engage in any of the activities
described in Subsection H(2)(a) to (f) above.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-9
1:151
(4) Definitions. As used in this Subsection H, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
vulva, anus and cleavage of the buttocks.
(a)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(b)
Less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple
of the female breast.
(c)
Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
(a)
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus or
excretory functions.
(b)
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
anus, buttocks or female breasts.
(c)
(5) Exemptions. The provisions of this Subsection H do not apply to the
following activities conducted on the licensed premises or in the
following specific areas of licensed establishments:
(a) Theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, exhibition
halls, restaurants and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet,
music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are
offered to the general public, with or without paid admission,
or movie theaters and video arcades where video or motionpicture
presentations of dance, ballet, music and dramatic
performances of serious artistic merit are offered to the
general public, with or without paid admission. In order to fall
within the application of this exemption, the predominant
business or attraction in the licensed establishment may not
consist of the offering to customers of entertainment which is
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification
to such customers and where the establishment is
distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or
promotion of, employees or independent contractors
associated with the licensed establishment engaging in nude
erotic dancing.
(b) Lavatories, restrooms and bathrooms on the licensed premises
where there is unintentional exposure of genitals by
individuals performing excretory functions.
(c) The private areas or guest rooms not accessible to the general
public of those hotels, motels, rooming houses, or bed-and-
§ 220-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-9
1:152
§ 220-10. Closing hours. [Amended by Ord. No. 11-33]
breakfast businesses in the City which hold an operator's
license under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., or this article.
(d) The rental or sale of video cassettes, DVD videodiscs, or other
electronic media for private viewing by individuals off the
licensed premises.
(e) Exposure of any portion of the female breast while a person is
engaged in breast-feeding a child.
A. No premises for which an alcohol beverage license or permit has been
issued shall remain open during the following hours:48
(1) Retail "Class A" liquor license: between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(2) Retail Class "A" fermented malt beverage license: between 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(3) Retail Class "B," "Class B" and "Class C" licenses and permits:
between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and
between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday, except
that on the Sunday that daylight saving time begins as specified in
§ 175.095(2), Wis. Stats., closing hours shall be between 3:30 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. On January 1, there shall be no limit on the hours
which the licensee may remain open. No package, container or
bottle sales in unopened original containers for consumption off the
premises may be made between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
8:00 a.m. [Amended 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12]
B. Exceptions. Food stores, hotels, restaurants and other commercial
establishments whose principal business is the sale or furnishing of
food or lodging, and bowling alleys and golf courses may remain open
for the conduct of their regular business, but no intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages shall be sold during the applicable abovestated
hours.
C. Definition. For the purpose of this section, "shall remain open" does not
apply to the licensee or his/her employees remaining on the premises
after closing hours specifically to clean or repair the premises; however,
the general public, guests of the licensee, or guests of licensee's
employees shall not be allowed to remain on the premises after closing
hours, and the doors to the premises shall be locked to prevent access
by such persons.
D. Obstruction of front windows/doors. All premises for which an alcohol
beverage license or permit has been issued shall be so arranged as to
furnish a clear view from the sidewalk of the interior of the
48.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), pertaining to hours for wholesale license, was
repealed 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-10
1:153
§ 220-11. Revocation and suspension of licenses. [Amended by Ord.
No. 12-02]
establishment. No curtains, pictures, signs or other obstructions which
interfere with such a clear view shall be maintained. The provisions of
this subsection, however, shall not apply to hotels or restaurants.
A. Procedure.
(1) Whenever the holder of any license issued under this article is
subject to the sanctions imposed under this article:
(a) Proceedings for the revocation or suspension of such license
shall be instituted in the manner and under the procedures
established by § 125.12, Wis. Stats., before the City of
Watertown Licensing Board and as specified herein below.
(b) The provisions relating to transfer of any license suspended or
revoked under this article, including the provisions outlined in
§ 220-7 above, shall not be applicable unless the transfer is to
an unrelated party pursuant to a bona fide sale for value.
(2) Whenever any license issued under this article has been revoked,
at least 12 months from the time of such revocation shall elapse
before another license shall be issued under this article to the
person whose license was revoked.
B. Suspension. In addition to the procedures and penalties set forth in this
article and in addition to any other penalty imposed by law:
(1) Any retail license issued under this article may be suspended by the
Licensing Board for a period not less than five days and not more
than 30 days upon the conviction in Municipal Court or a circuit
court exercising concurrent jurisdiction of a licensee for an offense
under this article or for a violation of Ch. 125 or 139, Wis. Stats., or
any other federal or state liquor or fermented malt beverage law, or
pursuant to the point system as set forth at Subsection D below.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(2) Any operator's license issued under this article may be suspended
by the Licensing Board for a period not less than 10 days and not
more than 60 days upon the conviction in Municipal Court or a
circuit court exercising concurrent jurisdiction of the licensee for
an offense under this article or for a violation of Ch. 125 or 139,
Wis. Stats., or any other federal or state liquor or fermented malt
beverage law or pursuant to the point system as set forth at
Subsection D below. The holder of such operator's license shall be
prohibited from selling alcohol beverages anywhere in the City of
Watertown during such period of suspension.
(3) Any employee, agent or representative of a retail licensee, whether
or not compensated by the licensee, who is not a holder of an
§ 220-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-11
1:154
operator's license and who is convicted in the Municipal Court or a
circuit court exercising concurrent jurisdiction for an offense under
this article or for a violation of Ch. 125 or 139, Wis. Stats., or any
other federal or state liquor or fermented malt beverage law or
pursuant to the point system as set forth at Subsection D below
may be prohibited from selling alcohol beverages in the City of
Watertown for a period of not less than 10 days and not more than
60 days. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
C. Revocation. In addition to the procedures and penalties set forth in this
article and in addition to any other penalty imposed by law, any license
issued under this article may be revoked by the Licensing Board upon a
second violation committed within 12 months after a previous violation,
both of which resulted in a conviction of the same licensee in any
Municipal Court or a circuit court exercising concurrent jurisdiction
under this article or for a violation of Ch. 125 or 139, Wis. Stats., or any
other federal or state liquor or fermented beverage law.
D. System created. There is hereby established a point system for the
purpose of guiding the Licensing Board in making recommendations on
the possible suspension or revocation of alcohol beverage licenses. The
number of demerit points shall be assigned according to the type of
violation. This system is intended to identify habitually troublesome
alcohol licensees whose actions or those of his/her employees
repeatedly violate state statutes and/or City of Watertown ordinances
and to take consistent action against such licensees.
(1) Assignment of points. There is hereby assigned the following
maximum demerit points for each type of violation:
Types of Violations Chapter or Section
Demerit Points
(per incident)
Refusal to allow police to
search premises or refusal
to cooperate with lawful
police investigation
§§ 410-25, 410-26
and 410-46;
§ 139.08, Wis. Stats.
150
Refusal to allow Fire
Department to conduct
inspection
§ 303-4 100
Failure to maintain exits
in an unobstructed
manner
§ 303-19 50
Failure to maintain
sufficient fire
extinguishers
§ 303-2; Ch. SPS
314, Wis. Adm. Code
50
Unlawful employment of
minors
§ 220-9B 75
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:155
Types of Violations Chapter or Section
Demerit Points
(per incident)
Sexually oriented
business on licensed
premises unless permitted
by law
§ 220-9H 150
Owner/employee
possessing controlled
substances on licensed
premises
§ 410-54; Ch. 961,
Wis. Stats.
150
Owner/employee
possessing illegal drug
paraphernalia on
premises
§ 410-55; Ch. 961,
Wis. Stats.
100
Unauthorized transfer/use
of license
§ 220-7;
§ 125.04(12), Wis.
Stats.
90
Exceeding posted
occupancy/capacity
Ch. 303; Ch. SPS
314, Wis. Adm. Code
50
Sale of alcohol to person
under age 21 without
parent, guardian or
spouse of legal drinking
age
§ 125.07(1), Wis.
Stats.
80
Person under age 21 on
premises without parent,
guardian or spouse of
legal drinking age
§ 125.07(3), Wis.
Stats.
80
Sale to intoxicated person § 125.07(2), Wis.
Stats.
80
False statement on
application
§ 125.04(3) and (5),
Wis. Stats.
150
Failure to maintain order
fights/disorderly conduct,
Police Department not
notified by bar
§ 410-6 50
Failure to maintain order
fights/disorderly conduct,
Police Department
notified by bar
§ 410-7 10
Loud and unnecessary
noise
§ 410-40 45
Public consumption
outside licensed premises
§ 220-9F 10
§ 220-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-11
1:156
Types of Violations Chapter or Section
Demerit Points
(per incident)
Open after hours § 220-10 45
No licensed bartender on
premises
§ 220-9E 40
Fail to properly supervise
sales
§ 220-9E 40
Obstruction of front
windows/doors
§ 220-10E 25
After hours carry-outs § 220-10 30
Failure to frame and
display license
§ 220-8 25
Penalty enhancer for
severe offenses: enhanced
penalty for conduct which
results in bodily harm to
any individual; creates a
substantial risk of death
or bodily harm; involves
the use of a firearm or
other dangerous weapon;
or demonstrates an
ongoing disregard for the
requirements of state law
or municipal ordinances
Up to 150
additional
points
Health Code Chapter 152;
Chapter 228, Article
III; Chapter 319,
Article I; Chapter
362; Chapter 446
Environmental sanitation
violations
Chapter 319, Article
II
25
(2) Method of determination. In determining the accumulated points,
the date of the violation is used as the basis for assigning the
demerit points per incident. A conviction for a violation is not
necessary to assign points. That decision is made by the Chief of
Police or his designee based on his analysis of the violation.
(3) Alcohol licensing point notification. The Police Department shall
notify the Licensing Board and the licensee and the property owner
of any incidents which result in the assessment of demerit points.
The Licensing Board shall have the authority to adjust any points
assessed by the Police Chief, either up or down.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:157
(4) Point reduction courses. During any demerit point counting period,
a licensee may regain up to 50 demerit points for that period by
successfully completing courses sanctioned for that purpose by the
City of Watertown Police Department. The number of demerit
points returned for each successfully completed course shall also
be determined by the Police Department.
E. Disciplinary procedures.
(1) Hearings and recommendations. The Licensing Board is hereby
designated as the duly authorized committee that shall hold
hearings as prescribed in § 125.12, Wis. Stats. As provided by law,
after the hearing the Licensing Board shall submit a report to the
Common Council, including findings of fact, conclusions of law and
a recommendation as to what action, if any, the Common Council
should take with respect to the license. In making its
recommendation, the Board shall consider, in addition to all other
factors it deems relevant, the following guidelines. It is not
intended that these guidelines limit the discretion of the Licensing
Board; rather, that they provide guidance in formulating a
recommendation.
(a) For demerit points totaling 25 to 149 within a rolling twelvemonth
period, a recommendation that the licensee be warned
of the consequences of additional violations.
(b) For demerit points totaling 150 to 199 within a rolling twelvemonth
period, a recommendation of a warning or a suspension
of the license for a period of not less than 10 days and up to 90
days.
(c) For demerit points totaling 200 or more within a rolling twelvemonth
period, a suspension of the license for a period of not
less than 10 days and up to 90 days, or revocation of the
license.
(2) Transfer/sale of licensed business.
(a) Upon the transfer or sale of the licensed business, all
accumulated demerit points shall be cancelled unless any of
the following apply:
[1] The new licensee is related to the former owner by blood,
adoption or marriage.
[2] The new licensee held a business interest in the previous
licensed business, real estate or equipment.
[3] The former licensee retains an interest in the previous
licensed business, real estate or equipment.
[4] The new licensee's acquisition of the business did not
involve an arm's length transaction consisting of an open
§ 220-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-11
1:158
§ 220-12. Revocation and refusal to renew inactive licenses.
It shall be deemed a ground for nonrenewal or revocation of any license
issued under this article, in addition to those grounds specified in § 125.12,
Wis. Stats., if any of the following conditions shall at any time exist:
§ 220-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
market sale in which the owner is willing but not obligated
to sell and the buyer is willing but not obligated to buy.
(b) If any of the above apply, the new licensee shall inherit the
demerit points previously assessed and be subject to the
penalties prescribed by law.
(3) Scope. Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with,
abridge or modify the rights or procedures established for
revocation or suspension of licenses in § 125.12, Wis. Stats.
A. If the licensee is not routinely conducting the business of the sale or
offering for sale of alcohol beverages on the licensed premises during
the month immediately preceding the close of the license year.
B. If the licensee has not sold or offered for sale alcohol beverages on the
licensed premises for a minimum of 180 days during the license year
immediately preceding the license year for which application for a
renewal license is made, provided that the licensee has been licensed
for the full license year immediately preceding the license year for
which application for a renewal license is made.
C. If the licensee loses physical possession or occupation of the licensed
premises through a judgment of foreclosure, seizure under a writ or
execution or attachment to satisfy a judgment of record, assignment for
the benefit of creditors, adjudication of the United States Bankruptcy
Court, termination of a lease or rental agreement, or abandonment by
the licensee.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-13
1:159

ARTICLE II
Outside Sales
[Adopted by Ord. No. 98-55 (§ 9.11 of the former City Code)]
§ 220-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
OUTSIDE SALES AREA — An open area immediately adjacent to and
abutting the licensed premises of the applicant's retail Class "B" alcohol
beverage license where fermented malt beverages and alcohol beverages
are sold, served or consumed.
§ 220-15. Legislative intent.
The Common Council of the City of Watertown hereby finds that the conduct
of concerts or outside sales of alcohol beverages and consumption on
premises licensed to sell alcohol beverages can have several negative
effects upon the community, such as increased generation of litter or refuse
on public streets, decreased supervision of sales to underage persons,
increased noise levels and impact on neighboring residences or businesses,
more intensive police protection and control, and increased safety issues
due to the assembly of large groups of people, such that outside sales events
shall be licensed and controlled by the City of Watertown as to the number
and manner of their operation.
§ 220-16. License created.
There is created an outside sales event license, which may be issued only
to a person or entity possessing a valid retail Class "B" alcohol beverage
license issued by the City of Watertown.
§ 220-17. Application.
Application for the outside sales event license shall be made to the City
Clerk/Treasurer on a form prescribed by the City of Watertown and shall be
granted only upon approval of the Common Council. The application form
shall contain the following information:
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. A physical description and map of the outside sales area, showing
abutting walls of the building, entrance(s) to the outside sales area from
the licensed premises, fire exits, fencing and dimensions of the outside
sales area.
C. Dates and hours of operation of the outside sales event.
D. Any special activities or service of food which will be conducted in the
outside sales area.
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:161
§ 220-18. License fee and posting.49
The fee for an outside sales event license shall be as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule per event, and the
license, once issued, shall be posted conspicuously in the outside sales area
at all times it shall be in use.
§ 220-19. Conditions of license.
No outside sales event shall be permitted, maintained or operated except in
conformity with the following regulations:
A. At any part of the outside sales area not blocked by a building, there
shall be maintained or constructed a temporary fence or enclosure at
least four feet in height.
B. Entry to the outside sales area shall not be through an access point in
the enclosure or fence and shall only be gained from the interior of the
licensed premises.
C. The outside sales area shall not be greater than the floor space of the
abutting licensed premises.
D. The outside sales area shall be limited to one person for each 10 square
feet, and the maximum capacity shall be separately posted within the
outside sales area.
E. The outside sales area shall not remain open for the sale, service or
consumption of alcohol beverages between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m.
F. The noise levels emanating from any outside sales area shall not violate
§ 410-40 of the Watertown Code of General Ordinances.
G. No live performance or reproduction of concerts, music, sporting
events, video or television programs, or similar entertainment events
shall be broadcast or displayed on the exterior of the licensed premises
or in the outside sales area, other than between a continuous block of
not more than four hours between 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 8:00 p.m., to
be requested by the applicant.
H. The retail Class "B" licensee, his/her employees or agents shall be
responsible for preventing violations of this article and shall operate
the outside sales area in conformity with Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., and
Article I of this chapter.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 220-19
1:162
Chapter 224
AMUSEMENTS
§ 224-1. License required. [Amended by Ord. No. 94-12; Ord. No.
98-15]
No person, business or corporation shall conduct, exhibit, operate or
maintain within the City any circus, roller skating rink, pool or billiard hall,
video game arcade, contest, concert or exhibit of any natural or artificial
curiosity, or any other show, device or amusement to which admission
may be had by the payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token obtained for money, or in which a charge is
made indirectly for admittance, unless a license shall be obtained therefor.
This section shall not apply to events conducted by permanently organized
clubs, societies or corporations where the attendance is restricted to the
members of the society, club or corporation, or the guests thereof, and for
which the guests do not have to pay a fee. This section also shall not apply
to persons conducting public dances, operating bowling alleys, operating
businesses for which any of the various City liquor licenses are required,
or any other amusement for which a license is otherwise required by the
City. This section shall also not apply to any premises having three or fewer
video-arcade-type amusement devices.
§ 224-2. Application for license.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the City Clerk/Treasurer a written application upon a form
furnished by the City. Such application shall contain the names,
residences and ages of applicants if an individual, firm or partnership,
or the names of the principal officers, their residences and ages if the
applicant is an association or corporation. It shall also contain the name
or names of one or more persons whom such firm, partnership,
corporation or an association shall designate as manager or person in
charge, with the address or addresses of the same. Such application
shall further state the following:
(1) Whether applicant has been convicted of violating any law
regarding the conduct of any public amusement and, if so, when
and in what court.
(2) The premises where such amusement is to be located or conducted,
giving street and number of all entrances, the location of the room
or rooms or space to be occupied and the total amount of space to
be used for such purpose.
(3) Whether the applicant or applicants or manager had, either alone
or with someone else, previously engaged as owner or employee in
conducting any public amusement, when and where and for how
long.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-2
1:163
§ 224-3. Issuance of license.
(4) The name and address of the person owning the premises for which
a license is sought.
(5) The specific nature of the amusement for which a license is sought.
(6) Such other information as the City Clerk/Treasurer may from time
to time require.
B. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall refer such application to the Chief of
Police, Health Officer, Chief of the Fire Department and Building
Inspector, who shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application
to determine whether the place sought to be licensed complies with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto and is a proper
place for the purpose for which it is to be used. These officials shall
furnish to the City Clerk/Treasurer in writing the information derived
from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to
whether a license should be granted or refused.
A. Upon the filing of the application and the information as provided in the
previous section, the City Clerk/Treasurer may, upon his approval of
such application and the payment to the City of the proper license fee,
issue to the applicant a license to conduct and maintain a public
amusement. No license is to be refused except for a specific reason and
for the protection of the public safety, health, morals or general welfare.
B. Every license issued to conduct a public amusement shall specify the
time of its duration and shall be of no validity after the expiration of
such time.
C. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the location, the exact nature of the amusement, the
dates of issuance and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the
name of the licensee. No applicant to whom a license has been refused
shall make further application until a period of at least six months shall
have elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless he can show that
the reason for such objection no longer exists. No license shall be
granted to a person under 18 years of age or renewed without a
reinspection of the premises.
D. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk/Treasurer to keep in a book
provided for that purpose a record of all licenses issued by him,
showing when and to whom the same was issued, the amount paid
therefor and when the same shall expire.
§ 224-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 224-4
1:164
§ 224-4. License fees.50
License fees as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule shall be charged for the following:
§ 224-5. Transfer of license.
No transfer of license as to location or ownership shall be granted except
after application therefor upon a form provided by the City Clerk/Treasurer,
who may grant or reject such application after investigation. If the
application for transfer is approved, this action shall be endorsed upon the
license by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 224-6. Posting of license.
Every person licensed hereunder shall immediately post such license and
keep same posted while in force in a conspicuous place on the premises
mentioned in the application for such license. No person shall post such
license upon premises other than those mentioned in the application or
knowingly deface or destroy any such license. Whenever a license shall be
lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder or its agent or
employees, a duplicate license in lieu thereof under the original application
may be issued by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 224-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 82-15]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
A. For the exhibition of a circus or menagerie.
B. For the operation of a roller skating rink.
C. For the operation of a carnival or other type of entertainment featuring
rides or amusements or games of chance.
D. For the operation and maintenance of pool halls and billiard rooms,
video game arcades, games, contests or any other type of amusements.
No license is to be issued for a period of less than one month.
[Amended by Ord. No. 83-16; Ord. No. 95-77; Ord. No. 96-19]
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 224-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-7
1:165
Chapter 228
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 410,
especially Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 224-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 224-7
1:166
ARTICLE I
Dog License
[Adopted as §§ 9.16 and 9.20 of the former City Code]
§ 228-1. License required. [Amended by Ord. No. 80-61; Ord. No.
91-107; Ord. No. 02-54]
§ 228-2. Delinquent payments. [Amended by Ord. No. 80-6152]
The City Clerk/Treasurer shall assess and collect an additional charge as
set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule from
every owner of a dog more than five months of age, where such owner fails
to obtain a license prior to April 1 or within 30 days of requiring ownership
of a licensable dog or where such owner fails to obtain a license within 30
days after the dog has reached licensable age.
§ 228-3. Definitions.53
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DOG — All domesticated members of the species Canis familiaris, male or
female.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog; the occupant
of any premises on which a dog remains or to which it customarily returns
daily for 10 days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog within the
meaning of this article.54
A. Every owner of a dog more than five months of age on January 1 of any
year or five months of age within the license year shall annually, or
within 30 days from the date of such dog becoming five months of age,
pay a dog license tax as set by the Common Council and provided under
the separate fee schedule for each neutered male dog and spayed
female dog and for each male dog and female dog that has not been
neutered or spayed, or 1/2 of those amounts if the dog becomes five
months of age after July 1 of the license year. A kennel license shall be
available at an annual cost as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule.51
B. No collecting official, as defined in § 174.065(1), Wis. Stats., shall issue
a dog license unless the owner of said dog presents an unexpired
certificate of rabies vaccination.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
54.Editor's Note: Original § 9.16(4), which immediately followed this section, was repealed by
Ord. No. 01-23.
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-4
1:167
§ 228-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
§ 228-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 228-4
1:168
ARTICLE II
Rabid or Vicious Animals55
[Adopted by Ord. No. 80-44 (§ 12.07 of the former City Code)]
§ 228-5. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Sections 95.21, 174.01, 174.042 and 174.06, Wis. Stats., are hereby
adopted by reference.
55.Editor's Note: See also § 410-45, Dangerous and vicious dogs.
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:169

ARTICLE III
Keeping of Domestic Animals
[Adopted by Ord. No. 01-38 (§ 10.10 of the former City Code)]
§ 228-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAT — Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
DOG — Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Includes dogs, cats, hamsters, rabbits, guinea pigs,
gerbils, mice, rats, ferrets, chinchillas, iguanas, turtles, snakes and birds.
WILD, DANGEROUS OR UNDOMESTICATED ANIMAL — That which is not
of a species customarily used as an ordinary household pet, but one which
would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be
found in the wilderness of this or any other country, or one which otherwise
causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or property damage.
This shall include, but not be limited to, all poisonous animals, including
snakes and constrictor snakes six feet in length or more.
§ 228-7. Legislative intent.
The Common Council of the City of Watertown hereby finds that the keeping
of an unlimited number of domestic animals in the City for a period of time
will adversely affect sanitary conditions and the health and safety of its
occupants and the general public. Therefore, the keeping of an unlimited
number of domestic animals is declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 228-8. Nonconforming use.
Any person who becomes nonconforming with respect to the requirements
set forth in § 228-9 may continue to keep those dogs which that person had
licensed in the City of Watertown prior to the effective date of this article.
This nonconforming use exemption shall be valid while the person resides
on the property listed on the license, and so long as the dogs licensed on the
effective date have not been replaced with additional dogs that would cause
the owner to remain in noncomformity with this article.
§ 228-9. Limitations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than 10
rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, ferrets, chinchillas,
iguanas, birds, turtles or snakes, with the exceptions to snakes noted
above, or any combination of these animals totaling more than 10,
within the City. A litter or a portion of a litter of these animals may be
kept for a period of time not to exceed one month from weaning.
§ 228-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-9
1:171
§ 228-10. Exceptions.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than four
dogs or more than five cats within the City, with the exception that a
litter of pups or litter of kittens or a portion of litter may be kept for a
period of time not exceeding four months from birth.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than 10
animals as defined at § 228-6, or more than 10 animals including any
animal not defined in § 228-6 but allowed pursuant to this section, at
the same residence.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an owner of a licensed
pet shop, zoo or circus, to harbor, keep, maintain or have in his or her
possession a wild, dangerous or undomesticated animal within the
Watertown City limits.
E. Pigs, goats, ducks, doves, geese, turkeys and pheasants shall not be
kept in the City except for school-related educational purposes or as
part of a licensed pet shop, zoo, petting zoo or circus. [Amended
10-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-36]
A. An annual written permit for the keeping of pigs, goats, chickens,
ducks, doves, geese, turkeys and pheasants for school-related
educational purposes or as part of a licensed pet shop, zoo, petting zoo
or circus may be obtained from the Health Officer, who shall issue a
permit only after inspection of the premises where the animal or
animals are to be kept and a determination is made that no nuisance or
other ordinance or statutory violation will be created thereby.
B. A permit shall be required for any animal(s) not listed herein in the
definitions of "domestic animal," "dog" and "cat" in § 228-6. Such permit
shall be obtained by submitting a written request for the permit to the
Health Officer. The Health Officer may require an annual inspection of
the premises where the animal or animals are to be kept. If a
determination is made that no nuisance will be created thereby and
said animal is not considered a wild, dangerous or undomesticated
animal as defined herein, any inspection will be at the discretion of the
Health Officer. The cost of obtaining or renewing such permit shall be
as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule, provided no inspection is required. In the event that an
inspection is required by the Health Officer, an additional fee shall be
required to cover the time and expense related to the inspection.56
C. Any person owning domestic animals as defined in the definitions of
"domestic animal," "dog" and "cat" in § 228-6 may apply to the Health
Officer seeking an exception to the numerical limits set forth in
§ 228-9A to C. Such person shall obtain a permit requesting an
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 228-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 228-10
1:172
§ 228-11. Animal housing regulated.
exception to § 228-9A to C from the Health Officer, who may issue
a permit only after an annual inspection of the premises where the
animal or animals are to be kept and a determination is made that no
nuisance will be created by exceeding the numerical limits set forth
above, and a determination is made that no human health hazard is
posed. The cost of obtaining or renewing such permit shall be as set
by the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule,
provided no inspection is required. In the event that an inspection is
required by the Health Officer, an additional fee shall be required to
cover the time and expense related to the inspection.57
D. All permits issued shall state with specificity the type and number of
animals for which the exception has been granted. Permits shall be
reviewed on an annual basis. Permits may be rescinded at any time that
the Health Officer makes the determination that the type or number of
animals or the condition in which they are kept has created a public
nuisance or a human health hazard.
E. In the event that the Health Officer or designated representative does
not issue a permit upon a written request, the permit seeker may appeal
in writing to the Board of Health within 30 days of the date of the
mailing of the order to such permit seeker, which shall notify the Board
of Health and the Health Officer, in writing, of the nature of the
objection and of a request for a hearing thereon. The order of the
Health Officer shall be deemed the initial determination, and the
municipal authority charged with conducting the review, pursuant to
§ 10-8B of this Code, shall be the Watertown Board of Health. The Board
of Health shall proceed to conduct a hearing on the appellant's
objections, pursuant to §§ 10-9 and 10-10 of this Code of Ordinances.
The Health Officer shall be present at such hearing. The appellant may
be represented by counsel. The Board of Health may affirm, cancel or
modify the order of the Health Officer, in its discretion, to best conform
such order to the intent of this article. [Amended by Ord. No. 11-21]
F. An exception to this permit requirement shall be made for any
individual that is state or federally licensed as an animal rescue or
rehabilitation specialist.
A. All structures, pens, coops or yards wherein domestic animals are kept
or permitted to be kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, shall be dry and well ventilated, and reasonable control
methods shall be utilized to reduce rodents and vermin. The structure
shall be maintained as free from objectionable odors as can be
obtained.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 228-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-11
1:173
§ 228-12. Animals excluded from food-handling establishments.
No person shall take or permit to remain any live animal on any premises
where food is sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by the
general public. Use of animals to assist handicapped individuals shall be
allowed.
§ 228-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, entity or corporation violating any provision of this article
shall be subject to forfeiture of not less than $50 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
B. Any such structure, pen, coop, shed or yard wherein domestic animals
are kept or permitted to be kept, which shall emit offensive odors or
offensive matter to adjoining premises or to public waterways, streets,
alleys or other public places, may be declared to be a public nuisance,
and the Health Officer may order the abatement thereof.
C. The Health Officer or designated representative, upon the complaint of
any individual, shall inspect any such structure or premises and issue
any such order as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section, including an order requiring the owner or occupant of the
premises to install mechanical or other ventilating equipment as a
condition to continuance of the maintaining or keeping of such animals.
§ 228-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 228-13
1:174
ARTICLE IV
Cat License
[Adopted by Ord. No. 02-55 (§§ 9.14 and 9.20 of the former City
Code)]
§ 228-14. License required.
§ 228-15. Delinquent payments.60
The City Clerk/Treasurer shall assess and collect an additional fee as set by
the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule from every
owner of a cat more than five months of age where such owner fails to
obtain a license prior to April 1 or within 30 days of requiring ownership of
a licensable cat or where such owner fails to obtain a license within 30 days
after the cat has reached licensable age.
§ 228-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CAT — All domesticated members of the species Felis catus, male or female.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring or keeping a cat; the occupant
of any premises on which a cat remains or to which it customarily returns
daily for 10 days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the cat within the
meaning of this article.
§ 228-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
A. Every owner of a cat more than five months of age on January 1 of any
year or five months of age within the license year shall annually, or
within 30 days from the date of such cat becoming five months of age,
pay a cat license tax as set by the Common Council and provided under
the separate fee schedule for each neutered male cat and spayed
female cat and for each male cat and female cat that has not been
neutered or spayed, or 1/2 of those amounts if the cat becomes five
months of age after July 1 of the license year. 58
B. Whereas there is no requirement in the Wisconsin Statutes for the
licensing of cats, all revenue collected by the City for issuing said
licenses shall be retained by the City.59
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
59.Editor's Note: The issuing of such licenses became effective with the 2003 license year.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 228-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-17
1:175
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
§ 228-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 228-17
1:176
Chapter 240
BICYCLES
§ 240-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and
having wheels, any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter.
BICYCLE LANE — That portion of roadway set aside by the City for the
exclusive use of bicycles or other modes of travel where permitted under
§ 349.23, Wis. Stats., and so designated by appropriate signs and markings.
BIKE ROUTE — Any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been
duly designated by the City and which is identified by appropriate signs and
markings.
BICYCLE WAY — Any path or sidewalk or portion thereof designated for use
of bicycles by the City.
§ 240-2. Registration required. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-37]
No person whose residence is within the corporate limits of the City shall
operate a bicycle upon any street in the City unless such bicycle is
registered and bears a decal as herein provided.
§ 240-3. How to register. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-3761]
Registration shall be accomplished by filing with the Police Department
the name and address of the owner, together with a complete description
of the bicycle, on forms provided by the Department, and by paying a
registration fee as set by the Common Council and provided under separate
fee schedule. The registration shall be nonexpiring, providing the bicycle
remains within the same household. If the bicycle is sold, given away
or otherwise disposed of, the owner shall notify the Department of such
action. The bicycle will have to be reregistered by the new owner and the
appropriate fee shall be paid, provided the new owner is a resident of the
City. The registration decal shall remain attached to the bicycle at time it
is sold, given away or disposed of. In case the registration decal is lost,
stolen or obliterated, a renumbered decal shall be issued for a fee as set by
the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule. All bicycles
must be registered within 10 days of purchase or before operating on any
City street. No registration shall be issued for any bicycle without a serial
number or owner- or City-applied number.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 228-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:177
§ 240-4. Accounting for fees.
The Police Department shall, on a quarterly basis, make an accounting of
the fees received to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 240-5. Registration decals.
No bicycle shall be considered registered until a registration decal shall
be affixed to the bicycle, which shall remain so affixed until reregistration
or removal by the Police Department for cause. No person shall willfully
remove, deface or destroy any such identification decal. The decal should
be attached to the upright frame member directly below the seat-attaching
clamp.
§ 240-6. Safe mechanical condition required.
No bicycle shall be registered which is in unsafe mechanical condition.
§ 240-7. Change of registration. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-37]
Within 10 days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed
ownership or been dismantled and taken out of operation, the person in
whose name the bicycle has been registered shall report such information
to the Police Department. In case of change of ownership, the registration
shall thereupon be changed to show the name of the new owner, provided
the new owner is a resident of the City. In case of dismantling and taking
out of operation, the registration shall be canceled.
§ 240-8. Rules of road.
Whenever a bicycle is operated in the City, the following rules apply:
A. The rider of a bicycle upon a roadway carrying two-way traffic shall ride
as near as practicable to the right edge of the unobstructed traveled
roadway. On one-way roadways, the operator of the bicycle shall ride as
near as practicable to the right edge or left edge of the unobstructed
traveled roadway. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway
shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction, or when making a left-hand turn at an
intersection.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, nor shall a bicycle be
used to tow any coaster, sled, person on roller skates or in-line skates,
toy vehicle or other similar device. In addition to the operator, a bicycle
otherwise designed to carry only the operator may be used to carry or
transport a child seated in an auxiliary child's seat or trailer designed
for attachment to a bicycle if the seat or trailer is securely attached to
the bicycle according to the directions of the manufacturer of the seat
or trailer.
§ 240-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 240-8
1:178
§ 240-9. Wisconsin Statutes adopted.
The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect
to bicycles and play vehicles in the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted
and, by reference, made a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. Any
act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute is required or
prohibited by this Code.
C. No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or his bicycle
to any moving vehicle.
D. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any public roadway abreast of
another person operating a bicycle except when passing such bicycle.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 410-13B of this Code (wheeled
devices), every person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield
the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care and give
an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian proceeding
in the same direction.
F. All bicycles shall stop for arterial highway signs, automatic traffic
signals and when emerging from alleys and driveways.
G. No bicycle shall be parked upon any sidewalk area or upon any roadway
in such a manner as to interfere with free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
H. Bicycles which are not mechanically safe shall not be operated on the
public ways of the City.
I. No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane, bicycle
way or sidewalk during hours of darkness unless such bicycle is
equipped with or the operator is wearing a lamp emitting a white light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of such bicycle.
Such bicycle shall also be equipped with a red reflector that has a
diameter of at least two inches of surface area on the rear so mounted
and maintained as to be visible from all distances from 50 to 500 feet to
the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in lieu of the red
reflector.62
J. No person shall operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or
bicycle way unless equipped with brakes in good working condition,
adequate to control the movement of and to stop the bicycle whenever
necessary.
K. No person 12 years or older shall operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk in
Watertown, except for the specific purpose of distributing newspapers.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-10
1:179
§ 240-10. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
Where the child is under the age of 12 years, full responsibility for the
proper equipment of the bicycle in compliance with State of Wisconsin
Statutes and the City of Watertown ordinances shall be that of the child and
his parent or guardian.
§ 240-11. Violations and penalties.63
Any individual 12 years of age or older who violates the provisions of
this chapter or any parent or guardian of any child under the age of 12
years who knowingly permits a child to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit amounts as set forth in
the Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule. All violations not listed in the
Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule shall carry a penalty of not less than
$10 for the first offense and $25 for second and continuing offenses, plus
costs of prosecution.
Chapter 247
BOATING
§ 247-1. Applicability and enforcement.
§ 247-2. Legislative findings and intent.
The intent of this chapter is to provide safe and healthful conditions for
navigation and the enjoyment of aquatic recreation and riparian beauty on
the Rock River and Silver Creek consistent with public rights and interests
and the capability of the water resources. The Common Council finds that
during high-water conditions any wake on the Rock River or Silver Creek
causes the shoreline to erode and silt to build up faster than would happen
under natural conditions. The Common Council also finds that personal
watercraft, when operating at greater than "slow-no-wake" speeds, create a
greater wake closer to the shoreline than other watercraft, are louder and
more maneuverable than other watercraft, and are more hazardous to users
of the water resources and shore area wildlife than other watercraft. For
these and other reasons, it is in the interest of public health, safety and
welfare that the City of Watertown adopts this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all the waters of the Rock
River and Silver Creek within the territorial jurisdiction of the City of
Watertown.
B. This chapter shall be enforced by the officers of the City of Watertown
Police Department.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 247-3
1:180
§ 247-3. State boating and safety laws adopted.
State boating laws as found in §§ 30.50 to 30.71, Wis. Stats., inclusive,
with the exception of those sections for which a violation is a crime, are
incorporated herein and hereby adopted by reference, including all changes
and amendments hereafter made thereto.
§ 247-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HIGH WATER CONDITIONS — Any situation existing in the City of
Watertown where the water level of the Rock River, as measured on the
gauge at the Oconomowoc Avenue Bridge, is 821 feet above sea level or,
as measured on the gauge at the Cady Street Bridge, is 809 feet above sea
level.
MOTORBOAT — Has the same meaning contained in § 30.50, Wis. Stats., as
amended from time to time.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — Has the same meaning contained in § 30.50,
Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time.
SLOW-NO-WAKE — That speed at which a motorboat or personal watercraft
moves as slowly as possible through the water while still maintaining
steerage control.
§ 247-5. Prohibited acts.
Except as applied to individuals or organizations that have obtained a
permit from the City of Watertown to perform aquatic entertainment, such
as water ski shows, and except as applied to officers of the City of
Watertown Police Department and the State of Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources, acting in their official capacity, the following acts are
prohibited:
§ 247-6. Posting requirements.
A. No person shall, at any time, operate a motorboat or personal
watercraft in the waters of the Rock River from the east City limits to
the lower dam in the City of Watertown during high-water conditions in
other than a "slow-no-wake" manner.
B. No person shall, at any time, operate a personal watercraft in the
waters of the Rock River between the east City limits and the lower dam
in other than a "slow-no-wake" manner.
C. No person shall, at any time, operate a motorboat in the waters of the
Rock River between the east City limits and the lower dam at a speed in
excess of 25 miles per hour.
§ 247-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-6
1:181
§ 247-7. Violations and penalties.
Wisconsin state boating penalties as found in § 30.80, Wis. Stats., and
deposits as established in the Uniform Deposit and Bail Schedule as
established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, and as amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference, with all references to fines
amended to forfeitures and all references to imprisonment deleted.
Chapter 253
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 216.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 282.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 288.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 303.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 325.
Housing standards — See Ch. 332.
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 419.
Property maintenance, commercial — See Ch.
424.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 512.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
A. The City of Watertown shall place and maintain a copy of this chapter at
all public access point within the jurisdiction of the City of Watertown.
B. During high-water conditions, "Slow-No-Wake" signs shall be displayed
at all public access points and noticed in the Watertown Daily Times and
on WTTN Radio station.
C. The City of Watertown shall place a twenty-five-mile-per-hour speed
limit sign at each public access point within the jurisdiction of the City
of Watertown.
D. The City of Watertown shall place "Slow-No-Wake" signs specifically
applicable to personal watercraft at all public access points.
A. The Wisconsin state boating penalties shall apply to all violations of this
chapter except violations of § 247-5. Applicable state assessments and
court costs shall be added to all penalties herein.
B. Any person who shall violate § 247-5 shall forfeit not more than $50 for
the first offense and not more than $100 upon conviction of the same
offense a second or subsequent time within one year. Applicable state
assessments and court costs shall be added to all penalties herein.
§ 247-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 247-7
1:182
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 253-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, when used in this chapter the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING — A building located on agricultural property
and used to shelter farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other
farm produce, in which there is no human habitation and which is not used
by the public.
ALTER or ALTERATION — Any change, addition or modification in
construction or occupancy.
APPROVED — Refers to approval by the Building Inspector as the result
of investigation and tests conducted by him or by reason of accepted
principles or tests by national authorities or technical or scientific
organizations.
ATTIC STORY — Any story situated wholly or partly in the roof, so
designated, arranged or built as to be used for business, storage or
habitation.
BASEMENT — A story partly or wholly underground.
BUILDING — Any form of construction for the shelter, support or enclosure
of persons, animals or chattels, having a roof supported by uprights or
walls, and separated from every other building by at least a party wall, and
when separated by division walls from the ground up, and without opening,
each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building.
CAST STONE — A building stone manufactured from cement concrete
precast and used as a trim, veneer or facing on or in buildings or structures.
DEAD LOAD — The weight of walls, permanent partitions, framing, floors,
roofs and all other permanent, stationary construction entering into and
becoming a part of the building.
FIRE RESISTANCE or FIRE-RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION — Construction
to resist the spread of fire.
FLOOR AREA — The area included within surrounding walls of a building
(or portion thereof), exclusive of vent shafts and courts.
FOOTING — That portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads
and transmits loads directly to soil or piles.
GARAGE — A building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle
containing gasoline, distillate or other volatile, flammable liquid in its tank
is stored, repaired or kept.
GRADE (GROUND LEVEL) — The average of the finished ground level at the
center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five
feet of a sidewalk, the aboveground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
§ 253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-1
1:183
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — Includes any material which will not ignite
at or below a temperature of 1,200° F. during an exposure of five minutes,
and which shall not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
LINTEL — The beam or girder placed over an opening in a wall, which
supports the wall construction above.
LIVE LOAD — Includes all loads except dead or lateral loads.
MASONRY — That form of construction composed of stone, brick, concrete,
gypsum, hollow clay tile, concrete block or tile, or other similar building
units or materials, or combination of these materials, laid up unit by unit set
in mortar.
REPAIR — The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building
for the purpose of its maintenance. The word "repair" or "repairs" shall not
apply to any change of construction.
STAIRWAY — Two or more risers shall constitute a stairway.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.
VENEER — A facing of brick, stone, concrete, tile, metal or similar material
attached to a wall for the purpose of providing ornamentation, protection or
insulation but not counted as adding strength to the wall.
WALL — Includes:
§ 253-2. Scope.
BEARING WALL — A wall which supports any load other than its own
weight.
A.
FACED WALL — A wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so
bonded as to exert a common action under load.
B.
NONBEARING WALL — A wall which supports no load other than its
own weight.
C.
D. PARAPET WALL — That part of any wall entirely above the roofline.
A. This chapter shall apply to all new buildings and structures erected
within the City of Watertown and all buildings or structures moved into
or within the City.
B. Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of use or occupancy in all
such buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions for new
buildings or structures.
C. Where, in any specified case, different sections of this chapter specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the
most restrictive shall govern.
§ 253-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-3
1:184
§ 253-3. Codes adopted by reference. [Last amended by Ord. No.
12-07]
§ 253-4. New methods and materials. [Amended by Ord. No. 01-44;
Ord. No. 12-0766]
All materials, methods of construction and devices designed for use in
buildings or structures covered by this chapter and not specifically
mentioned in or permitted by this chapter shall not be so used until
approved in writing by the Department of Safety and Professional Services
for use in buildings or structures covered by the Wisconsin State Building
Code, except sanitary appliances, which shall be approved in accordance
with the State Plumbing Code. Such materials, methods of construction
and devices, when approved, must be installed or used in strict compliance
with the manufacturer's specifications and any rules or conditions of use
A. The following codes are adopted by reference and made a part hereof:
(1) Commercial Building Code, Chapters SPS 361 to 366, Wis. Adm.
Code, including:64
(a) Chapter SPS 364, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning.
(b) Chapter SPS 366, Existing Buildings.
(2) Chapter SPS 360, Wis. Adm. Code, Erosion Control, Sediment
Control and Storm Water.65
(3) Uniform Dwelling Code, Chapters SPS 320 to 325, Wis. Adm. Code,
and all amendments thereafter. The Building Inspector and his
delegated representatives are hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Uniform
Dwelling Code, commencing December 1, 1978.
(a) The Uniform Dwelling Code, as adopted, shall apply to all
additions and alterations of existing one- and two-family
dwellings.
(b) When a conflict exists between the local Building Code and the
Uniform Dwelling Code, the Uniform Dwelling Code shall take
precedence over the local Building Code.
(c) Construction of all detached garages with over 200 square feet
of floor area shall be governed by the Uniform Dwelling Code.
B. A violation of any provision of these codes shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
65.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-4
1:185
established by the Department of Safety and Professional Services. The
data, tests and other evidence necessary to prove the merits of such
material, methods of construction or devices shall be determined by the
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
§ 253-5. Unsafe buildings and neglected buildings. [Amended by
Ord. No. 91-31; Ord. No. 96-7; Ord. No. 01-44]
A. Whenever the Building Inspector shall find upon written complaint from
any person or an oral complaint from any City employee that any
dwelling, building or structure, or part thereof, within the City, in his
judgment, is so old, dilapidated or so out-of-repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use; or
has been so damaged, destroyed or removed as to produce blight or
deterioration; or has been a subject of a cessation of normal
construction for a period of more than two years, he may order the
owner of the premises upon which dwelling, building or structure is
located to make it safe and sanitary by repair and restoration of the
same. If in the judgment of the Building Inspector it would be
unreasonable to repair the same, the Building Inspector may order the
owner to raze and remove such dwelling, building or structure, or part
thereof. Any order issued under this section shall be in the form of a
written notice informing the owner of such violation and order, which
such written notice shall be served upon the owner of such building as
set forth in § 66.0413(1)(d), Wis. Stats., and shall direct the owner of
such dwelling, building or structure to promptly comply with such order
within 30 days following the service of such notice.
B. Whenever the Building Inspector shall find that an owner of any
dwelling, building or structure, or part thereof, in the City, has
permitted the same, either as a result of vandalism, neglect or for any
other reason, to deteriorate or become dilapidated or blighted to the
extent where windows, doors or other openings, exterior finishes,
excluding paint or siding, plumbing or heating fixtures or facilities, or
other appurtenances of such dwelling or building are either
deteriorated, damaged, destroyed or removed so that such building
causes a threat to public health and safety, or produces blight or
deterioration by reason of such condition, the Building Inspector shall
issue a written notice respecting the existence of such defect. Such
written notice shall be served upon the owner of such dwelling, building
or structure as set forth in § 66.0413(1)(d), Wis. Stats., and shall direct
the owner thereof to promptly remedy the defect within 30 days
following the service of such notice.
C. An order from the Municipal Building Inspector shall specify the time
within which the owner of the building is required to comply with the
order and shall specify repairs, if any. If the owner fails or refuses to
comply within the time prescribed, the Building Inspector or other
designated officer may proceed to raze the building through any
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
§ 253-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-5
1:186
persons, or to secure the building and, if necessary, the property on
which the building is located if unfit for human habitation, occupancy
or use. The cost of razing or securing the building may be charged
in full or in part against the real estate upon which the building is
located, and if that cost is so charged it is a lien upon the real estate
and may be assessed and collected as a special charge. Any portion
of the cost charged against the real estate that is not reimbursed
under § 632.103(2), Wis. Stats. from funds withheld from an insurance
settlement may be assessed and collected as a special tax.67
D. Appeals.
(1) The owner of any dwelling, building or structure or any person
affected by the notice or order of the Building Inspector provided
under Subsection A or B above may appeal the action taken by the
Building Inspector within 30 days of the date of service of the
written notice and/or order to comply upon such owner or other
person to the Circuit Court of the county in which said dwelling,
building or structure is located, for an order restraining the
Building Inspector from taking the action under Subsection A or B
above as specified in the written notice or order to comply. Such
appeal must be in writing, which must specify the grounds therefor
and must address the contents of the written notice and/or order to
comply. A copy of such written appeal shall be served upon the
Building Inspector within 30 days of service of the written notice
and order to comply upon the owner or other person.
(2) The remedies provided in this section are exclusive remedies and
anyone affected by any such written notice or order to comply of
the Building Inspector shall not be entitled to recover any damages,
as provided in § 66.0413(1)(h) and (i), Wis. Stats.
E. Any violation of this section or failure to comply with any duly issued
order under this section shall be enforced against the owner, tenant or
other interested party under the terms of this section.
(1) A violation for failure to comply with any order issued hereunder
may subject the owner of the premises, tenant of the premises or
other interested party to the issuance of a citation pursuant to
§ 253-10 of this chapter.
(2) In the alternative, and as an additional method of enforcement to
that provided in Subsection E(1) above, without limiting any of the
powers of the City to enforce this section, a violation of this section
by an owner, tenant or other interested party may subject the party
or parties to the relief afforded in § 66.0413, Wis. Stats., as from
time to time amended, which said provision of the Wisconsin
Statutes is hereby adopted by reference insofar as the same is
applicable to the enforcement of this section.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-5
1:187
§ 253-6. Moving of buildings.
(3) If the public health or safety concern demands immediate action in
the judgment of the Building Inspector, Fire Inspector or Health
Officer, the Building Inspector shall enter upon the premises, with
such assistance as may be necessary, and cause the dwelling,
building or structure to be made safe or sanitary or to be removed,
with the expense of any such work to be recovered by the City in an
action against the owner or tenant and the costs thereof to be
added as a special charge upon the premises, as provided for in
§ 66.0413(1)(f), Wis. Stats. The Fire Department and Public Health
Department shall give all reasonable assistance to the Building
Inspector in the performance of such tasks.68
A. Houses. No person shall move a house or similar type of building within
the City without a permit therefor. A fee as set by the Common Council
and provided under separate fee schedule shall be paid for each permit.
[Amended by Ord. No. 80-2669]
B. Garages. No person shall move a garage or similar type building within
the City except upon permit therefor. A fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule shall be paid for each
such permit. [Amended by Ord. No. 80-2670]
C. Bond. Before a permit to move any building is granted by the Building
Inspector, the party applying for such permit shall give a bond in the
amount of $1,000 with good and sufficient sureties, conditioned, among
other things, that such party will save and indemnify the City against
any judgment, costs and expenses which in any way accrue against the
City, and also to save the City harmless against all liabilities, judgments,
costs and expenses in consequence of the granting of such permit.
D. Conditions of permit. Every permit to move a building shall state all
conditions to be complied with, designate the route to be taken, and
limit the time for removal. The removal of a building shall be continuous
all the hours of the day, and at night if the Building Inspector so orders,
until completed, with the least possible obstruction to traffic. No
building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing
or intersection or so near to any fire hydrant as to prevent easy access
thereto. Lighted lanterns shall be kept at each end of the building
during the night. The proper authority shall be consulted regarding the
moving of all wires, poles, etc., and the trimming or cutting of all trees;
all costs incurred by the above alterations shall be paid by the party
requesting the permit, and the permission in writing of the property
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-6
1:188
authority, together with a statement of the costs paid for such
alterations, shall be required before the issuance of the permit. Every
person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after
the building reaches its destination, report that fact to the Building
Inspector, who shall thereupon inspect the streets over which the
building has been removed and ascertain their condition. If such
removal has caused any ascertainable damage, such damage shall be
repaired within 10 days by the movers; failure to do so will result in the
City repairing such damage and holding the sureties on the bond given
responsible for the costs incurred and the payment of the same.
E. The Police Department shall approve the time and the route to be taken
in moving buildings.
F. The Building Inspector shall approve the condition of the structure to
be moved prior to moving and approve the site relocation in regard to
zoning and aesthetic considerations.
G. An applicant denied a permit hereunder by the Building Inspector may
appeal such decision to the Plan Commission relative to zoning and to
the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to aesthetic considerations.
§ 253-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-6
1:189

ARTICLE II
Organization and Enforcement
§ 253-7. Inspection Division.71
There is established the Inspection Division, which shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Building Inspector.
§ 253-8. Powers and duties of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall have the power and it shall be his duty to
enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the City of
Watertown and all laws and orders of the State of Wisconsin which relate to
building construction, and for these purposes he shall have the right at all
reasonable times to enter buildings and premises.
§ 253-9. Stop orders.
Whenever any building work is done contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, the Building Inspector may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to
be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until the
condition in violation has been corrected or until authorized by the Building
Inspector to proceed with the work.72
§ 253-10. Violations and penalties.
A. General penalty. Whenever so provided in this chapter, any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $1 nor more than $100 together with the costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs
of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not in excess of 90 days.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any provision
of this chapter who shall previously have been convicted of a
violation of the same provision shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each such offense
together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail
until said forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to
exceed six months.73
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
72.Editor's Note: Original § 13.10, which immediately followed this section, was repealed by
Ord. No. 92-27.
§ 253-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-10
1:191
B. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude any right
of action which the City may have to restrain any violation of this
chapter or to remove any unlawful building, structure or condition.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-10
1:192
ARTICLE III
Permits and Inspections
§ 253-11. Permits required. [Amended by Ord. No. 75-17]
§ 253-12. Application.
Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a blank form
furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state the name and address
of the owner of the land on which the building is to be built, if different;
the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located;
the name and address of the designer; the location of the building and the
purpose for which it is to be used; and shall contain such other information
as the Building Inspector shall require.
§ 253-13. Plans. [Amended by Ord. No. 01-5; Ord. No. 08-32; Ord.
No. 12-07]
With the application for permit there shall be submitted two complete sets
of plans and specifications, including a plot plan drawn to scale showing
the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon and the location of the
proposed building with respect to adjoining streets, alleys, lot lines and
buildings. Commercial building plans submitted to the City for review and
approval shall follow the same submittal procedures required in § SPS
361.31, Wis. Adm. Code. Plans for buildings reviewed by the Department of
Safety and Professional Services shall bear the stamp of approval from the
Department of Safety and Professional Services and shall also be submitted
in duplicate. One set of plans shall be returned to the applicant after
approval, and the other set shall remain on file in the office of the Building
Inspector. All plans and specifications shall be signed by the designer.
§ 253-14. Waiver of plans.
If the Building Inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently
described in the application, he may waive the filing of plans for alterations,
repairs or moving, provided that cost of such work does not exceed $1,000.
§ 253-15. Approval of plans.
A. No wall, building or structure or any part thereof shall hereafter be
built, repaired, enlarged, altered or moved within the City except as
hereinafter provided, nor shall excavation of the site for any such
building or structure be commenced unless a permit therefor shall have
first been obtained by the owner or his agent from the Building
Inspector. The responsibility for obtaining permits rests equally upon
the owner and the contractor as an accessory.
B. The applicant shall keep any rubbish and debris controlled on the
permit premises in such a way as not to cause a nuisance to adjacent
properties.
§ 253-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-15
1:193
§ 253-16. Minor repairs.
The Building Inspector may authorize minor repairs which do not change
the occupancy area, structural strength, fire protection, exits, light or
ventilation of the building without a building permit.
§ 253-17. Duration and extension of permit. [Amended by Ord. No.
01-5]
A building permit shall have lapsed and be void after 12 months from the
date of issuance; if at the time of original application it is apparent that
the project cannot be completed within 12 months, the Building Inspector
may issue the original permit for not more than 24 months, after which the
permit may be extended by payment of 1/2 the original fee.
§ 253-18. Validity of permit.
§ 253-19. Revocation of permit.
If the Building Inspector shall find at any time that the applicable
ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied
A. If the Building Inspector determines that the proposed building will
comply in every respect with all ordinances of the City of Watertown
and all applicable laws and orders of the State of Wisconsin, he shall
officially approve and stamp one set of the plans and return it to the
owner and shall issue a building permit therefor upon presentation of
proof of payment of the indicated fees. The building permit shall be kept
and displayed at the site of the proposed building. After being
approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any
respect which involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws
and orders, or which involves the safety of the building or occupants,
except with the written consent of the Building Inspector.
B. Plan approval fees. Fees for building plans, heating and ventilation
plans and illumination plans for buildings up to 50,000 cubic feet shall
be as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule [Amended by Ord. No. 81-8; Ord. No. 00-22; Ord. No.
06-18; Ord. No. 12-07]
A. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for or an approval of
any violation of any provisions of this chapter. No permit presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be
valid.
B. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not
prevent the Building Inspector from thereafter requiring the correction
of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building
operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this
chapter or of any other ordinance of the City of Watertown.
§ 253-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-19
1:194
with, and that the holder of the permit refuses to conform after a written
warning or instruction has been issued to him, he shall revoke the building
or moving permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When
any such permit is revoked, it shall be unlawful to do any further work
thereunder until the permit is reissued, excepting such work as the Building
Inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the reissuance
of the permit or as he may require for the preservation of human life and
safety or property.
§ 253-20. Fees. [Last amended by Ord. No. 06-18]
§ 253-21. Records.
The Building Inspector shall keep a record of all permits issued and all
inspections made. He shall keep a record showing the number, description
and approximate cost of all buildings erected, enlarged or altered. He shall
also keep a record of all buildings condemned by him. He shall make a
monthly report, which will be kept on file in his office, and make an annual
report to the Common Council.
§ 253-22. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning. [Amended by
Ord. No. 97-32; Ord. No. 05-57]
A. A fee for each building permit shall be paid as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule.74
B. Square footage shall be determined using the dimensions of the
exterior walls of all floors including the basement (finished or
unfinished), as well as any attached garages.
C. Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or
proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees specified shall
be doubled (excluding plan review fee), but the payment of such double
fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the
requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work, nor from any
other penalties prescribed herein.
D. All fees shall be paid to the City Clerk/Treasurer, and a permit shall not
be issued until a receipt showing payment in full is presented to the
Building Inspector.
A. Permit required. Any person who shall undertake the installation or
replacement of a heating plant or central air conditioning or ventilating
unit shall obtain a permit to install such unit. Permit applications will be
furnished by the Building Inspection Division.
B. Permit fee. The fee for heating, ventilation and air-conditioning permits
shall be as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule. [Amended by Ord. No. 06-1875]
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-22
1:195
C. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) All commercial and industrial buildings and buildings housing over
two families shall have state approval before a permit is issued.
(2) Electrical wiring shall comply with the Watertown Electrical Code,
Chapter 282, and be performed by a licensed electrical contractor
for all original installations of commercial, industrial and
residential locations, except for replacement of existing fixtures as
allowed in the Electrical Code.
(3) If the heating contractor shall fail to obtain a permit before the
installation has been started, except in emergency cases, the total
fees for such permits shall be double the regular fee.
(4) In addition to § SPS 365.0400, Wis. Adm. Code, and NFPA 54-3.3.5,
flexible gas piping used for building distribution, including
seamless copper, aluminum alloy, or stainless steel tubing, shall not
be allowed within six feet of any floor or where subject to physical
damage. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-07]
(a) Exception. This does not include flexible gas hose connectors
not exceeding six feet in length intended to connect main line
to gas-utilization equipment allowed by NFPA 54-5.5.2.
D. Inspection required; final inspection. Upon completion of any heating,
ventilation or air-conditioning installation, the permit holder shall notify
the City's Inspection Division to arrange for a final inspection for oneand
two-family residences. For public buildings, the permit holder shall
notify the State Department of Safety and Professional Services for final
inspection.76
E. Reinspections. Reinspection of work which was found to be in violation
of the applicable codes shall incur a fee as set by the Common Council
and provided under separate fee schedule.77
F. Wisconsin Administrative Code; Building and Heating, Ventilation and
Air Conditioning Code. All buildings which fall under the jurisdiction of
Chapter SPS 364, as amended from time to time, shall have the heating,
ventilation and air conditioning installed in compliance with these
chapters.78
G. Uniform Dwelling Code. All buildings under the jurisdiction of the
Uniform Dwelling Code or any other building not mentioned shall have
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-22 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-22
1:196
§ 253-23. Fire protection systems. [Added by Ord. No. 05-46;
amended Ord. No. 12-0779]
The following requirements are in addition to the requirement in IBC
Section 901.
heating, ventilation and air conditioning installed according to the
standards of Chapters SPS 320 through 324, Wis. Adm. Code.
[Amended by Ord. No. 12-07]
A. Application for permit; plans and specifications.
(1) General. No person may install, erect or construct any fire alarm
system or fire suppression system or add to, enlarge, move,
improve, alter, convert, extend or demolish any fire alarm system or
fire suppression system, or cause the same to be done, or
commence any work covered by this chapter on any fire alarm
system or fire suppression system without first obtaining a fire
alarm/fire suppression system permit therefor from the Inspection
Division. Such permit shall be issued in the name of the owner/
contractor.
(2) Applications for fire alarm/fire suppression system permits shall be
filed with the Building Inspector in writing on a form to be
furnished for that purpose. Such application shall describe the land
and/or structure upon which the proposed installation or work is to
be done by a general description which will readily identify and
definitely locate the proposed installation or work and shall show
the use or occupancy of all parts of the building and such other
pertinent information as may be required by the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector or any inspector of the Inspection Division
shall, as a condition of granting a fire alarm/fire suppression
system permit, have the right to enter the premises for which said
permit was issued at any reasonable time during and throughout
the course of such work and until final approval thereof has been
granted, for the purpose of inspecting said premises and its
compliance as to construction or use with all statutory and
ordinance regulations in reference to the installation, modification,
construction, repair, use and location of fire alarm/fire suppression
systems.
(3) Working plans and specifications showing the location of each
component element of the proposed fire alarm system and/or fire
suppression system, all drawings, manufacturer's cut sheet for
devices, calculations, material approvals, manufacturer's listed
installations and design manuals, pre-engineered design
specifications, design specifications, and the manufacturer model
and type of each component element of such systems shall
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-23
1:197
accompany every application for a permit and shall be filed in
duplicate with the Building Inspector. If the installation involves a
building meeting the criteria in § SPS 361.30(3), Wis. Adm. Code,
the submittal will require approved plans by the Department of
Safety and Professional Services. However, the Building Inspector
may authorize the issuance of a permit without plans or
specifications for minor or inconsequential work.
(a) Plans submitted shall be drawn to scale on substantial paper.
The submitted plans shall be working plans of sufficient clarity
to indicate the nature and character of the work proposed and
to show that the regulations which apply will be complied with.
They shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and shall bear the name of the designer,
professional engineer, contractor or other person who
prepared them.
(b) Specifications shall be in detail. Any specifications in which
general expressions are used to the effect that "work shall be
done in accordance with the IBC and SPS 316" or "to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector" shall be deemed
imperfect and incomplete, and every reference to the IBC and
Ch. SPS 316, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be to the section or
subsection applicable to the material to be used or to the
method of construction proposed.
(c) Automatic fire sprinkler system projects involving the
alteration, addition or removal of fewer than 21 sprinklers in
an already existing automatic fire sprinkler system must
comply with the requirements of NFPA 1.
(d) Alterations to and/or modifications of an existing fire alarm
system and/or fire suppression system may not, at the
discretion of the Building Inspector, require a complete set of
plans as set forth above; however, each such application for a
permit shall include appropriate supporting documentation
establishing that the proposed alterations/modifications
comply with all appropriate codes, ordinances and standards.
(e) For state-owned buildings, plans shall be approved by the
appropriate state agency. A permit is required for said
projects; a copy of the state plan approval letter is required as
part of the permit application. The Building Inspector shall
inspect the fire protection systems in state-owned buildings.
When a state agency specifies plan review and inspection by
the City, a complete submittal is required.
(4) The data specified in all applicable IBC and Ch. SPS 316, Wis. Adm.
Code, standards adopted by this chapter shall be part of or shall
accompany all plans submitted for approval.
B. Fire alarm/suppression system permit.
§ 253-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-23
1:198
(1) When plans are required for approval, they shall be submitted in
duplicate and work shall not be started until plans are approved,
except by special permission to start work as issued by the Building
Inspector. If the plans and specifications are in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter and all other laws or ordinances
applicable thereto, the Building Inspector, upon receipt of the
required fee, shall grant a fire alarm/suppression system permit for
said work and shall sign, date and endorse in writing or by rubber
stamp all sets of submitted plans; if compliance with other
conditions is required, the plans may be stamped as "conditionally
approved." In all such cases of conditional approval the Building
Inspector shall return, with the approved plans, written notification
of the conditions that must be satisfied. Whenever a submitted
application is incomplete, the Building Inspector may suspend any
action on such application and shall notify the applicant of the
information needed to process such application.
(2) Approved plans shall not be changed. The work shall be installed as
shown on the plans, and there shall be no modifications or
alterations made without written permission of the Building
Inspector.
(3) Fire alarm/suppression system permits shall lapse and be void
unless the work authorized thereby is commenced within one year
from the date thereof and completed or resumed within one year
from the date that construction begins, and in the event of further
construction after either of the latter of these time periods, a new
permit must be obtained pursuant to all the requirements of the
code then in force. The fee for such new permit shall be based upon
the area (square footage of protected area) remaining to be done.
(4) If the Building Inspector shall find at any time that any provisions
of this chapter, any other chapter in the City's Code, laws, orders,
plans and/or specifications are not being complied with, he or she
may revoke the fire alarm/fire suppression system permit by
written notice, stating the error or violation which has occurred.
Said notice shall be served on the owner and on the general
contractor or one of her/his representatives on the job or, if there is
no general contractor, then on the person in charge of the work.
Service of the notice shall be either personal or by mailing a copy of
said notice to the address of said person as known to the Building
Inspector. When any such permit is revoked, it shall be unlawful to
do any further work until a new permit is issued, excepting such
work as the Building Inspector shall order to be done as a condition
precedent to the issuance of a new permit or which the Building
Inspector may authorize as reasonably necessary to protect work
already done on the job, existing property, adjoining property and
the public. Additionally, the Building Inspector may pursue any
other remedies for noncompliance with this chapter, as such
§ 253-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-23
1:199
remedies may be set forth in the City's Code and/or the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(5) The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans or
specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for
or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or to fail
to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid except
insofar as the work or use that it authorizes is lawful. If subsequent
to the issuance of a permit errors are discovered in the application,
plans, specifications or execution of the work, the Building
Inspector may require the correction of said errors in said
application, plans, specifications or construction and may rescind
the permit and prevent installation/work operations from
continuing when in violation of this chapter or of any ordinance of
the City of Watertown.
C. Fee schedule.
(1) Scope. The fees fixed in this section shall be assessed and collected
by the Inspection Division for the inspection of fire alarm systems
and fire suppression systems. These fees also include the
inspection of newly installed/remodeled fire alarm systems and fire
suppression systems. These fees are collected in advance from the
owner or agent. This fee schedule applies to inspections done on
buildings and premises within the City of Watertown.
(2) Fee schedule. Penalty for failure to obtain a permit before starting
work shall be double the fees. This shall be in addition to any other
penalties provided elsewhere in the City's Code; in addition, a
penalty of $100 shall be assessed for each day that any work
requiring a permit progresses without a permit, calculated from
the date the notice of violation is delivered to either the property
owner or the contractor performing the work until the date the
owner or contractor submits the proper plans in an approved
format to the Building Inspector.
(a) New systems. Except as otherwise specified in this section,
inspection fees for new systems shall be computed on a single
flat fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule.
(b) Alterations/modifications to existing systems.
[1] The fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule shall be assessed for inspection of
fire alarm systems and fire suppression system that have
been submitted.
[2] The fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule shall be assessed for revisions to
§ 253-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-23
1:200
§ 253-24. Inspection of work.
The Inspection Division shall be notified by the permit holder or his
authorized agent prior to the occurrence of the following events so that the
Building Inspector may make his inspection:
§ 253-25. Report of violations.
It shall be the duty of all police officers to report at once to the Building
Inspector any building work which is being carried on without a permit.
§ 253-26. Use or occupancy.
No new building or structure shall be used or occupied and no change in
the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion
thereof shall be made until the Building Inspector has made the final
inspection and issued a occupancy permit.
previously approved plans and plans that have been
previously reviewed but not denied.
(c) Private fire service mains and fire hydrants. The fee for review
of plans for private fire service mains and fire hydrants shall be
as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule for each system submitted.
(d) Reinspections. This fee applies to any reinspections required
because the inspected work failed to pass inspection. The fee
for reinspection shall be as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule.
A. The laying of any concrete for footings or garage slabs.
B. Completion of foundation and before backfilling.
C. Building rough-in has been completed, insulation installed, and before
wall is enclosed.
D. Final inspection prior to occupancy. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-43]
§ 253-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-26
1:201

ARTICLE IV
Construction Standards
§ 253-27. Footings and foundations. [Amended by Ord. No. 76-21]
A. Support. The foundation of every permanent structure shall be
supported by satisfactory bearing materials such as natural deposits of
rock, gravel, sand, inorganic salt, clay or any combination thereof
which does not contain an appreciable amount of organic matter.
B. Freezing. No footing or foundation shall be placed on frozen soil.
Footings or poured foundations shall not be laid in freezing weather
unless adequately protected.
C. Materials. Footings shall be poured concrete designed to sustain 2,000
pounds per square inch or better, except for wood foundations (see
Subsection L). [Amended by Ord. No. 79-19]
D. Dimensions.
(1) Concrete footings for load-bearing walls shall be of adequate
dimensions to distribute the load to the supporting soil. Minimum
thickness shall be eight inches. Footing width shall extend six
inches on each side of the wall above. Footings for any building or
structure shall be constructed of concrete or reinforced concrete or
wood (see Subsection L) and shall extend below the adjoining
grade a minimum of three feet six inches. Masonry units used in
foundation walls, appendages and stoops shall be laid in portland
cement mortar, plumb and in alignment. [Amended by Ord. No.
76-22; Ord. No. 79-20]
(2) Concrete footings for piers and columns shall be a minimum of two
feet square and a minimum thickness of 10 inches and shall be
designed to carry the superimposed load. Columns shall be
centered on column footings.
(3) The following tables provide for the minimum wall thickness
requirements:
Thickness of Foundation Walls
(inches)
Number of
Stories Concrete Unit Masonry
Table I: Masonry and Masonry Veneer Buildings
1 10 12
2 12 12
3 12 12
Table II: Light Incombustible and Wood Frame Buildings
§ 253-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-27
1:203
Thickness of Foundation Walls
(inches)
Number of
Stories Concrete Unit Masonry
1 8 10
2 8 12
3 12 12
E. Chimney footings. Chimney footing shall be six inches wider all around
than chimney size and 12 inches thick. Chimney footings shall start at
the level of lowest adjacent foundation wall footings.
F. Fireplace footings. Fireplace footings shall be 12 inches wider all
around than fireplace, with reinforcing rods eight inches apart across at
right angles and not less than 12 inches deep.
G. Height above ground. Foundation walls supporting wood members shall
extend at least six inches above the finished grade and shall conform
with the grade of existing homes within the block, and in no case shall
construction begin without first having obtained approval of grades
from the City Engineer.
H. Foundation ventilation. The space between the bottom of floor joists
and the ground of a dwelling (except space as is occupied by a
basement or cellar) shall be provided with ventilating openings through
foundation walls or exterior walls. There shall be not less than two
ventilating openings, the minimum total area of which shall be
proportioned on the basis of 1/2 square foot for each 25 linear feet or
major fraction thereof of exterior wall. Minimum clearance between
bottom of floor joists and the ground beneath shall be 18 inches.
I. Concrete slabs on ground. Earth under slab bed shall be leveled and
tamped. Wire mesh reinforcing, when required, shall have a minimum
weight of 20 pounds per 100 square feet.
J. Foundation walls. Walls of hollow masonry units shall be capped with
minimum of four inches of solid masonry or poured concrete. If
concrete is used, reinforce with wire mesh. Hollow masonry unit
foundation walls supporting girder shall be capped under the girder
with solid masonry or poured concrete a minimum of six inches in
height.
K. Pilasters.
(1) Concrete walls. Pilasters shall be provided where girders frame
into six-inch poured concrete walls; minimum size of pilasters: two
inches by 12 inches poured integrally with wall.
(2) Masonry walls. Pilasters shall be provided where girders whose
clear span exceeds 12 feet frame into eight-inch masonry walls;
§ 253-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-27
1:204
minimum size: four inches by 12 inches built integrally with wall.
Also, one pilaster eight inches by 16 inches shall be required for
every 20 feet of wall.
(3) Girder pockets. Provide four-inch end bearing for girder. Provide
one-half-inch air space between pocket and sides and end of wood
girder.
L. Wood foundation system. Wood foundations shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the following adopted standard of the
National Forest Products Association and listed exceptions: The All-
Weather Wood Foundation System, Basic Requirements, Technical
Report No. 7.
(1) Exceptions:
(a) Fasteners. Fasteners for use in preservative-treated wood shall
meet the requirements of this section. Fasteners of silicon
bronze or copper or stainless steel Type 304 or 316, as defined
by the American Iron and Steel Institute classification, shall be
permitted in preservative-treated wood above or below grade.
Fasteners or fastener materials not otherwise permitted under
this section shall be permitted if adequate comparative tests
for durability, including the effects associated with woodtreating
chemicals, demonstrate performance equal to or
greater than the specified fasteners or fastener materials.
(b) Plastic film. Six-mil-thick polyethylene sheeting shall be
supplied over the below-grade portion of exterior basement
walls prior to backfilling. Joints in the polyethylene sheeting
shall be lapped at least six inches and bonded. The top edge of
the polyethylene sheeting shall be bonded to the plywood
sheathing. A treated lumber or plywood strip shall be attached
to the wall to cover the top edge to the polyethylene sheeting.
The wood strip shall extend several inches above and below
finish grade level to protect the polyethylene from exposure to
light and from mechanical damage at or near grade. The joint
between the strip and the wall shall be caulked full length prior
to fastening the strip to the wall. Alternatively, asbestoscement
board, brick stucco or other covering may be used in
place of the wood strip. The polyethylene sheeting shall extend
down to the bottom of the wood footing plate but shall not
overlap or extend into the gravel footing.
(c) The thickness of the wood foundation wall shall be no less than
two by six, 16 inches on center.
(2) Materials. All lumber and plywood shall be treated in accordance
with the following adopted standard and shall be identified as to
conformance with such standard by an approved inspection
agency: Quality Control Program for Soft-Wood Lumber, Timber
and Plywood Pressure Treated with Water-Borne Preservatives for
§ 253-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-27
1:205
Ground Contact Use in Residential and Light Commercial
Foundations.
(a) Height of foundation wall above grade. All foundation walls
shall be designed and constructed to provide at least eight
inches of clearance between grade and untreated wood. Note:
This section is not intended to apply to untreated wood applied
on the interior side of foundation walls.
(b) Where lumber is cut after treatment, the cut surface shall be
brush-coated with not less than a three-percent solution of the
same preservative in the original treatment. [Added by Ord.
No. 79-18]
M. Foot drain tile.
(1) Bleeder tile. Nonperforated, perforated tile, or equivalent, of a
minimum of three inches in diameter, shall be embedded in
concrete footings of all new buildings where any basement or
usable crawl space three feet and greater is proposed (and be
spaced in said footing not to exceed eight feet, more or less apart).
This tile, hereafter called "bleeder tile," shall be placed in the
footings between the main building and an attached section like a
garage with the floor at grade, and around footings of existing
building additions where a full depth basement is proposed.
Bleeder tile openings, both inside and outside of footings, shall be
free of any debris and shall be covered with crushed stone or
equivalent acceptable material to permit water to course freely to
and through the bleeder tile.
(2) Exterior drain tile. Perforated tile shall be installed around the
outside perimeter of any basement wall, be placed on the footing
and covered with a minimum of one foot of crushed stone or similar
acceptable material. In the event the tile cannot be placed on
footings, it shall then be placed alongside the footing on not less
than two inches of stone or similar acceptable material and covered
with not less than one foot of like material.
(3) Interior drain tile. Perforated tile shall be placed alongside of the
footing and upon not less than one inch of crushed stone or similar
acceptable material and covered with not less than one inch of like
material to allow the unobstructed flow of water into the tile. All
tiles shall terminate in a clear water sump crock located a minimum
of one inch above the basement floor or to an approved gravity
drainage system.
(4) Sheathing. Where clear sand is encountered or any type of soil that
could cause an obstruction of the tile, the tile shall be wrapped with
a porous nylon sheathing or similar acceptable material to preclude
the entrance of granules into the drain tile.
§ 253-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-27
1:206
§ 253-28. Masonry chimneys.
§ 253-29. Fireplaces.
(5) Exceptions. Drain tile requirements shall not apply in the following
situations: [Amended by Ord. No. 89-102]
(a) Buildings constructed with an all-weather wood foundation
system as per Technical Report No. 7, Basic Requirements,
National Forest Products Association, Washington, D.C.
(b) Additions to existing buildings where crawl space only is
proposed.
A. Masonry chimneys. Masonry chimneys shall be constructed gastight
and shall bear on masonry or concrete foundations.
B. Effective flue area for fireplace. Effective flue area for a fireplace: not
less than 1/10 of fireplace opening. Separate flues required for each
fireplace.
C. Flue linings. Fire clay flue lining supported on masonry or concrete
shall be installed in all chimneys from a point below the breaching to
the top of chimney. Two flues may be grouped without wythes, provided
joints of linings are staggered. The flue linings of fireplaces and
chimneys shall be backed up with at least four inches of masonry of the
proper fire-resistant material to adequately support and protect the flue
linings. All chimney and fireplaces must have flue linings not less than
eight inches except where gas is used, then four inches or six inches
can be used.
D. Chimney cap. Chimney cap shall be provided to form wash from flue to
outside edge of chimney; minimum thickness at outside edge: two
inches.
E. Thimbles. Thimbles and cleanout doors shall be built in at the time
chimney is constructed.
F. Cleanout doors. Every chimney shall be provided with a cleanout
opening equipped with a metal cleanout door and frame.
G. Framing around chimney. Wood lath, furring or framing shall be placed
not less than two inches from any chimney.
H. Chimney height. All chimneys shall extend at least six inches above the
ridge of the roof that the chimney penetrates and not less than six
inches above the highest ridge within 10 feet of the chimney.
A. Smoke chamber, dampers, etc. Smoke chamber and damper shall be
installed in all fireplaces.
(1) Ash dump, when provided, shall empty into concrete or masonry
chamber provided with metal cleanout door.
§ 253-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-29
1:207
§ 253-30. Frame walls.
(2) Lining shall be fire brick or other acceptable material.
B. Hearth. Support on masonry or concrete. Projection from chimney
breast at least 16 inches. Width to be at least 16 inches wider than
fireplace opening.
A. Definition. In conventional frame wall construction, all structural parts
are of wood or are dependent upon a wood frame for support. This
includes walls with facing or wood frame for support and walls with
facing or veneer other than wood, such as brick, tile, stone and stucco.
B. Studding. Wall studding of frame building shall not be less than two
inches by four inches, 16 inches center to center. One-story detached
garages and other accessory buildings may have studding spaced 24
inches center to center.
C. Base plates. For garages and porches, stud walls resting on masonry
shall have base plates bolted to the masonry at corners and between
corners, with bolts not less than 1/2 inch in diameter embedded not less
than seven inches into the masonry and spaced not more than eight feet
apart, center to center. These sills shall be not less than the width of the
studs nor less than two inches thick.
D. Plates. In bearing partitions, the top plate shall be doubled and lapped
at each intersection with walls or partitions. Joints in the upper and
lower members of the top plate shall be staggered not less than four
feet.
E. Bridging. All stud partitions or walls over 10 feet in height shall have
herringbone bridging, not less than two inches in thickness and of the
same width as the studs, fitted snugly and spiked into the stud at midheight
of the stud, or other means for giving equal lateral support to the
studs.
F. Corners and bracing. Angles at corners where stud walls or partitions
meet shall be framed solid so that no lath can extend from one room to
another. All exterior and main cross-stud partitions shall be effectively
and thoroughly braced.
G. Window and door opening. All windows and door openings on bearing
walls and partitions must have double headers. All bearing openings
between and including three feet to five feet must be headed with two
pieces of two inches by six inches set on edge. All bearing openings
over five feet and not over eight feet wide must be headed by two pieces
of two inches by eight inches set on edge. All bearing openings over
eight feet and not over 10 feet must be headed by two pieces of two
inches by 10 inches set on edge. All bearing openings over 10 feet and
not over 12 feet must be headed by two pieces of two inches by 12
inches set on edge. All headers must have shoulder studs. Front
§ 253-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-30
1:208
§ 253-31. Masonry veneer on frame construction.
entrance door shall be not less than three feet wide, and side or back
entrance door shall be not less than two feet eight inches.
H. Firestopping. Firestopping shall be installed at every floor level to cut
off all concealed draft openings and form an effectual horizontal fire
barrier between stories and roof spaces.
I. Sheathing. Sheathing shall be required over studs, except in one-story
detached garages and other accessory buildings. Wood boards, when
applied diagonally, shall extend at 45° in opposite directions from each
corner. Sheathing shall be applied solidly over the wall surface and
properly nailed to each stud with not less than two eight-penny nails for
boards four inches to eight inches in width, and three nails for 10
inches to 12 inches in width. Sheathing shall be of one or more of the
following materials:
(1) Wood not less than 5/8 inch thick.
(2) Approved fiber board not less than 7/16 inch thick.
(3) Approved gypsum sheathing not less than 1/2 inch thick.
(4) Approved plywood not less than 5/16 inch thick.
J. Paper or felt. All wood sheathing shall be covered with water-resistant
building paper or saturated asphalt felt. Each lap shall be not less than
four inches, with at least a four-inch lay around opening, with at least
15 lb. felt or equivalent.
K. Plywood. Where plywood is used for covering the exterior of outside
sheathing walls, it shall be of the exterior type not less than 3/8 inch
thick. Joints shall be backed solid with nailing pieces not less than two
inches wide.
L. Ledger boards. Ledger or ribbon boards used to support joists shall be
not less than one inch by four inches, shall be cut into the studs and
securely nailed to each stud. Where ledger boards are used, the outside
walls shall be completely firestopped with not less than two-inch
material.
A. Thickness.
(1) Masonry veneer applied to the walls of frame structures shall rest
directly upon the masonry foundation of the structure and shall be
not less than 3 3/4 inches in thickness. Such veneer shall be backed
up with waterproof building paper or saturated felt, which shall
extend down below the joist and, where insulated sheathing is
used, the joists are also covered.
(2) Minimum thickness, brick: 3 3/4 inches. Ashlar stone masonry
dwellings less than two stories high: three inches; two-story
§ 253-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-31
1:209
§ 253-32. Stucco on frame construction.
§ 253-33. Wood framing.
dwellings: four inches. Rubble stone masonry, uncoursed (field
stone): 12 inches; mosaic or random: 12 inches; coursed dwellings
less than two stories high: eight inches; two-story dwellings: 12
inches.
B. Flashing. Flashing shall be installed where necessary to prevent
moisture from penetrating behind the wall.
C. Anchorage. The masonry veneer shall be securely attached to the frame
structure at intervals of not more than 16 inches horizontally and 24
inches vertically.
D. Sheathing. Sheathing shall be securely attached to the framework of
the structure back of the masonry veneer by properly nailing to each
stud as specified in § 253-30I, and in all cases, before applying masonry
veneer, a substantial waterproof paper of asphalt-saturated felt shall be
applied as required in § 253-30J.
A. Flashing. Flashing or other measures adequate to prevent penetration
of moisture behind the stucco surface shall be used where necessary.
B. Back plastering. Back plastering shall be required where sheathing or
its equivalent is omitted.
C. Sheathing. Sheathing shall be securely attached to the framework of
the structure back of the masonry veneer by properly nailing to each
stud as specified in § 253-30I, and in all cases, before applying masonry
veneer, a substantial waterproof paper of asphalt-saturated felt shall be
applied as required in § 253-30J.
D. Metal lath. Where metal lath is used for the stucco base, it shall be
expanded galvanized metal lath weighing not less than 3.4 pounds per
square yard, or wire fabric not lighter than No. 19 gauge.
A. Strength and soundness. All members shall be so framed, anchored,
tied and braced together as to develop the maximum strength and
rigidity necessary for the purpose for which they are used. No member
shall be stressed in excess of the strength of its details and connections.
B. Size of members. All wooden members shall be of sufficient size and
strength to carry the load safely without exceeding the allowable
working stresses of the material.
C. Beams. Every beam, girder and joist shall have end bearing in
accordance with compression perpendicular to grain, values, but the
length of end bearing shall never be less than four inches on masonry or
concrete or 1 1/2 inches on metal, except that joists when nailed to the
adjacent studs shall be supported on a one-inch let-in ribbon. Wood
§ 253-31 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-33
1:210
§ 253-34. Concrete slab floors.
members bearing on or in contact with masonry or concrete at or below
adjacent ground level shall be treated with an approved preservative or
provided with a moisture-resistant separation over bearing or contact.
D. Spaced columns. The following table gives maximum spans for wood
floor beams for various joist sizes. If steel beams are used, columns
shall be spaced according to manufacturer's specifications.80
E. Double joists. Joists under bearing partitions shall be doubled unless
supported by a partition underneath. Joists under and parallel to
bearing partitions shall be doubled and well spiked or may be separated
by solid bridging spaced at not more than four-foot intervals.
F. Floor joist support. Floor joists shall be supported by girders which
bear on exterior walls or partitions, except floor joists heading into
stairwells or similar headers.
G. Floor joist bridging.
(1) Solid wood blocking of two-inch nominal thickness, wood cross
bridging of not less than one inch by four inches or metal cross
bridging of equal strength shall be placed between joists where the
joist span exceeds eight feet. Solid blocking shall be placed
between joists at all points of support and at all points where
flooring is not continuous, except that bridging at bearing may be
omitted when the joists are nailed to studs. The lower ends of the
cross bridging shall be driven up and nailed after the floor or
subflooring has been nailed.
(2) Solid blocking not less than two inches nominal thickness and full
depth of the joists shall be provided in the following places: over all
bearing walls, bearing partitions and around all stairways or other
vertical openings; and over all girders, except when joists are not
sealed on the underside thereof. Such solid blocking shall serve as
firestopping and as the required bridging.
H. Allowable spans. The maximum spans for wood floor joists shall be as
listed in the following table. The table is based on allowable live load of
40 pounds per square foot on floor joists supporting a plastered ceiling
below.81
I. Plywood flooring. When plywood is used as finished flooring, it shall be
laid over a subflooring and the plywood shall be 5/16 inch thick for a
twelve-inch span, 3/8 inch thick for a sixteen-inch span, and 5/8 inch
thick for a twenty-four-inch span.
80.Editor's Note: The Table of Maximum Spans for Wood Floor Beams is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
81.Editor's Note: The Table of Maximum Span of Wood Floor Joist for Use in Dwellings is
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 253-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-34
1:211
§ 253-35. Ceiling and roof construction.
A. Cement floors. Minimum thickness: four inches. When concrete slab on
ground is used as finish floor or the base for other finish flooring in
habitable rooms, the construction of the floor and base shall be such
that water or dampness will not penetrate the slab. Normal
construction precautions against water or dampness will require one or
a combination of the following under all conditions:
(1) Four-inch-thick bed of clean gravel or crushed stone of uniform
size, drained if below grade. Provision must be made to prevent
cement paste or fines of concrete from filling the voids of the bed.
(2) Two-ply membrane waterproofing, mopped between layers with hot
tar or hot asphalt, turned up to top of slab at edges and, when
below grade, extended up enclosing walls to six inches above grade
or equivalent.
B. Basement floor slabs. Minimum thickness: three inches. Bottom of slab
shall be not lower than top of footing. Slab shall continue over footing
projection to foundation wall.
C. Garage floor slabs. Minimum thickness: four inches. Provide slab at
least two feet in front of garage for opening to form an apron; slope to
driveway.
D. Terrace and porch floor slabs. Minimum thickness: four inches, and
reinforced with wire mesh or rods. Metal flashing or two 15 lb. felts
shall be installed between slabs and all wood construction.
E. Driveways and walks. Minimum slab thickness: four inches. Expansion
joints shall be provided at garage apron and at thirty-foot intervals. A
trowel-cut approximately halfway through the slab of walks shall be
made at approximately four-foot intervals.
A. Roof framing. Roofs shall be so framed and tied into framework and
supporting walls as to form an integral part of the whole building.
B. Spans for roof rafters. The maximum spans for rafters shall be as listed
in the following table, based on a live load of 30 pounds per square foot
plus a dead load of five pounds per square foot.82
(1) The allowable span of roof rafters shall be measured from plate to
ridge, except that where rafters are braced to ceiling joists and a
complete truss is formed, the span shall be considered as the
distance between intersecting points of trussing.
(2) The table below is for rafters with slopes of less than four in 12. For
slopes of four in 12 to 12 in 12, increase below lengths by one foot
82.Editor's Note: The Table of Spacing of Roof Rafters is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 253-34 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-35
1:212
§ 253-36. Room sizes.
six inches; for slopes of 12 in 12 and greater, increase below
lengths by two feet six inches.
(3) For spacing for woods different from the tables below, joist and
rafters shall be determined on a basis equal to the following
tables.83
(4) Stress values for individual species of lumber shall be determined
from the latest edition of National Design Specifications for Stress
Grade Lumber and Its Fastenings.
C. Collar beams. Collar beams on every other rafter shall be required
when the roof pitch is six inches and under, and collar beams shall be of
one-inch by six-inch lumber.
D. Trussing. Trussing shall be required on rafters 15 feet and over,
measuring from stud to ridge board. Spacing shall not be more than
four feet apart, and one-inch by six-inch rough lumber or larger shall be
used.
E. Roof trusses. If built-up roof trusses are used, they shall be of the size
and space according to the manufacturer's specifications.
F. Plywood roofs. If plywood is used on roofs, the minimum thickness shall
be 3/8 inch spacing, and 1/2 inch thick for twenty-four-inch spacing.
Nailing shall be not less than six-inch spacing.
G. Spans for ceiling joist.
(1) The maximum spans for ceiling joists shall be as listed in the
following table.84
(2) Stress values and modulus of elasticity for individual species of
lumber shall be determined from the latest edition of National
Design Specifications for Stress Grade Lumber and Its Fastenings.
H. Attics. All residences shall have access provided to the attic space by
means of a stairway or permanent ladder or a scuttle not less than 22
inches square. Adequate ventilation shall be provided in all spaces
between the roof and top floor ceiling by means of louvers or other
approval vents. The net area of each ventilation opening shall be not
less than 144 square inches, and such openings shall be so located as to
provide effective cross ventilation.
A. Area. A sleeping room shall have a minimum floor area of 70 square
feet.
83.Editor's Note: The Table of Spacing of Roof Rafters and the Table of Maximum Spans for
Ceiling Joists are included as attachments to this chapter.
84.Editor's Note: The Table of Maximum Spans for Ceiling Joists is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 253-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-36
1:213
§ 253-37. Windows.
§ 253-38. Stairs.
§ 253-39. Prefabricated buildings.
The erection of a prefabricated building or use of prefabricated assembly,
the integral parts of which have been built up or assembled prior to
incorporation in the building, shall be permitted, subject to all other
provisions of this chapter and according to Chapter 550, Zoning.
B. Height. The minimum ceiling height for any dwelling room on the first
floor shall be 7 1/2 feet clear when finished.
A. Window areas. The window or skylight area for each livable room must
be at least 1/8 of actual floor area, excluding bathroom, where a
ventilating fan must be provided if there is no window.
B. Ventilation. Where more than 1/2 of the required windows in a room are
fixed, ventilation shall be provided by louvers or other approved
devices.
A. Width. Stairs shall be not less than 36 inches in width in the rough.
B. Rise and tread. All stairways shall have a uniform rise of not more than
eight inches and a uniform tread of not less than nine inches measuring
from tread to tread and from riser to riser.
C. Handrails. All stairways and steps of more than four risers shall have at
least one handrail mounted on the open side, if any. Stairs five feet or
more in width, or open on both sides, shall have a handrail on each side.
D. Headroom. Every interior stairway shall have a headroom clearance of
not less than six feet four inches, measured vertically from the nearest
nosing to the nearest soffit.
E. Landings. Between landings there shall be not more than 12 feet
measured vertically, nor less than two risers. Every platform shall be at
least as wide as the stairway, measuring in the direction of travel. Such
dimension need not exceed four feet.
F. Doors opening into stairways. Whenever a door opens onto a stairway, a
platform shall be provided extending at least the full width of the door
in the direction of travel.
§ 253-36 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-39
1:214
ARTICLE V
Regulations Within Fire Districts
§ 253-40. General requirements.
Every building hereafter erected, enlarged or moved within or into the fire
district shall be of fire-resistive mill or ordinary construction, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. Enclosing walls, division walls and party
walls shall be four-hour fire-resistive walls of a construction as provided
in § Ind 51.05, Wis. Adm. Code, which is hereby by reference made a
part of this chapter with respect to all buildings and structures within
the fire district. The terms "fire-resistive construction," "mill construction,"
"ordinary construction," "frame construction" and "fire-retardant roof
coverings" shall have the meaning as defined in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, §§ Ind 51.001, 51.01, 51.02, 51.03 and 51.07 of the
Wisconsin State Building Code.85
§ 253-41. General fire limits.
A. The general fire limits of the City of Watertown, Wisconsin, shall be as
follows:
(1) East of Rock River. Beginning at the center line of Jones Street at
Rock River, thence easterly to North Fifth Street, thence southerly
along the center line of North Fifth Street to Madison Street,
thence easterly along the center line of Madison Street to North
Eighth Street, thence northerly along the center line of North
Eighth Street to the northwest corner of Seibel's subdivision,
thence easterly along the north line of Seibel's subdivision to the
northeast corner of Seibel's subdivision, thence southerly along the
east line of Seibel's subdivision to East Main Street, thence
westerly along the center line of East Main Street to Seventh
Street, thence southerly along the center line of Seventh Street to
Market Street, thence westerly along the center line of Market
Street to Fourth Street, thence southerly along the center line of
Fourth Street to Jefferson Street, thence westerly along the center
line of Jefferson Street to Rock River.
(2) West of Rock River. Beginning at the center line of O'Connell Street
at Rock River, thence westerly along the center line of O'Connell
Street to North Washington Street, thence southerly along the
center line of North Washington Street to a point on a line with the
north line of lot 7, block 31, Original Plat, thence westerly along the
north line of lots 4, 5, 6, and 7, block 31, Original Plat, to the center
line of North Church Street, thence southerly along the center line
of North Church Street and Church Street to a point on a line with
the south line of lot 1, block 32, Original Plat, thence easterly along
85.Editor's Note: See now the Commercial Building Code, Chapters SPS 361 to 366, Wis.
Adm. Code, and Ch. SPS 375, which contains definitions of those terms, under "Buildings
Constructed Prior to 1914."
§ 253-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-41
1:215
§ 253-42. Special fire limits within general fire limits.
The special fire limits shall be as follows:
§ 253-43. Construction within general fire limits.
the south line of lots 1, 2, 9 and 10 of block 32, Original Plat, to the
center line of Washington Street, thence southerly along the center
line of Washington Street to Emmet Street, thence easterly along
the center line of Emmet Street to Rock River.
B. No person or persons owning or in control of any lot or parcel of ground
situated within the general fire limits shall kindle, start or cause or
permit the burning of any trash or rubbish outside of a building
thereon, whether or not such trash or rubbish is contained within a
fireproof burner, without the permission and approval in writing of the
Fire Chief or Fire Inspector.
A. Lots 4, 5, 6, 7 of block 40, and all of block 45, Original Plat, west of Rock
River, in the Fourth Ward.
B. Lots 1, 2, 9, 10 of block 39, and lots 1, 5, 6 of block 46, Original Plat,
west side of Rock River, in the Third Ward.
C. Lots 5, 6, 7, 8 of block 4, and all of blocks 5, 6, 7, Original Plat, east side
of Rock River, and all of outlots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 in the Second Ward.
D. Lots 1, 2, 3 of block 8, and all of blocks 9, 10, 11, 12, Original Plat, east
side of Rock River in the First Ward.
A. No building of frame or wood construction or of any other combustible
material shall hereafter be erected or constructed within the general
fire limits, and no such building shall be moved to or upon any lot within
the general fire limits from without such fire limits.
B. All walls of outbuildings, which are not a part of main buildings, shall be
of brick or other fireproof materials, and such walls shall not be less
than eight inches in thickness; provided, however, that such buildings,
if located at least 10 feet distant from any other building and not
exceeding 120 feet in superficial area and eight feet in height, may be
built of wood if covered on the outside and roof with sheet metal or
other fireproof material approved by the Director of Public Works.
C. Dwelling houses not exceeding 26 feet in height from the water table to
the eave may be erected within the special fire limits of wood on brick
or stone foundation, if duly covered on the outside with and encased in
brick walls, not less than four inches in thickness, extending from
foundation to roof. The roof shall in each case be covered with fireproof
material.
D. No building which is intended for mercantile, retail, wholesale or any
form and character of business whatsoever shall be erected or
§ 253-41 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-43
1:216
§ 253-44. Construction within special fire limits.
No building or structure of any kind shall hereafter be constructed within
the special fire limits unless the same is in conformity with the following
provisions:
constructed within the general fire limits except the builder thereof
first secure and file with the City Engineer one set of plans showing
thereon the approval of the State Department of Safety and
Professional Services.
A. All outside and party walls, except as hereinafter specified, shall be
made of stone, brick, concrete, iron, steel or other incombustible
material approved by the Director of Public Works.
B. All outside and party walls of stores, mills, breweries, warehouses, malt
houses and all other buildings, except as hereinafter provided, shall, in
their minimum thickness, be constructed in accordance with the
following table:
Basement 1 2 3 4 5
1 story 12 inch 8
2 story 12 inch 12 8
3 story 16 inch 12 12 8
4 story 16 inch 12 12 12 8
5 story 16 inch 12 12 12 12 8
C. Plate glass and steel construction shall be allowed if in conformity with
the rules of modern practice and approved by the Director of Public
Works.
D. Framework of bay windows may be constructed of wooden studding
and sheathing, provided the same is covered on the outside with sheet
metal or other fireproof material approved by the Director of Public
Works, the spaces between the studding completely filled with mineral
wood, asbestos, hard-burned clay tile, terra-cotta, or other fireproof
material approved by the Director of Public Works, and metal lath used
on the inner side.
E. All roofs, cornices and gutters shall be made of or covered with sheet
metal, slate, vitrified tile or other fireproof material approved by the
Director of Public Works.
F. Any outside platform, stairs, walk, balcony or structure other than a
building, any portion of which shall be more than 15 feet from the
ground, shall be entirely made of or covered with fireproof material.
§ 253-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-45
1:217
§ 253-45. Raising, enlarging or moving within or into general fire
limits. [Amended by Ord. No. 69-12]
No building or part of a building or other structure within the general fire
limits which does not conform in its construction to the requirements of
§ 253-43 shall be raised, enlarged or removed to any other place within said
general fire limits, nor shall any such building or structure be moved into
the territory embraced in said general fire limits, nor shall any such building
or other structure within said general fire limits which may be damaged to
the extent of 50% of its fair market value be enlarged, repaired or made
up to occupy more space than before such injury, or raised higher than the
highest point of such building before the occurrence of the injury.
§ 253-46. Damage sustained by building; how determined.
The extent of any damage to any building or other structure within said
general fire limits may be determined by three persons, residents of the
City, one of whom shall be chosen by the owner of the building or structure,
the second shall be the City Engineer, and the two so selected shall elect
a third; their decision or that of a majority of them shall be final and
conclusive. Such decision shall be filed in the office of the Building
Inspector.
§ 253-47. Buildings erected or removed from place to place within
special fire limits.
Any building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, repaired or
removed into or from place to place within said special fire limits contrary
to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance, owing to the
proximity and number of buildings within said special fire limits and for
the prevention of fire and the spread and communication thereof; and upon
information thereof to the Building Inspector after due notice to the owner,
his agent or the builder to remove or abate the same, or alter the same
so as to comply with the requirements of this chapter within 30 days, and
after a hearing before the Common Council be given such owner, agent or
building to show cause why such building or other structure or nuisance is
not removed within said stipulated time, then the Building Inspector is to
cause such building or structure to be razed, and the expense thereof shall
be reported by the Building Inspector to the City Clerk/Treasurer, who shall
spread the same on the tax roll as a charge against the property.
§ 253-45 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-47
1:218
ARTICLE VI
Projections
[Added 6-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1286]
§ 253-48. Bay windows.
The construction of bay windows, any portion of which shall project over
any street, alley or public ground, within the limits of the City is prohibited.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also moved former §§ 13.50 through 13.58, pertaining to
sign regulations, as a new Article XII, Signs and Projections, in Chapter 550, Zoning, of
the Code.
§ 253-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-48
1:219

ARTICLE VII
Filling of Land
[Added 6-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
§ 253-49. Permit.
§ 253-50. Plan.
Whenever the amount of fill required shall exceed 500 cubic yards or the
area exceed 1/2 acre, the applicant shall submit a topographic and contour
A. Required. No person shall fill upon any lot, tract or parcel of land unless
he shall first obtain a filling permit pursuant to Subsection B hereof and
post the same upon the premises in the manner provided for the posting
of a building permit as set forth in the City's Code.
B. Application.
(1) Procedures. A filling permit shall be issued by the City Engineer,
upon application being duly made and filed with him, upon payment
of a permit fee as set forth below. Such application shall be signed
by the owner of the premises involved, together with the person
applying for the permit if he be other than the owner; shall contain
the location of the premises and an accurate description of the
same and an estimate of the number of cubic yards necessary to fill
such land to approximately the grade of the terrain bounding the
area to be filled. The permit shall run for a period of one year and
be subject to renewal each successive year upon reapplication. The
permit may be revoked by the Common Council, upon notice to the
permittee and hearing, if the permittee is depositing or permitting
or causing to be deposited materials on such premises other than
solid fill or has failed to or refused to comply with any of the
regulations set forth herein or any of the rules, regulations and
orders of the Inspector herein.
(2) Hearing. Such hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided
in § 227.15, Wis. Stats.
(3) Permit fees shall be as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule.87
C. Estimate. If it appears from the application for such filling permit that
the amount of fill reasonably required to alter the contour of the subject
filling site to the approximate grade of the terrain bounding the area to
be filled shall exceed 500 cubic yards, the provisions of Subsection B
shall become applicable and govern the issuance of such filling permit.
If there is any disagreement over the estimate of the number of cubic
yards required, the estimate of the Inspector shall be controlling.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-50
1:221
map at a scale of not over 100 feet to the inch with two-foot contour
intervals, using City datum. Such map shall show the proposed fill area, the
proposed final contours, drainage patterns and special drainage devices, if
necessary, and all other pertinent information as may be required to clearly
indicate the orderly development of the fill area. Provided, however, that in
the case of the excavation or the filling in of a building site, where a building
permit has been issued for the erection of a new building or structure,
the alteration or addition thereto, and the proposed final grades of such
excavation and grading are included in the plat plans as submitted and
approved by the Building Inspector, and the total amount of filling required
does not exceed 500 cubic yards, a filling permit shall not be required.
§ 253-51. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases are defined
and shall be construed to mean, unless the context in which they are used
clearly indicates an intent to the contrary, as follows:
FILL — The act of placing, setting down or depositing solid fill on land for
the purpose of, or which has the resultant effect of, changing the existing
contour of or raising the elevation of such land or any part thereof.
FILLING — See "fill."
FILLING PERMIT — Required to engage in the act of filling on a specified
parcel of land.
FILL, SOLID — Earth, clay, soil, ground, stones, rocks and broken concrete,
if the same does not exceed 18 inches in diameter; cinders (consisting of the
residue from the combustion of coal and not less than 1/8 inch in diameter);
or any mixture or combination of the foregoing.
INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector and/or Engineer of the City.88
MATERIALS, FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE — Includes oils and oil
lights, sweepings from garage floors, barrels, boxes or other containers
containing oil or other similar liquids, rags, clothes, paper, shavings, paper
or cardboard boxes or cartons, grease, paints, varnish or other similar
substances, any of which are likely to be readily flammable or combustible.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, firm, corporation or partnership.
§ 253-52. Filling regulations.
A. Every person who shall fill upon any lot, tract or parcel of land shall fill
such land as evenly as possible and, at the end of such filling, shall level
and grade such fill and see to it that the top thereof shall be of soil, free
from broken concrete and relatively free from gravel, and that the
upper four inches thereof shall be of soil suitable for growing grass. He
shall keep the surface of such filling free from dust at all times during
the filling operations and thereafter.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-52
1:222
B. Landfilling shall be operated and maintained in a sanitary manner,
rodent-free, with no emission of dust or dirt beyond its boundary lines.
C. All materials delivered to the landfill site shall be deposited in a manner
to prevent erosion into any watercourses, roadside ditches or onto
adjoining properties.
D. All fill operations shall be confined to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to sunset
daily, Monday through Saturday, unless otherwise shown or permitted
on the application. No such activity shall be permitted on Sundays.
E. No permittee hereunder shall operate equipment or otherwise cause
noise which interferes with nearby property owners in the peaceable
enjoyment of their properties. The permittee shall maintain roadways to
and across the site in a smooth condition to minimize noise of delivery
vehicles.
F. Roadways to and across the landfill site shall be treated to prevent dust
nuisances.
G. No natural drainageways or swales shall be blocked, and fill shall be
placed in a manner to prevent formation of water nuisances or insectbreeding
ponds.
H. Should any fill material erode into any watercourse or onto any
adjoining property, the permittee shall remove such material at his
expense upon the order of the City Engineer.
I. Fencing or suitable visual screen, as approved by the Inspector, due to
complaints or where deemed necessary to avoid visual impairment,
shall be provided on all sides of the site unless waived by the Common
Council on application.
J. No permittee hereunder, nor the owner of the property, shall deny the
City Engineer, Building Inspector, police officer or other authorized
officer or employee of the City the right of entry on his property during
normal business hours for the purpose of inspection thereof or for the
purpose of enforcing or carrying out the provisions of this article.
K. No permittee shall fail to obey a stop order or revocation order issued
by the City Engineer, Building Inspector or authorized City officer for a
violation of this section. The permittee may appeal such stop order or
revocation order to the Common Council, such appeal to be filed in
writing with the City Clerk/Treasurer within five days of the service
thereof. If no appeal is taken within such time, the order shall be final.
Such appeal shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the Common
Council in public, at which time the permittee may be represented by
counsel. The Common Council may affirm, reverse or modify the order
appealed from and shall do so within five days of the hearing. The
permittee shall not operate under his permit until the appeal is decided.
§ 253-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-52
1:223
§ 253-53. Powers and duties of Building Inspector.
L. If any person fails to complete or correct his landfill operation in
accordance with the terms of his permit and the provisions of this
article, the City Engineer shall notify the permittee that the Common
Council will hold a public hearing on his recommendation that the City
complete or correct such work, either by City staff or contract, and
assess the reasonable cost thereof against the property on which
located. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail at
least seven days prior to the hearing. The permittee shall have the right
to be heard and to be represented by counsel. The Common Council, by
resolution, may order the work completed or corrected and levy a
special assessment for the reasonable cost thereof, which shall be a lien
on the property, collected as other special assessments. The permittee
may appeal to the circuit court within 20 days after a copy of the final
resolution is served upon him, by personal service or certified mail. If
no appeal is taken within such time, the assessment shall be final.
M. The Common Council may, in an individual case, upon recommendation
by the Inspector, as a condition to issuance of a filling permit or at any
time as a condition for the continuance of such permit, require
compliance by the permittee with any or all of the regulations set forth
in Subsection B hereof.
A. The Building Inspector shall have such power, authority and duties
concerning the inspection, supervision and control of fill or filling
within the City as hereinafter more particularly set forth.
B. Such Inspector shall have complete charge and supervision over the
regulation and operation of filling. He shall have, at all times, full power
and authority to require complete compliance with this section and all
other rules, regulations and orders of the City for the regulation of
filling and the enforcement of this section.
C. Should the Inspector find that any person engaged in filling is failing to
conform to the provisions of this section or other rules, regulations or
orders, he may require that the person filling discontinue operations
forthwith and until such time as conformance to this article, rules,
regulations or orders is made. Should the operator, his servants, agents
or employees, or any other person bring upon any such land materials
which are prohibited by the terms and provisions of this article, the
Inspector shall refuse to permit such materials to be unloaded. He shall,
if any portion or all of such materials have been unloaded, cause the
operator or person bringing such materials upon the land, to reload
same and remove them from the premises.
D. Such Inspector shall be the representative of the City at any filling site
within the City. He may require the ceasing of filling operations and the
discontinuing of operations until such time as there may be proper
compliance with this article and such other rules, regulations and
§ 253-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-53
1:224
§ 253-54. Persons liable.
The owner, lessee or any other person having possession and control over
any filling operation, be it public or private, under the terms of this article
shall be responsible for the actions of his agents, servants or employees to
the same extent as though they were the acts of such principal; and such
owner, lessee or other person shall be subject to arrest for violation of the
provisions of this article by any of his agents, servants or employees; any
penalty imposed under the terms of this article may be imposed upon the
principal and/or the agents, servants or employees, or either or both of
them.
§ 253-55. Public nuisance.
The depositing on any land of flammable and/or combustible materials and
the depositing of fly ash, foundry refuse and other similar materials of such
texture or material that they will be capable of being airborne, and the
permitting of such depositing, shall be and is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 253-56. Special permit: emergency.
The Common Council may, however, in any emergency to be determined
by it involving the abatement of a nuisance or in the protection of the
public health, welfare or safety, permit the dumping of suitable materials,
even though prohibited by the terms of this article; provided that, in each
instance, application therefor shall be made in writing to the Common
Council; it shall determine the type of materials to be dumped, the
circumstances surrounding the issuance of the permit, the justification
therefor and the manner in which such operations may be performed. Any
permit issued pursuant to such approval shall be in the nature of a special
permit, separate and apart from other permit issued to the applicant and
from any permit for the operation of a dump or fill operation upon the same
premises; shall specifically indicate the type of materials to be dumped, the
manner in which the same are to be dumped and shall contain such other
specifications and requirements as the Common Council may determine to
be necessary and desirable.
§ 253-57. Exemptions.
orders as may be necessary in the control, supervision and regulation
of filling lands.
A. The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this
article: filling for landscaping, gardening or filling required for
construction of accessory structures and uses up to a maximum of 20
cubic yards in any twelve-month period.
B. Fill required as a result of City Public Works Commission, Water
Department or similar project activity may be exempt from the
§ 253-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-57
1:225
§ 253-58. Intent and purpose.
It is specifically determined by the Common Council that it is the intent and
purpose of this article to regulate filling operations within the City limits on
a basis whereby such operation may be readily controlled, supervised and
regulated for the protection of public health, welfare and safety.
§ 253-59. Violations and penalties.
Any person or municipality violating the provisions of this article shall be
liable for any or all damages or expenses sustained or incurred by the
City by reason of any fire occurring in any such public or private dumping
ground or other place within the City caused by any dumping referred to
in this article, together with any expenses which the City may incur in
enforcing any of the terms or provisions of this article. The penalty for
violating the terms of this article shall be as set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
requirements of this article. The decision to exempt such activity shall
be at the discretion of the City Engineer.
§ 253-57 WATERTOWN CODE § 253-59
1:226
Chapter 266
CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 266-1. Cigarette and tobacco products retailer license.89
Per § 134.65, Wis. Stats., and any amendments thereto, the City of
Watertown shall issue a cigarette and tobacco products retailer license to
any establishment selling cigarette and/or tobacco products. Said license
shall require payment of a fee as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule for the licensing period July 1 through June 30.
§ 266-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 282
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
§ 282-1. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-08; 3-31-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-11]
As used this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR — Any person who is licensed by the State of
Wisconsin as an electrical contractor.
ELECTRICAL WORK — Includes the installation, superintending or
inspection of electrical wiring and equipment for the production,
modification, regulation, control, distribution, utilization or safeguarding
of electrical energy for mechanical, chemical, heating, lighting or similar
purposes.
§ 282-2. Electrical Inspector. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-08;
3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-11]
A. The Electrical Inspector shall be a person of good moral character, duly
licensed as an electrical contractor or journeyman electrician according
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-2
1:227
§ 282-3. Electrical licenses required. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-08;
3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-11]
No person shall alter, install or repair electrical wires and apparatus for
the utilization of electric current for light, heat or power in the City, except
in the usual operations of a public utility company, without first having
procured one of the following licenses from the State of Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services:
to the Wisconsin Statutes. He shall be well versed in local ordinances,
Wisconsin Statutes and rules and regulations of the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services and Wisconsin
Department of Health Services which pertain to electricity or the duties
of his office.
B. Duties and authority. The Electrical Inspector shall be under the
direction of the City's Inspection Division and the City Engineer and
shall have control of the installation and inspection of electrical work
within or in connection with all buildings in the City. He shall make or
cause to be made all inspections of electrical wiring from the line pole
to the building or structure where the service is being used as well as
the interior of the structure, manner of construction, and materials and
workmanship. He shall enforce all laws, ordinances and rules in
relation to the installation. The Electrical Inspector shall see that the
construction, reconstruction and alterations of all electrical service
hereinafter installed in all buildings in the City shall conform to the
laws and ordinances of the State of Wisconsin, the City, the rules and
regulations contained in the Wisconsin State Electrical Code, the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services and the
provisions of the Wisconsin Department of Health Services relating to
electrical wiring, if any. He shall see that the work shall be done by
licensed electricians as provided by law and this chapter and shall make
all inspections required thereby and in the manner set forth. He may
enter any building during reasonable hours in the discharge of his
official duties. He shall supervise all electrical installations as may be
necessary to adequately enforce this chapter.
C. Records. The Electrical Inspector shall prepare suitable forms for the
application for permits required, keep in his office a proper daily record
of all transactions of his office, and file a monthly report covering the
same with the Common Council.
A. Licensed master electrician.
B. Licensed residential master electrician.
C. Licensed journeyman electrician.
D. Licensed industrial journeyman electrician.
E. Licensed residential journeyman electrician.
§ 282-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 282-3
1:228
§ 282-4. Electrical contractor's license. [Amended by 3-31-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-11]
No person shall contract for or undertake to install or repair electrical wires
or apparatus within the City except as otherwise herein provided without
first having obtained an electrical contractor's license issued by the State of
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services. In the event the
person is a partnership or corporation, at least one individual member of
the partnership or corporation shall be a State of Wisconsin certified master
electrician or a State of Wisconsin certified master electrician restricted.
§ 282-5. Application for electrical license. [Amended by 3-31-2014
by Ord. No. 14-11]
Section SPS 305.40(1) through (5), Wis. Adm. Code, is hereby incorporated
by reference as if fully stated hereunder.90
§ 282-6. Electrical permits.
F. Registered beginning electrician.
G. Registered electrical apprentice.
H. Registered industrial electrical apprentice.
I. Registered residential electrical apprentice.
A. Requirements.
(1) Permits are required for the installation of any conductors and
equipment covered under § SPS 316.002, Scope, Wis. Adm. Code.
In no case shall any electrical work be done unless a permit has
first been obtained, except as provided under Subsections B and E
of this section. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-08]
(2) Permits shall only be issued to the following:
(a) Licensed electrical contractors or their authorized
representatives.
(b) A plant electrician, only for the property owned by his
employers.
(c) The owner-occupant of one- and two-family residences, if
qualified as required in § SPS 316.009, Wis. Adm. Code.
[Amended by Ord. No. 12-08]
(3) Permits are issued only at the office of the City Electrical Inspector.
Permits are issued for a period of 12 months from the date of issue,
after which time the permit may be renewed for an additional 12
90.Editor's Note: Original §§ 14.05 through 14.09, which immediately followed this section,
have been repealed. Sections 14.05 and 14.09 were repealed 3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-11.
§ 282-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-6
1:229
months by payment of 1/2 of the administration fee. When a permit
expires and is not renewed, all electrical work will cease and not
continue until a new permit is issued upon receipt of full payment
to the City.
B. Exemptions.
(1) Permits are not required for minor repairs such as replacing of
cords and plugs, switches, receptacles, lamp holders and lighting
fixtures on existing boxes. A permit is required when a new lighting
system and permanent wiring are installed or replaced in an
existing building.
(2) Permits are not required for the repair and maintenance of heating
and refrigeration equipment by a qualified heating and/or
refrigeration contractor.
C. Permit fees. Fees for permits for electrical installation, except for
electrical installation done for the City, for which no permit fee is to be
charged, shall be paid as follows:
(1) The minimum fee for any permit shall be as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule. Where
additional permits are required by the licensee for the same
project, the minimum fee does not apply. The breakdown of
minimum permit fees shall be as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule. [Amended by Ord. No.
06-1891]
(2) All permit fees shall be paid to the City Clerk/Treasurer and
credited to the general fund, and no permit shall be issued or valid
unless approved by an officer of the Inspection Division and the fee
paid to the City in the amount required for such permit.
(3) If the licensee shall fail to obtain a permit before an electrical
installation has been started, except in emergency cases, the total
fees for such permit shall be double the regular fee.
(4) No further permits are to be issued to any licensee until all arrears
in fees have been paid and all lawful orders of the Electrical
Inspector have been complied with.
(5) The connection of replacement appliances and equipment such as
furnaces, signs, air compressors, air conditioners, water heaters
and like equipment shall constitute an extension of an existing or
new branch circuit. The connection shall comply with current
Electrical Code.
(6) Existing installations which have been declared as a hazard to life
and property shall be made safe. The installation of any permanent
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 282-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 282-6
1:230
§ 282-7. Electrical inspection.
Upon the completion of the wiring of any building or before any wiring
is to be hidden from view, it shall be the duty of the person doing the
same to notify the Electrical Inspector, and he shall inspect the installation
within 48 hours of the time such notice is received. If upon inspection it is
found that such installation is fully in compliance with this chapter and does
not constitute a hazard to life or property, he shall approve the same and
authorize concealment of such wiring or connection for electrical service.
If the installation is incomplete or not in accordance with this chapter, he
shall issue orders to the person installing the same to remove all hazards
and make the necessary changes or additions within 10 days. Concealment
of electrical work before inspection or failure to comply with the orders of
the Electrical Inspector shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 282-8. Certificate of inspection.
wiring and equipment to correct this hazard will constitute an
extension of existing or new circuit.
D. Temporary work. On applying for a permit for temporary electrical
work, a specified period of time for which such wiring is to remain in
service must be stated. Service shall be cut off at the end of this period
and shall not again be connected without written permission from the
Electrical Inspector.
E. Emergency work. In emergency work, the person doing or causing the
work to be done shall report the same to the Electrical Inspector
immediately after beginning work on forms furnished by the Electrical
Inspector, and such work shall be in accordance with this chapter.
F. Sign installations. No permit for electrical installation in connection
with a sign overhanging any public street, alley or public ground in this
City shall be issued until the permit required by § 550-130 of this Code
has been issued by the Building Inspector for the erection of such
sign.92
A. General requirements.
(1) No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electric light,
power or heating installation and all other electrical apparatus
connected with it are in strict conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of the State Electrical Code, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, as amended, which is adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter.
(2) Any person who shall install electric wires or appliances shall be
responsible for same until approved by the Electrical Inspector.
Any person who shall make any additions, corrections, alterations
92.Editor's Note See Ch. 550, Zoning, Art. XII, for regulations pertaining to signs and
projections.
§ 282-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-8
1:231
§ 282-9. Appeals. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-0894]
When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of the electrical
installation of any building, the owner within five days after receiving
written notice from the Electrical Inspector may file an appeal in writing for
review of said actions of the Electrical Inspector to the State of Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services for an interpretation and
determination. Said determination shall be in writing and shall follow the
guidelines set forth in § SPS 316.008, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 282-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each day
a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
or connections to the installation thereafter shall be responsible for
the correct operation of such installation.
B. Approved material and fittings.
(1) All materials and appliances used or designed to be used in
connection with the utilization of electricity for light, heat or power
shall be of standard design and according to the list of standard
materials which shall be kept on file in the office of the Electrical
Inspector. The word "standard" as used in this section means
approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
(2) All electric service entrance equipment installed in single-family
dwellings shall be required to have main fuses or circuit breakers,
regardless of the number of subdivisions.
C. Unsafe equipment. No person shall keep, offer for sale or sell within the
City any appliances, equipment or fixtures designed for or intended to
be used for the production, transmission or utilization of electric
current or power unless said appliances, equipment or fixtures are
approved by the Electrical Inspector in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the Wisconsin State Electrical Code. It shall
be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to make periodic inspections at
least twice each year to see that these provisions are being complied
with.
D. Other wiring. All other wiring shall conform to the provisions of the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code, Chs. PSC 114 and SPS 316, Wis. Adm.
Code. A violation of the State Electrical Code shall be considered to be a
violation of this Code.93
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 282-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 282-10
1:232
section shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 288
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 453.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 282-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-10
1:233

ARTICLE I
Erosion Control and Stormwater Runoff
[Adopted by Ord. No. 08-26 (§ 20.16 of the former City Code);
amended in its entirety 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-19]
§ 288-1. Authority.
§ 288-2. Findings of fact.
The Common Council finds that runoff from land-disturbing construction
activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the
waters of the state in the City of Watertown.
§ 288-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and
control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground
cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by
minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or
discharged from land-disturbing construction activity to waters of the state
in the City of Watertown.
§ 288-4. Applicability and jurisdiction.
A. This article is adopted under the authority granted by § 62.234, Wis.
Stats. This article supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously
enacted under § 62.23, Wis. Stats., that relates to construction site
erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in § 62.234, Wis. Stats.,
§ 62.23, Wis. Stats., applies to this article and to any amendments to
this article.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The Common Council hereby authorizes the City Engineer and its
designees to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
D. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent erosion
and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the
following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals including those authorized under §§ 281.16
and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
§ NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Applicability.
§ 288-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-4
1:235
§ 288-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
(1) This article applies to the following land-disturbing construction
activities except as provided under Subsection A(2):
(a) A construction site, which has 3,000 or more square feet of
land-disturbing construction activity.
(2) This article does not apply to the following:
(a) Land-disturbing construction activity that includes the
construction of a one- or two-family residential site less than
one acre and is otherwise regulated by the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
(b) A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or
regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit issued under Chapter 40,
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 122, for land-disturbing
construction activity.
(c) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(d) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(e) Construction projects that do not result in land-disturbing
activity including mill and crush operations that do not have
soil disturbance, filling or road shoulder grading.
(f) Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(3) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection A(1),
this article applies to construction sites of any size that, in the
opinion of the City, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the
safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of
water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water
pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or
that endangers property or public safety.
B. Jurisdiction. This article applies to land-disturbing construction activity
on construction sites located within the boundaries and jurisdiction of
the City of Watertown.
C. Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under § 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also
including the office of District Attorney, which is subject to the state
plan promulgated or a memorandum of the understanding entered into
under § 281.33(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 288-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-5
1:236
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee or his/her
designee that is designated by the City of Watertown to administer this
article.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning in
§ 281.16(1), Wis. Stats.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A typical calendar year of precipitation
as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for users
of models such as WlnSLAMM, P8 or equivalent methodology. The average
annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location
closest to the City.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the City Hall is routinely and customarily open for
business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land-disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
CITY ENGINEER — The individual holding the City Engineer title or his/her
designees within the City of Watertown.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which one or more land-disturbing
construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct
land-disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules but under one plan.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency
and total depth of rainfall.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of four or fewer parcels
or building sites of one or fewer acres each in area where such creation
occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year
period.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A comprehensive plan
developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil
particles or rock fragments during construction.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of the
corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a
fourth class city or village.
FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land-disturbing construction activities
at the construction site have completed and that a uniform perennial
vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of
§ 288-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-5
1:237
the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Public Works Commission or the City
Council.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
MEP or MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — The highest level of
performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance
standard identified in this article as determined in accordance with § 288-6
of this article.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the City of Watertown to the
applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to discharge
post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The landowner or any other entity performing
services to meet the requirements of this article through a contract or other
agreement.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
SEDIMENT — Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITY — Activities including tree nursery operations,
tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning,
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 288-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-5
1:238
and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction
site is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit
application.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the City which requires that all
construction activity on the site be stopped.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Includes those portions of Lake Michigan and
Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays,
rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private, within this state or its jurisdiction.
§ 288-6. Applicability of maximum extent practicable.
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject to a
performance standard of this article demonstrates to the City's satisfaction
that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of
performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance
standard is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the
performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the responsible
party shall take into account the best available technology, cost
effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as
protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and
threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties.
§ 288-7. Technical standards.
A. Design criteria, standards and specifications. All BMPs required to
comply with this article shall meet the design criteria, standards and
specifications based on any of the following:
(1) Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
Subchapter V of Chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Soil loss prediction tools [such as the Universal Soil Loss Equation
(USLE)] when using an appropriate rainfall or runoff factor (also
referred to as the R factor) or an appropriate design storm and
precipitation distribution, and when considering the geographic
location of the site and the period of disturbance.
B. Other standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed
in Subsection A may be used provided that the methods have been
approved by the City.
§ 288-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-8
1:239
§ 288-8. Performance standards.
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement an erosion
and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with § 288-10 that
incorporates the requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written plan shall be developed in accordance with § 288-10 and
implemented for each construction site. Simplified plans may be
completed for sites with less than one acre of land-disturbing
construction activity in accordance with the requirements of this
article.
C. Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The plan required
under Subsection B shall include the following:
(1) Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment
control practices shall be used at each site where more than 3,000
square feet of land-disturbing construction activity is to occur, and
shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following:
(a) The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by
vehicles.
(b) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site
stormwater inlets.
(c) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent
waters of the state.
(d) The discharge of sediment from drainageways that flow off the
site.
(e) The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
(f) The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing
for more than seven days.
(g) The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in
downstream channels.
(h) The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals,
cement, and other building compounds and materials on the
construction site during the construction period. However,
projects that require the placement of these materials in
waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or
BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subsection.
(i) The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated
wash water from vehicle and wheel washing.
(2) Sediment performance standards. In addition to the erosion and
sediment control practices under Subsection C(1), the following
erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed for all
§ 288-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-8
1:240
construction sites with more than one acre of land-disturbing
construction activity:
(a) BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per
acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the
sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final
stabilization.
(b) No person shall be required to employ more BMPs than are
needed to meet a performance standard in order to comply
with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and sediment
control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of
this subsection. Credit may be given toward meeting the
sediment performance standard of this subsection for limiting
the duration or area, or both, of land-disturbing construction
activity, or for other appropriate mechanisms.
(c) Notwithstanding Subsection C(2)(a), if BMPs cannot be
designed and implemented to meet the sediment performance
standard, the erosion and sediment control plan shall include a
written, site-specific explanation of why the sediment
performance standard cannot be met and how the sediment
load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(3) Preventive measures. The erosion and sediment control plan shall
incorporate all of the following:
(a) Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to
surface waters whenever possible.
(b) Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil.
(c) Minimization of land-disturbing construction activity on slopes
of 20% or more.
(d) Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
D. Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located
prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
E. Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be
implemented as follows:
(1) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or
installed before land-disturbing construction activities begin in
accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan developed
in § 288-10.
(2) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until
final stabilization.
§ 288-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-8
1:241
§ 288-9. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
(3) Final stabilization activity shall commence when land-disturbing
activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of
the site.
(4) Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when landdisturbing
activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume
for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
(5) BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment
control shall be removed by the responsible party.
F. Alternate requirements. The City may establish stormwater
management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this
section if the City determines that an added level of protection is
needed for sensitive resources.
A. Permit required. No responsible party may commence a land-disturbing
construction activity subject to this article without receiving prior
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a
permit from the City.
B. Permit application and fees. At least one responsible party desiring to
undertake a land-disturbing construction activity subject to this article
shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment
control plan that meets the requirements of § 288-10 and shall pay an
application fee to the City of Watertown. By submitting an application,
the applicant is authorizing the City of Watertown to enter the site to
obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment
control plan.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The City shall review any
permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment
control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure
shall be used:
(1) Within 15 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, as required by Subsection B, the City shall inform the
applicant whether the application and plan are approved or
disapproved based on the requirements of this article.
(2) If the permit application and plan are approved, the City shall issue
the permit.
(3) If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the City shall state
in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(4) The City may request additional information from the applicant. If
additional information is submitted, the City shall have 15 business
days from the date the additional information is received to inform
the applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved.
§ 288-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-9
1:242
D. Financial guarantee. As a condition of approval and issuance of the
permit, the City may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond,
irrevocable letter of credit or other financial guarantee to guarantee a
good faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any
permit conditions. The financial guarantee shall be an amount up to
120% of the estimated cost of the improvements.
E. Permit requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
(1) Notify the City within 48 hours of commencing any land-disturbing
construction activity.
(2) Notify the City of completion of any BMPs within three days after
their installation.
(3) Obtain permission in writing from the City prior to any modification
pursuant to § 288-10C of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(4) Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment
control plan.
(5) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems,
BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment
control plan.
(6) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and
drainageways resulting from land-disturbing construction activities
and document repairs in a site erosion control log.
(7) Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inch or
more which results in runoff during active construction periods,
and at least once each week. Document the findings of the
inspections in a site erosion control log with the date of inspection,
the name of the person conducting the inspection, and a
description of the present phase of the construction at the site.
Repair or replace erosion and sediment control best management
practices as necessary within 24 hours of an inspection or by the
date agreed to between the permittee and the City Engineer or the
appropriate designee. Inspections are only required for
construction sites with more than one acre of land-disturbing
construction activity.
(8) Allow the City to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting
compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for
performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance
with the control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment
control plan at the construction site.
(9) Keep a copy of the inspection reports on the site at all times.
F. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions established by the City in addition to the requirements set
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:243
§ 288-10. Erosion and sediment control plan, statement, and
amendments.
forth in Subsection E, where needed to assure compliance with the
performance standards in § 288-8.
G. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a
period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other
construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of
issuance. The City may extend the period one or more times for up to an
additional 180 days. The City may require additional BMPs as a
condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the
requirements of this article.
H. Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the
construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the
requirements of this article until the site has undergone final
stabilization.
A. Erosion and sediment control plan.
(1) An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and
submitted to the City.
(2) The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet
the performance standards in § 288-8 and other requirements of
this article. Simplified plans may be completed for sites with less
than one acre of land-disturbing construction activity.
(3) The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution
caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and
up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment
control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items:
(a) The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the
site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant,
together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at
such firm. The application shall also include start and end
dates for construction.
(b) Description of the site and the nature of the construction
activity, including representation of the limits of land
disturbance on a United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute
series topographic map.
(c) A sequence of construction of the development site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary
§ 288-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-10
1:244
erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of
permanent vegetation.
(d) Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the
site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
(e) Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff
coefficient of the site before and after construction activities
are completed.
(f) Calculations to show the expected percent reduction in the
average annual sediment load carried in runoff as compared to
no sediment or erosion controls.
(g) Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils.
(h) Depth to groundwater, as indicated by on-site soil borings or
Natural Resources Conservation Service soil information
where available.
(i) Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United
States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic maps.
(4) The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The
site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not
greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to
exceed five feet.
(a) Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered
drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified
one-hundred-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways shall
also be shown.
(b) Boundaries of the construction site.
(c) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after
major grading activities.
(d) Areas of soil disturbance.
(e) Location of major structural and nonstructural controls
identified in the plan.
(f) Location of areas where stabilization practices will be
employed.
(g) Areas which will be vegetated following construction.
(h) Area and location of wetland acreage on the site and locations
where stormwater is discharged to a surface water or wetland
within one-quarter mile downstream of the construction site.
§ 288-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-10
1:245
(i) Locations of all surface waters and wetlands within one mile of
the construction site.
(j) Areas used for infiltration of post-construction stormwater
runoff.
(k) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire
construction site map.
(5) Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description
of appropriate erosion and sediment control best management
practices that will be installed and maintained at the site to prevent
pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The plan shall clearly
describe the appropriate erosion and sediment control measures
for each major land-disturbing construction activity and the timing
during the construction process that the measures will be
implemented. The description of erosion and sediment controls
shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum
requirements:
(a) Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices,
including an implementation schedule. Site plans shall ensure
that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that
disturbed portions of the site are stabilized.
(b) Description of structural practices to divert flow away from
exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise
specifically approved in writing by the City of Watertown,
structural measures shall be installed on upland soils.
(c) Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise
controlled by outfall controls.
(d) Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
(e) Staging construction to limit exposed soil areas subject to
erosion.
(f) Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
(g) Minimization of tracking via installation of tracking pads at all
vehicle and equipment entry and exit locations of the
construction site.
(h) Clean up of off-site sediment deposits.
(i) Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites.
(j) Stabilization of drainageways.
(k) Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
§ 288-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-10
1:246
§ 288-11. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by
the Common Council and may from time to time be modified by resolution.
A schedule of the fees established by the Common Council shall be available
for review in City Hall. The fee shall cover all City and consultant costs to
review the permit application and perform the required site inspections.
§ 288-11.1. Inspection.
If land-disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a
permit required by this article, the City may enter the land pursuant to the
provisions of § 66.0119(1), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats. The City will inspect any
construction site with more than one acre of land-disturbing construction
activity that holds a permit under this chapter at least once a month during
the period starting March 1 and ending October 31 and at least two times
during the period starting November 1 and ending February 28 to ensure
(l) Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as
possible after final grading.
(m) Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
(6) The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity
dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the
length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a nonerosive
flow from the structure to a watercourse so that the natural
physical and biological characteristics and functions are
maintained and protected.
B. Erosion and sediment control plan statement. For each construction
site identified under § 288-4A with more than one acre of landdisturbing
construction activity, an erosion and sediment control plan
statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the
City. The control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, including
a site map. Further, it shall also include the best management practices
that will be used to meet the requirements of the article, including the
site development schedule.
C. Amendments. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following
occur:
(1) There is a change in design, construction, operation or
maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not
otherwise been addressed in the plan.
(2) The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of
pollutants carried by construction site runoff.
(3) The City notifies the applicant of changes needed in the plan.
§ 288-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-11.1
1:247
compliance with the approved sediment and erosion control plan. The costs
of these inspections shall be billed to the responsible party.
§ 288-11.2. Enforcement.
§ 288-11.3. Appeals.
A. The City may post a stop-work order if any of the following occurs:
(1) Any land-disturbing construction activity regulated under this
article is being undertaken without a permit.
(2) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in
a good faith manner.
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
B. If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stopwork
order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion
and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the City may revoke the
permit.
C. If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not
cease the activity after being notified by the City, or if a responsible
party violates a stop-work order posted under Subsection A, the City
may request the City Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any
court with jurisdiction.
D. The City may retract the stop-work order issued under Subsection A or
the permit revocation under Subsection B.
E. After posting a stop-work order under Subsection A, the City may issue
a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work
necessary to comply with this article. The City may go on the land and
commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the
work performed under this subsection by the City, plus interest at the
rate authorized by City shall be billed to the responsible party. In the
event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the Clerk shall
enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special
assessment against the property pursuant to Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis.
Stats.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and the costs
of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
G. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
§ 288-11.1 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-11.3
1:248
§ 288-11.4. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision
or portion of this article unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the
article shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
A. Public Works Commission. The Public Works Commission shall act as
the review and appeal agency and:
(1) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, decision or determination in administering this article
except for cease and desist orders obtained under § 288-11.2C.
(2) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this
article which are not contrary to the public interest and where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions
of the article will result in unnecessary hardship; and
(3) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by
statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Public Works Commission may be
taken by any aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or
bureau of the City of Watertown affected by any decision of the City.
§ 288-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-11.4
1:249

ARTICLE II
Control of Post-Construction Stormwater Management
[Adopted by Ord. No. 08-27 (§ 20.17 of the former City Code);
amended in its entirety 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20]
§ 288-12. Authority.
§ 288-13. Findings of fact.
The Common Council finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a
significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general
welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of
natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
A. This article is adopted by the Common Council under the authority
granted by § 62.234, Wis. Stats. This article supersedes all provisions of
an ordinance previously enacted under § 62.23, Wis. Stats., that relate
to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified
in § 62.234, Wis. Stats., § 62.23, Wis. Stats., applies to this article and to
any amendments to this article.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The Common Council hereby authorizes the City and its designees to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
D. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals including those authorized under §§ 281.16
and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
§ NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge,
diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature.
B. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of
sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria,
pathogens and other urban pollutants.
C. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads.
D. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
§ 288-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-13
1:251
§ 288-14. Purpose and intent.
§ 288-15. Applicability and jurisdiction.
E. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage
facilities.
F. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
G. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to establish long-term,
post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic
environment. Specific purposes are to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and
control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect
spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth.
(3) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of
particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger
downstream property.
(4) Minimize the amount of pollutants discharged from the separate
storm sewer to protect waters of the state.
B. Intent. It is the intent of the Common Council that this article regulates
post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This
article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Common Council
recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the
stormwater performance standards set forth in this article is through
the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level
stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as
watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may
prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of
which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to
discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance
with the performance standards developed under § 281.16, Wis. Stats.,
for regional stormwater management measures and have been
approved by the Common Council, it is the intent of this article that the
approved plan be used to identify post-construction management
measures acceptable for the community.
§ 288-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-15
1:252
A. Applicability.
(1) Where not otherwise limited by law, this article applies to a postconstruction
site which has 3,000 or more square feet of landdisturbing
construction activity, unless the site is otherwise exempt
under Subsection A(2).
(2) A site that meets any of the criteria in this Subsection is exempt
from the requirements of this article:
(a) Land-disturbing construction activity that includes the
construction of a one- or two-family residential site less than
one acre and is otherwise regulated by the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
(b) A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based on complete development of the postconstruction
site, provided the cumulative area of all parking
lots and rooftops is less than one acre.
(c) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(d) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(e) Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(f) Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and
fiberoptic lines. This exemption does not apply to the
construction of any aboveground structures associated with
utility construction.
(g) The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed
by any of the following:
[1] Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
administrative rules, permits or approvals including those
authorized under § 288.16, Wis. Stats., for nonpoint
sources, and § 283.33, Wis. Stats., for stormwater
discharge.
[2] Targeted nonagricultural performance standards
promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection A(1),
this article applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the
opinion of the City, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the
safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of
water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water
§ 288-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-15
1:253
§ 288-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE SOD, OR SELF-SUSTAINING VEGETATIVE COVER —
Maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that the
physical integrity of the stream bank or lakeshore is preserved. Selfsustaining
vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff layers
of fallen and woody debris.
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — The City Engineer, the City Public Works
Commission, the City Council or other entity empowered under § 62.234,
Wis. Stats., that is designated by the City of Watertown to administer this
article.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning given in
§ 281.16, Wis. Stats.
ATLAS 14 — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Volume 8
(Midwestern States), published in 2013.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A typical calendar year of precipitation
as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for users
of models such as WlnSLAMM, P8 or equivalent methodology. The average
annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location
closest to the City.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the City Hall is routinely and customarily open for
business.
pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or
that endangers property or public safety.
B. Jurisdiction. This article applies to land-disturbing activities within the
boundaries of the City of Watertown, and that portion of the Town of
Emmet, Dodge County, Wisconsin, that is subject to the City's Plat
Review Jurisdiction as set forth in Resolution Exhibit No. 6152 and
recorded on September 25, 1997, in Volume 937 on Page 86 as
Document No. 851436 in the Dodge County Office of the Register of
Deeds and all subsequent amendments.
C. Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under § 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also
including the office of the District Attorney, which is subject to the state
plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into
under § 281.33(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 288-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-16
1:254
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land-disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit or
in violation of a permit issued by the City of Watertown.
CITY ENGINEER — The individual holding the City Engineer title or his/her
designees within the City of Watertown.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface connected to
waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or
a minimally pervious flow path.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total depth of rainfall.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land
uses and associated roads.
DIRECT CONDUITS TO GROUNDWATER — Wells, sinkholes, swallets,
fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, nonmetallic mines, tile inlets
discharging to groundwater, quarries, or depressional groundwater
recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of four or fewer parcels
or building sites of one or fewer acres each in area where such creation
occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year
period.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system that
is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access,
berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.11, Wis.
Adm. Code.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of the
corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a
fourth class city or village.
FILTERING LAYER — Soil that has at least a three-foot-deep layer with at
least 20% fines; or at least a five-foot-deep layer with at least 10% fines; or
an engineered soil with an equivalent level of protection as determined by
the regulatory authority for the site.
FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land-disturbing construction activities at
the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial,
vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of
the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
§ 288-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-16
1:255
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to
the City by the responsible party to assure that requirements of the article
are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Public Works Commission or the City
Council.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a large
portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops,
sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that
typically are impervious.
IN-FILL AREA — An undeveloped area of land located within an existing
urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or natural or manmade
features where development cannot occur.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the
soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain
garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not
include natural infiltration in previous surfaces such as lawns, redirecting
of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices,
such as swales or roadside channels designed for conveyance and pollutant
removal only.
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MEP or MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — The highest level of
performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance
standard identified in this article. Maximum extent practicable applies when
a person who is subject to a performance standard of this article
demonstrates to the City's satisfaction that a performance standard is not
achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making
the assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level
of performance different from the performance standard is the maximum
extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account the best
available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other
competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare,
§ 288-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-16
1:256
protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of
historic properties.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the conversion of
previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
NRCS MSE3 DISTRIBUTION — A specific precipitation distribution
developed by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, using precipitation data from Atlas 14.
OFF SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ON SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK — Has the meaning given in § NR
115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.10, Wis.
Adm. Code.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil which passes
through a No. 200 sieve.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the City to the applicant
to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to discharge postconstruction
runoff to waters of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the City by the
permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the
authority in administering the permit.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion of
the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other
similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the completion
of land-disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land-disturbing construction
activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT — Has the meaning given in § NR 140.05(17),
Wis. Adm. Code.
PROTECTIVE AREA — An area of land that commences at the top of the
channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of those widths, as measured horizontally
§ 288-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-16
1:257
from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface.
REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The landowner or any other entity performing
services to meet the requirements of this article through a contract or other
agreement.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITY — Activities including tree nursery operations,
tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning,
and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction
site is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing construction activity occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the City Engineer which requires
that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan designed
to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater after the site has
undergone final stabilization following completion of the construction
activity.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic
units on a regional or municipal scale.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high water mark of a surface water of the state, where
the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50
feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet,
landward from the ordinary high water mark, the top of the channel is the
ordinary high water mark.
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 288-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-16
1:258
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or TMDL — The amount of pollutants
specified as a function of one or more water quality parameters, that can
be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure
attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
TP-40 — Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United
States, published in 1961.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55,
June 1986.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A highway, a railroad, a public mass transit
facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public work for
transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under § 85.095(1)(b),
Wis. Stats. "Transportation facility" does not include building sites for the
construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of
employment that are regulated by the Department pursuant to § 281.33,
Wis. Stats.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical
Paper 149, published 1973.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Includes those portions of Lake Michigan and
Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays,
rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private, within this state or its jurisdiction.
§ 288-17. Technical standards.
The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak
flow shaving and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to
meet the water quality standards of this article:
§ 288-18. Performance standards.
A. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Subchapter V of
Chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards
may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the City.
C. In this article, the following year and location has been selected as the
average annual rainfall for water quality modeling purposes: Madison,
1981 (Mar. 12-Dec. 2).
§ 288-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-18
1:259
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement a postconstruction
stormwater management plan that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with
§ 288-20 shall be developed and implemented for each postconstruction
site. Simplified plans may be completed for sites with less
than one acre of land-disturbing construction activity in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Maintenance of effort. For redevelopment sites where the
redevelopment will be replacing older development that was subject to
post-construction performance standards of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm.
Code, in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall
meet the total suspended solids reduction, peak flow control,
infiltration, and protective areas standards applicable to the older
development or meet the redevelopment standards of this article,
whichever is more stringent.
D. Requirements. The plan required under Subsection B shall include the
following:
(1) Pollutant control. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained
to control total suspended solids and phosphorus carried in runoff
from the post-construction site as follows:
(a) BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1 or to the
maximum extent practicable as provided in Subsection D(1)(b).
The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as
compared to no runoff management controls.
Table 1
Pollutant Reduction Standards
Development
Type TSS Reduction Phosphorus
New development 80% 30%
In-fill development 80% 30%
Redevelopment 60% of load from
parking areas and
roads
30%
(b) Maximum extent practicable. If the design cannot meet a total
suspended solids or phosphorus reduction performance
standard of Table 1, the stormwater management plan shall
include a written, site-specific explanation of why the total
suspended solids or phosphorus reduction performance
standard cannot be met and why the total pollutant loads will
be reduced only to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 288-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-18
1:260
(c) Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the
BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in determining
the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the
efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of
the BMP accordingly.
(2) Peak discharge.
(a) Unless otherwise provided for in this section, all land
development activities subject to this section shall establish
on-site management practices to control peak flow rates of
stormwater discharged from the site. On-site management
practices shall be used to meet the following minimum
performance standards:
[1] The peak flow rates of stormwater runoff from the
development shall not exceed those calculated for the
series of design storms specified in Subsection D(2)(a)[2]
occurring under development conditions specified in
Subsection D(2)(a)[4]. Discharge velocities must be
nonerosive to discharge locations, outfall channels, and
receiving streams. Safe overland conveyance must be
provided for discharges from the development.
[2] The stormwater management facilities shall contain
sufficient storage to contain the runoff from the onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event under
developed conditions, while utilizing a peak discharge rate
from the developed site which does not exceed the peak
runoff rate from the site for a two-year, twenty-four-hour
rainfall event under predevelopment conditions.
[3] By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce
the one-year, twenty-four-hour post-construction peak
runoff discharge rates to the one-year, twenty-four-hour
predevelopment peak runoff discharge rate, or to the
maximum extent practicable.
[4] Predevelopment conditions shall assume "good hydrologic
conditions" for appropriate land covers as identified in
TR-55 or an equivalent methodology. The meaning of
"hydrologic soil group" and "runoff curve number" are as
determined in TR-55. However, when predevelopment land
cover is woodland, grassland, or cropland, rather than
using TR-55 values for these land use types, the runoff
curve numbers in Table 2 shall be used. Peak discharges
shall be calculated using TR-55 runoff curve number
methodology, Atlas 14 precipitation depths, and the
appropriate NRCS Wisconsin MSE3 precipitation
distribution. On a case-by-case basis, the City Engineer
§ 288-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-18
1:261
may allow the use of TP-40 precipitation depths and the
Type II distribution.
Table 2
Maximum Predevelopment Runoff Curve Numbers
Hydrologic
Soil
Group A B C D
Woodland
curve
number
30 55 70 77
Grassland
curve
number
39 61 71 78
Cropland
curve
number
55 69 78 83
(b) This subsection of the section does not apply to any of the
following:
[1] A redevelopment post-construction site.
[2] An in-fill development area less than one acre.
(3) Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to
infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance
with the following, except as provided in Subsection D(3)(f)
through (i).
(a) Low imperviousness. For development up to 40% connected
imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low-density
residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so
that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least
90% of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 1%
of the post-construction site is required as an effective
infiltration area.
(b) Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than
40% and up to 80% connected imperviousness, such as
medium- and high-density residential, multifamily
development, industrial and institutional development, and
office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 75% of the
predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2%
§ 288-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-18
1:262
of the post-construction site is required as an effective
infiltration area.
(c) High imperviousness. For development with more than 80%
connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls,
shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than 2% of the postconstruction
site is required as an effective infiltration area.
(d) Predevelopment condition shall be the same as in Table 2 of the
peak discharge section of this article.95
(e) Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for
parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in
commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an
infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to
protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance
with Subsection D(3)(k). Pretreatment options may include,
but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
(f) Exclusions. Runoff from the following areas may not be
infiltrated and do not qualify as contributing to meeting the
requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet the
conditions of Subsection D(3)(k):
[1] Areas associated with Tier 1 industrial facilities identified
in § NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage,
loading, rooftop and parking.
[2] Storage and loading areas of Tier 2 industrial facilities
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
[3] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Runoff from
rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be
infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory
authorities.
(g) Location of practices. Infiltration practices may not be located
in the following areas:
[1] Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater.
95.Editor's Note: See § 288-18D(2)(a)[4]
§ 288-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-18
1:263
[2] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in § NR 811.12(5)(d)6, Wis. Adm. Code, or within
the separation distances listed in § NR 812.08, Wis. Adm.
Code, for any private well or noncommunity well for runoff
infiltrated from commercial (including multifamily
residential), industrial and institutional land uses or
regional devices for one- and two-family residential
development.
[3] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR
720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
(h) Separation distances.
[1] Infiltration practices shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil and the separation distance
between the bottom of the infiltration system and the
elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of
bedrock are in accordance with Table 3:
Table 3
Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics
Source Area
Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
commercial,
institutional
parking lots and
roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Residential
arterial roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Roofs draining to
subsurface
infiltration
practices
1 foot or more Native or
engineered soil
with particles finer
than coarse sand
Roofs draining to
surface
infiltration
practices
Not applicable Not applicable
All other
impervious source
areas
3 feet or more Filtering layer
[2] Notwithstanding Subsection D(3)(h), applicable
requirements for injection wells classified under Ch. NR
815, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be followed.
§ 288-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-18
1:264
(i) Exemptions. Infiltration practices located in runoff from the
following areas may be credited towards meeting the
requirements when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate
under these conditions is optional:
[1] Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at
the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than
0.6 inch/hour using a scientifically credible field test
method.
[2] Areas where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet
below the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using
the U.S. Department of Agriculture method of soils
analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam,
silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
[3] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for commercial development.
[4] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for industrial development not subject to the prohibitions/
exclusions under Subsection D(3)(f).
[5] Redevelopment post-construction sites except as provided
under § 288-18C.
[6] In-fill development areas less than one acre.
[7] Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses, and arterial residential roads.
(j) Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet
flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall be
given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by
this section.
(k) Groundwater standards.
[1] Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
section shall, to the extent technically and economically
feasible, minimize the level of pollutants in filtration to
groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the
preventive action limit at a point of standards application
in accordance with Ch. NR 140. However, if site-specific
information indicates that compliance with a preventive
action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not
be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to
the maximum extent practicable.
[2] Notwithstanding Subsection D(3)(k)[1], the discharge
from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard
at the point of standards application.
§ 288-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-18
1:265
(l) Maximum extent practicable. Where the conditions of
Subsection D(3)(f) through (i) limit or restrict the use of
infiltration practices, the infiltration performance standard of
§ 288-18D(3) shall be met to the maximum extent practicable.
(4) Protective areas.
(a) "Protective area" means an area of land that commences at the
top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the
delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the
following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface. However, in this subsection, protective
area does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream
enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter
the enclosure at this location.
[1] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters: 75 feet.
[2] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever
is more current: 50 feet.
[3] For lakes: 50 feet.
[4] For wetlands not subject to Subsection D(4)(a)[5] or [6]: 50
feet.
[5] For highly susceptible wetlands: 75 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types:
calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous
bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood
swamps and ephemeral ponds.
[6] For less susceptible wetlands: 10% of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less
susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass,
cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged
material or fill material disposal sites that take on the
attributes of a wetland.
[7] In Subsection D(4)(a)[4] through [6], determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be
made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in § NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
[8] Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in
accordance with § NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm. Code. This
§ 288-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-18
1:266
subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been
completely filled in accordance with all applicable state
and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands
that have been partially filled in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured
from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been
placed. Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the
protective area standard need not be met in that location.
[9] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres: 10 feet.
[10] Notwithstanding Subsection D(4)(a)[1] to [9], the greatest
protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams,
lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
(b) This subsection applies to post-construction sites located
within a protective area, except those areas exempted
pursuant to Subsection D(4)(d).
(c) The following requirements shall be met:
[1] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If
there is no practical alternative to locating an impervious
surface in the protective area, the stormwater
management plan shall contain a written site-specific
explanation.
[2] Where land-disturbing construction activity occurs within
a protective area, and where no impervious surface is
present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover
of 70% or greater shall be established and maintained. The
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be
sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish
habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland
flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative
materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the
bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep
slopes or where high-velocity flows occur.
[3] Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or
wet detention basins that are designed to control
pollutants from nonpoint sources may be located in the
protective area.
(d) This subsection does not apply to:
[1] Except as provided under § 288-18C, redevelopment postconstruction
sites.
[2] In-fill development areas less than one acre.
§ 288-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-18
1:267
[3] Structures that cross or access surface waters such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts.
[4] Structures constructed in accordance with § 59.692(1v),
Wis. Stats.
[5] Areas of post-construction sites from which runoff does not
enter the surface water, including wetlands, without first
being treated by a BMP to meet the local ordinance
requirements for total suspended solids and peak flow
reduction, except to the extent that vegetative ground
cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
(5) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have
BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum
within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the state
contains no visible petroleum sheen.
(6) Site Drainage. Measures shall be implemented to ensure proper
site drainage, prevent property damage and protect public health
and safety, including the following minimum requirements:
(a) Drainage easement. Perpetual drainage easements or other
deed restrictions shall be recorded on the property to preserve
major stormwater flow paths and permanent stormwater BMP
locations. Covenants in these areas shall not allow buildings or
other structures and shall prevent any grading, filling or other
activities that interrupt or obstruct flows in any way. Covenants
shall also specify maintenance responsibilities and authorities
in accordance with § 288-21.
(b) Site grading. Site grading shall ensure positive flows away
from all buildings, roads, driveways and septic systems, be
coordinated with the general stormwater drainage patterns for
the area, and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent
properties.
(c) Street drainage. All street drainage shall be designed to
prevent concentrated flows from crossing the traffic lanes to
the maximum extent practicable. Design flow depths at the
road center line for on-street drainage shall not exceed six
inches during the peak flows generated by the one-hundredyear,
twenty-four-hour design storm, using planned land use
conditions for the entire contributing watershed area.
(d) Bridges and cross-culverts. All new or modified bridges and
cross-culverts shall comply with applicable design standards
and regulations, facilitate fish passage and prevent increased
flooding or channel erosion upstream or downstream from the
structure. All bridges and cross-culverts on collector and
arterial roadways shall be designed to convey the one-
§ 288-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-18
1:268
hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design storm. All bridges and
cross-culverts on local roadways shall be designed to convey
ten-year, twenty-four-hour design storm, while providing an
overland flow path that does not impact any structures for the
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design storm. A floodplain
analysis shall be required for all developments impacting a
navigable waterway. This analysis must demonstrate no
adverse off-site impacts, in accordance with state and federal
regulations and may require larger structures than those
specified above. Design flow depths at the road center line
for all crossings shall not exceed six inches during peak flows
generated by the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design
storm, using planned land use conditions for the entire
contributing watershed area. All predevelopment runoff
storage areas within the flow path upstream of bridges and
cross-culverts shall be preserved and designated as drainage
easements, unless compensatory storage is provided and
accounted for in modeling. As-built documentation shall be
submitted for all new or modified structures that are located
within a mapped floodplain or that the City determines to be
necessary to maintain floodplain modeling for the applicable
watershed.
(e) Subsurface drainage. To avoid property and other damages
from groundwater, all buildings planned for human occupation
on a regular basis shall meet all of the following:
[1] Basement floor surfaces shall be built a minimum of one
foot above the highest groundwater table elevation, as
documented in the submitted soil evaluations in
accordance with City standards. On sloped sites,
basements may be allowed partially below the highest
groundwater table only on the upslope side if they meet
City drainage system standards for design, discharge,
engineering oversight, and long-term maintenance. For
these sites, the one-foot groundwater separation will be
enforced at the furthest downslope point of the basement.
[2] Avoid hydric soils as much as possible.
[3] The City shall be notified of any drain tiles that are
uncovered during construction, which the City may
require to be restored or connected to other drainage
systems.
[4] No discharge of groundwater from tile lines, sump pumps
or other means shall be allowed onto another person's land
or any public space without the written approval of the
City and the property owner.
§ 288-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-18
1:269
(f) Open channels. All open channel drainage systems shall at a
minimum be designed to carry the peak flows from a onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour design storm using planned
land use for the entire contributing watershed area. Side
slopes shall be no steeper than 4h:1v unless otherwise
approved by the City for unique site conditions. Water surface
elevations for the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design
storm shall be calculated for all existing and proposed open
channels.
(g) Storm sewers. All storm sewers shall be designed to convey the
ten-year, twenty-four-hour design storm while providing an
overland flow path that does not impact any structures for the
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design storm, unless
otherwise modified by the City.
(h) Changes to stormwater discharges. For sites where the City
determines the post-development stormwater discharge flow
paths will be significantly different than predevelopment
conditions, or where proposed stormwater discharges may
otherwise have a significant negative impact on downstream
property owner(s), the City may require the applicant to
submit written authorization, record a drainage easement, or
complete other legal arrangements with the affected property
owner(s) prior to permit issuance.
(i) Structure protection and safety. Flows generated by the onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour design storm under the
planned land use conditions may exceed the design capacity of
conveyance systems, but shall not come in contact with any
buildings. For buildings designed for human occupation on a
regular basis, the following additional requirements shall
apply:
[1] The lowest elevation of the structure that is exposed to the
ground surface shall be a minimum of two feet above the
maximum water surface elevation produced by the onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour design storm, including
flows through any stormwater BMP that may temporarily
or permanently store water at a depth of greater than one
foot; and
[2] The structure shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
stormwater BMP that may temporarily or permanently
store water at a depth of greater than one foot, including
any internally drained area with a significant contributing
watershed and/or limited runoff storage capacity, as
determined by the City. Setback distance shall be
measured from the closest edge of water at the elevation
produced by the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm. The City may exempt existing structures and
§ 288-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-18
1:270
structures with no basement from this requirement if the
City determines other site risks are minimal based on soil
and site conditions.
(7) Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
(a) Applicability. Except as provided in Subsection D(7)(b),
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance
and pollutant removal meet all of the water quality
requirements of this section, if the swales are designed to the
maximum extent practicable to do all of the following:
[1] Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or
check dams.
[2] Swales shall comply with Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Technical Standard 1005, "Vegetated
Infiltration Swales." Transportation facility swale
treatment does not have to comply with other sections of
Technical Standard 1005.
(b) Exemptions. The City may, consistent with water quality
standards, require that other provisions be met on a
transportation facility with an average daily travel of vehicles
greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface water of the
state that the runoff directly enters is any of the following:
[1] An outstanding resource water.
[2] An exceptional resource water.
[3] Waters listed in § 303(d) of the federal Clean Water Act
that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to
nonpoint source impacts.
[4] Waters where targeted performance standards are
developed under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet
water quality standards.
(c) The transportation facility authority shall contact the City to
determine if additional BMPs beyond a water quality swale are
needed under this subsection.
E. General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management
measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing
runoff:
(1) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales,
natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural
groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
§ 288-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-18
1:271
§ 288-19. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
(2) Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be
provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
(3) Unless deemed not possible by City staff, stormwater facilities shall
be located on outlots with direct access to adjacent public streets.
F. Location and regional treatment option.
(1) BMPs may be located on site or off site as part of a regional
stormwater device, practice or system, but shall be in accordance
with § NR 151.003, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) The City may approve off-site management measures provided that
all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The City determines that the post-construction runoff is
covered by a stormwater management system plan that is
approved by the City of Watertown and that contains
management requirements consistent with the purpose and
intent of this article.
(b) The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
[1] The facility is in place.
[2] The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a
level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that
which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this article.
[3] The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its
long-term operation and maintenance.
(3) Where a regional treatment option exists such that the City
exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site
stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall be
required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with
the City. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the
City shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional
treatment option.
G. Alternate requirements. The City may establish stormwater
management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this
section if the City determines that an added level of protection is
needed to protect sensitive resources, to control stormwater quantity
or control flooding, comply with federally approved total maximum
daily load requirements, or control pollutants associated with existing
development or redevelopment.
§ 288-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-19
1:272
A. Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land-disturbing
construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff
permit from the City prior to commencing the proposed activity.
B. Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this article,
any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the City a permit
application made on a form provided by the City for that purpose.
(1) Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application
must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a
maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable permit
administration fee.
(2) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of §§ 288-18 and 288-20, the maintenance agreement
shall be prepared to meet the requirements of § 288-21, the
financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of § 288-22, and
fees shall be those established by the City of Watertown as set forth
in § 288-23.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The City shall review any
permit application that is submitted with a stormwater management
plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following
approval procedure shall be used:
(1) Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, including all items as required by Subsection B, the
City shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and
maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the
requirements of this article.
(2) If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in
lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the City shall
issue the permit.
(3) If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance
agreement is disapproved, the City shall detail in writing the
reasons for disapproval.
(4) The City may request additional information from the applicant. If
additional information is submitted, the City shall have 20 business
days from the date the additional information is received to inform
the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either
approved or disapproved.
D. Permit requirements. All permits issued under this article shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under
this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The City
may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition,
following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the
§ 288-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-19
1:273
City to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance
with § 288-25.
(1) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party
of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state,
and local laws and regulations.
(2) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit.
(3) The responsible party shall notify the City at least three business
days before commencing any work in conjunction with the
stormwater management plan, and within three business days
upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If
required as a special condition under Subsection E, the responsible
party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set
forth by the City so that practice installations can be inspected
during construction.
(4) Practice installations required as part of this article shall be
certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by
the City or its designee to determine if they are in accordance with
the approved stormwater management plan and ordinance. The
City or its designee shall notify the responsible party in writing of
any changes required in such practices to bring them into
compliance with the conditions of this permit.
(5) The responsible party shall notify the City of any significant
modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater
management plan. The City may require that the proposed
modifications be submitted for approval prior to incorporation into
the stormwater management plan and execution by the responsible
party.
(6) The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management
practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan
until the practices either become the responsibility of the City of
Watertown, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as
specified in the approved maintenance agreement.
(7) The responsible party authorizes the City to perform any work or
operations necessary to bring stormwater management measures
into conformance with the approved stormwater management plan,
and consents to a special assessment or charge against the
property as authorized under Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to
charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under
§ 288-22.
(8) If so directed by the City, the responsible party shall repair at the
responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal
§ 288-19 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-19
1:274
§ 288-20. Stormwater management plan.
facilities and drainageways caused by runoff, where such damage
is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan.
(9) The responsible party shall permit property access to the City or its
designee for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance
with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit.
(10) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the City may require the responsible party to make
appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners
concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public
safety.
(11) The responsible party shall provide a five-year guarantee on all
facilities installed as part of the stormwater plan.
(12) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties detailed in § 288-24, if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms of this permit.
E. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include
conditions established by the City in addition to the requirements
needed to meet the performance standards in § 288-18 or a financial
guarantee as provided for in § 288-22.
F. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance through the date the City notifies the responsible
party that all stormwater management practices have passed the final
inspection required under Subsection D(4).
A. Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under
§ 288-18B shall contain any such information the City may need to
evaluate the environmental characteristics of the area affected by land
development activity, the potential impacts of the proposed
development upon the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges,
the potential impacts upon water resources and drainage utilities, and
the effectiveness and acceptability of proposed stormwater
management measures in meeting the performance standards set forth
in this section. Unless specified otherwise by this section, stormwater
management plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their
designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for
maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the
transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
§ 288-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-20
1:275
(2) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to
block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
(3) Predevelopment site conditions, including:
(a) One or more site maps at a scale of not greater than one inch
equals 50 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site
location and legal property description; predominant soil types
and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition;
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two
feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through,
and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected
by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used
in hydrology determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site; limits of the one-hundred-year floodplain; location
of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project
area and delineated pursuant to § NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. Computations
of the peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes from
each discharge point in the development. At a minimum,
computations must be made for the following storms: one-,
two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year. All major assumptions used
in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The
geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be
clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s).
(4) Post-development site conditions, including:
(a) Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes in
peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and
wetlands.
(b) Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management
measures in the development area imposed by wellhead
protection plans and ordinances.
(c) One or more site maps at a scale of not greater than one inch
equals 50 feet showing the following: post-construction
pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition;
impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and
pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site
at a scale not to exceed two feet; post-construction drainage
network including enough of the contiguous properties to show
runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and
§ 288-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-20
1:276
dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance
easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path
and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location
and type of all stormwater management conveyance and
treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary
drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that
will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices
to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm
drain, or natural drainageway; watershed boundaries used in
hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes
to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(d) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. The
computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s). Computations of the peak flow discharge rates and
discharge volumes from each discharge point in the
development including analysis of the safe capacity of
downstream conveyance systems. At a minimum, computations
must be made for the following storms: one-, two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year. All major assumptions used in developing
input parameters shall be clearly stated.
(e) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for
the placement and design of stormwater management
measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and
profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and
treatment practices.
(5) A description and installation schedule for the stormwater
management practices needed to meet the performance standards
in § 288-18.
(6) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
(7) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
each stormwater management practice.
(8) Results of impact assessments on wetland functional values, as
applicable.
(9) Design computations and all applicable assumptions for
stormwater conveyance (open channel, closed pipe) and
stormwater treatment practices (sedimentation type, filtrations,
infiltration type) as needed to show that practices are appropriately
sized and capable of meeting the discharge performance standards
of this section.
§ 288-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-20
1:277
§ 288-21. Maintenance agreement.
(10) Other information requested in writing by the City to determine
compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures
with the provisions of this article.
(11) All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings
shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be prepared
in accordance with accepted engineering practice and
requirements of this article.
B. Simplified plans. The City may allow simplified stormwater
management plans for sites with less than one acre of land-disturbing
construction activity.
C. Alternate requirements. The City may prescribe alternative submittal
requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site
stormwater management performance standards under § 288-18D.
A. Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement
required under § 288-19B for stormwater management practices shall
be an agreement between the City and the responsible party to provide
for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of
this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County
Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding
upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater
management practices.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by § 288-20A(6):
(1) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
(2) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater
management plan required under § 288-19B.
(3) Identification of the party(s) responsible for long-term maintenance
of the stormwater management practices identified in the
stormwater management plan required under § 288-19B.
(4) Requirement that the responsible party(s) shall maintain
stormwater management practices in accordance with the
schedule included in Subsection B(2) and shall submit an annual
inspection and maintenance summary report to the City.
(5) Authorization for the City to access the property to conduct
inspections of stormwater management practices as necessary to
ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in
accordance with the agreement.
§ 288-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-21
1:278
§ 288-22. Financial guarantee.
(6) A requirement of the City to maintain public records of the results
of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party responsible
for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically
indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater
management practice into proper working condition.
(7) Agreement that the party designated under Subsection B(3), as
responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater
management practices, shall be notified by the City of maintenance
problems which require correction. The specified corrective
actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set
by the City.
(8) Authorization of the City to perform the corrected actions identified
in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under
Subsection B(3) does not make the required corrections in the
specified time period. The City shall enter the amount due on the
tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the
property pursuant to Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
A. Establishment of the guarantee. The City may require the submittal of a
financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to
the City. The financial guarantee shall be up to an amount determined
by the City to be 120% of the estimated cost of construction and the
estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management
practices during the period which the designated party in the
maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial
guarantee shall give the City the authorization to use the funds to
complete the stormwater management practices if the responsible
party defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater
management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the
City that the requirements of this article have not been met.
B. Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
(1) The City shall release the portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section, less any costs incurred by the City of
Watertown to complete installation of practices, upon submission of
as-built plans by a licensed professional engineer. The City may
make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial
guarantee based on the completion of various development stages.
(2) The City shall release the portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section to assure maintenance of
stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the City, at such
time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed onto
another entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
§ 288-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-23
1:279
§ 288-23. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by
the Common Council and may from time to time be modified by resolution.
A schedule of the fees established by the Common Council shall be available
for review in City Hall. The fee shall cover all City and consultant costs to
review the permit application.
§ 288-24. Enforcement.
A. Any land-disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff
initiated after the effective date of this article by any person, firm,
association, or corporation subject to the article provisions shall be
deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
B. The City shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any
noncomplying land-disturbing construction activity or postconstruction
runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the
violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and
additional enforcement action which may be taken.
C. Upon receipt of written notification from the City under Subsection B,
the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the
stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit. The
responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the
specifications and schedule set forth by the City in the notice.
D. If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to
result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state,
the City may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to
prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the City plus interest,
consultant and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party.
E. The City is authorized to post a stop-work order on all land-disturbing
construction activity that is in violation of this article, or to request the
City Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with
jurisdiction.
F. The City may revoke a permit issued under this article for
noncompliance with article provisions.
G. Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease and desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the City or by a court with
jurisdiction.
H. The City is authorized to refer any violation of this article, or of a stopwork
order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this article, to
the City Attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in
any court with jurisdiction.
§ 288-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-24
1:280
§ 288-25. Appeals.
I. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with
the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 per offense, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
J. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
K. When the City determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to
this article has failed to follow practices set forth in the stormwater
management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in
said stormwater management plan, the City or a party designated by
the City may enter upon the land and perform the work or other
operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into
conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The City shall
keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this
work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial
security posted pursuant to § 288-22 of this article. Where such a
security has not been established, or where such a security is
insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and
collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the
work is completed.
A. Public Works Commission. The Public Works Commission shall act as
the review and appeal agency and:
(1) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, decision or determination made in administering this
article except for cease and desist orders obtained under
§ 288-24E;
(2) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this
article which are not contrary to the public interest and where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions
of the article will result in unnecessary hardship; and
(3) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by
statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Public Works Commission may be
taken by any aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or
bureau of the City of Watertown affected by any decision of the City.
§ 288-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-26
1:281
§ 288-26. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the article shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment.
§ 288-26 WATERTOWN CODE § 288-26
1:282
Chapter 295
FAIR HOUSING
§ 295-1. Fair and open housing.
The Common Council of the City of Watertown recognizes its
responsibilities under § 106.50, Wis. Stats., and endorses the concepts of
fair and open housing for all persons and prohibition of discrimination
therein.
Chapter 303
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 216.
Building construction; unfit buildings — See
Ch. 253.
Property maintenance, commercial — See Ch.
424.
A. The Common Council of the City of Watertown hereby adopts § 106.50,
Wis. Stats., and all subsequent amendments thereto.
B. The officials and employees of the City of Watertown shall assist in the
orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within
the City of Watertown by implementing the authority and enforcement
procedures set forth in § 106.50, Wis. Stats.
C. The City of Watertown Building Inspector shall maintain forms for
complaints filed under § 106.50, Wis. Stats., and shall assist any person
alleging a violation thereof in the City of Watertown to file a complaint
thereunder with the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development
for enforcement of § 106.50, Wis. Stats.96
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 288-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-1
1:283

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 303-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe regulations consistent with
recognized standard practices for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree
of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the use or occupancy
of buildings or premises.
§ 303-2. Adoption of codes. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-11; Ord. No.
05-48; Ord. No. 12-10; 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-8]
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
the City of Watertown Fire Prevention and Protection Code:
§ 303-3. Application to new and existing conditions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to new and existing
conditions, except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with the
terms of this chapter shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions
do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property.
§ 303-4. Authority to enter premises.
The Chief of the Fire Department or any inspectors or subordinates
designated by him may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or
premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection
or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter, he or they may
deem necessary to be made. Private dwellings shall not be entered without
the consent or permission of an adult occupant.
§ 303-5. Inspections of buildings and premises.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect or cause
to be inspected by the Fire Department all buildings and premises, except
the interiors of private dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the
A. Wisconsin Commercial Building Code, Wisconsin Administrative Code
Chapters SPS 361 through 366.
B. Explosives and Fireworks, Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS
307.
C. Flammable, Combustible, and Hazardous Liquids Code, Wisconsin
Administrative Code Chapter SPS 310.
D. Gas Systems, Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 340.
E. Fire Prevention Code, Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 314.
§ 303-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:285
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to
cause fire or any violations of the provisions or intent of this chapter and
of any other ordinance affecting the fire hazard, and to ensure compliance
in all places of assembly with all laws, regulations and orders dealing with
overcrowding, use of decorative materials, maintenance of exitways, and
maintenance of fire alarm and fire-detecting systems and fire-extinguishing
systems and appliances.
§ 303-6. Frequency of inspections. [Added by Ord. No. 89-85;
amended by Ord. No. 10-0597]
The City of Watertown hereby elects to exempt that portion of
§ 101.14(2)(c)1, Wis. Stats., which requires fire inspections of every public
building and place of employment within the fire limits of the City not less
than once every three months. Fire inspections of all buildings within the
fire limits shall be at least once in 12 months. The Fire Chief may require
more frequent inspections for buildings he/she deems as being high risk.
Those occupancies deemed "high risk" may include, but are not limited to,
places of assembly with occupant loads of more than 100; schools; hospitals;
day-care centers; nursing homes; congregate care facilities (with or without
nursing staff); jails or treatment facilities; or occupancies where the use,
storage, mixing and/or handling of hazardous substances would constitute
a process hazard.
§ 303-7. Orders to eliminate fire hazards.
Whenever the Fire Chief or officer designated by him shall find in any
building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions as
follows, he shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be
removed or remedied in such manner as may be specified in said order:
A. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive matter.
B. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive matter.
C. Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or
other highly flammable materials.
D. Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning systems or
of grease in kitchen exhaust ducts.
E. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department
or egress of occupants in case of fire.
F. Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of
sufficient fire escapes or other fire alarm apparatus or fireextinguishing
equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition,
97.Editor's Note: See also Charter Ordinance No. 8 in Ch. A600.
§ 303-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-7
1:286
§ 303-8. Service of orders.
§ 303-9. Investigation.
or from any other cause, creates a fire hazard or a threat to life and
safety.
A. The service of such orders as mentioned in § 303-7 may be made upon
the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions,
either by delivering a copy of the same personally or by delivering the
same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in
case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said
premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon
the owner of a premises, such order may be served either by delivering
to and leaving with said person a copy of said order or, if such owner is
absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing
such copy to the owner's last known post office address.
B. If buildings or other premises are owned by one person and occupied by
another under lease or otherwise, the orders issued in connection with
the enforcing of this chapter shall apply to the occupant thereof, except
where the rules or orders require the making of additions to or changes
in the premises themselves, such as would immediately become real
estate and be the property of the owner of the premises; in which case
the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not the occupant unless it
is otherwise agreed between the owner and the occupant.
C. After three inspections of the building or premises in any six-month
period, and the owner or occupant of the building does not comply with
the orders issued by the City's Fire Inspection Department and a fourth
inspection is required, the owner or occupant shall be charged an
inspection fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule. If additional inspections are required thereafter,
due to the noncompliance of the owner or occupant, each additional
inspection shall result in an additional fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule until compliance has
been obtained. [Added by Ord. No. 98-29; amended 10-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-18]
A. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the Fire Investigator and may
appoint additional investigators from the Fire Department. He shall
investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring
in the City which is of suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or
injury to persons or by which property has been destroyed or
substantially damaged. Such investigations shall be begun immediately
upon the occurrence of such a fire by the fire officer in whose district
the fire occurs, and if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin,
the Fire Chief or appointed investigators shall take charge immediately
of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated
§ 303-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-9
1:287
§ 303-10. Fire records.
The Fire Chief shall keep a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning
the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage
caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance and,
if so, in what amount. Such records shall be made daily from the reports
made by the Fire Department officers and inspectors. All such records shall
be public.
§ 303-11. Annual report.
A report of the Fire Department shall be made annually and transmitted to
the Mayor and Common Council. It shall contain all proceedings under this
chapter, with such statistics as the Fire Chief may wish to include therein.
The Fire Chief shall also recommend any amendments to this chapter
which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further
cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the
prosecution of the case. [Amended 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-8]
B. The City Attorney and the Police Department, upon request of the Fire
Chief, shall assist in the investigation of any fire which, in the opinion of
the Fire Chief, is of suspicious origin.
§ 303-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-11
1:288
ARTICLE II
General Precautions Against Fire
§ 303-12. Outdoor burning restrictions. [Amended by Ord. No.
07-37B; Ord. No. 08-07; 6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-6]
A. Outdoor burning prohibited. No person shall cause, allow or permit
outdoor burning of refuse, garbage, plant life or other combustible
material within the City, except as permitted under Subsection C.
B. Incinerators prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
and maintain or cause to be operated and maintained any incinerator
within the City, except as permitted under Subsection C.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Outdoor burning in connection with the preparation of food.
(2) The burning of refuse in a properly designed, operated and
maintained incinerator, duly licensed by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources to be effective for the purpose of air pollution
control, or outdoor burning by the City of Watertown pursuant to a
permit by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(3) Small outdoor flames for welding, acetylene torches, safety flares,
heating tar or similar applications.
(4) Any outdoor burning which is necessary and not contrary to the
interests of public health; or when the fire is a campfire, used solely
for recreational purposes or for ceremonial occasions.
(5) A fire set for the purpose of training public or private firefighting
personnel.
(6) A fire set or required by a public officer for the abatement of
nuisances and which is necessary in carrying out public health
functions.
D. Responsibilities of the property owner for any outdoor fires occurring
under Subsection C on their property:
(1) To adhere to all health and fire prevention codes.
(2) To have adult (18 years of age or older) supervisory personnel
present at the site of the outdoor burning.
(3) Any fire deemed to be a public health nuisance by the Fire Chief or
his or her designee shall be extinguished.
(4) No manufactured device shall be placed on any combustible
surface. "Manufactured device" means a device whose sole purpose
and design is used to contain a fire for recreational purposes, i.e.,
burn pit or burn ring.
§ 303-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-12
1:289
§ 303-13. Depositing or accumulating combustible material.
(5) The fire must be completely extinguished before the fire location
may be left unsupervised.
(6) The fire shall be no larger than three feet in diameter. A fire
exceeding the size restrictions may be permitted for churches,
organized schools, and civic organizations and only if applications
for site review has been made and approved by the Watertown Fire
Department. Such a fire shall not be more than 10 feet in diameter
or an area of more than 10 feet by 10 feet. The height shall be a
maximum of six feet.
(7) No flammable liquids shall be used to start or support the burning.
(8) Only virgin wood and charcoal fuel will be allowed to be burned.
"Virgin wood" means wood and other wood products, such as bark,
but not to include sawdust, which have had no chemical treatments
or finishes applied.
(9) Under no circumstances shall plastics, trash, garbage, oils,
hydrocarbon fuels, furniture, fabrics, leaves, yard waste, synthetic
materials of any kind, pressure-treated wood or wood that has been
finished with paints, varnishes, laminates or a similar finish be
burned.
(10) The fire shall be located at least 10 feet from property lines and at
least 20 feet from any building or structure. This does not apply to
manufactured devices installed to the manufacturers'
specifications.
(11) A functional extinguishing aid must be present, such as a fire
extinguisher, garden hose, etc.
E. Emergency provisions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, the Fire Chief, in times of extreme dryness or drought,
deficiency in the water supply or by reason of any other emergency, is
authorized to prohibit the setting of any fires upon any lands within the
City by providing published notice of the declared emergency and the
scope of the declaration in the local newspaper on the date that the
emergency is declared to begin and by providing published notice
broadcast through local radio or cable television.
A. Hot ashes and other dangerous materials. No person shall deposit hot
ashes or cinders or smoldering coals or greasy or oily substances liable
to spontaneous ignition into any wood receptacle or place the same
within 10 feet of any combustible materials, except in metal or other
noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless resting on a
noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building, shall be
placed on noncombustible stands and in every case must be kept at
least two feet away from any combustible wall or partition.
§ 303-12 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-13
1:290
B. Accumulations of waste materials. Accumulations of wastepaper, hay,
grass, straw, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or
rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to remain upon any roof or in
any court, yard, vacant lot or open space. All weeds, grass, vines or
other growth, when such endangers property, or is liable to be fired,
shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property it is on.
C. Handling readily combustible materials. No person making, using,
storing or having in charge or under his control any shavings, excelsior,
rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible waste materials
shall fail or neglect at the close of each day to cause all such materials
which are not compactly baled and stacked in an orderly manner to be
removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults or in metal or
metal-lined covered receptacles or bins.
D. Storage of readily combustible materials.
(1) Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of
the ceiling, and not so located as to endanger exit from the
building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20 feet in
height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as
not to constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.
(2) No combustible waste, rubbish or refuse shall be placed, kept or
stored in any air, elevator or stair shaft, in closets or dark out-ofthe-
way places, around electric motors or machinery or against
steam pipes, within 10 feet from any stove, boiler or furnace, or in
any place where oils are used or stored.
(3) All roofs shall be kept free from sawdust, shavings and all other
combustible waste and rubbish.
(4) Wastepaper shall be baled whenever sufficient for one or more
bales, or shall be stored in an isolated building or in a metal or
metal-lined room, vault or bin with a metal-lined door, or in a metal
or metal-lined box with self-closing cover.
(5) Excelsior, hay, straw or other packing materials shall be stored as
above provided, or destroyed.
(6) All combustible materials placed in alleys or areaways shall be in
suitable containers.
(7) No hay or straw shall be kept or stored either loose or in stacks in
the open, within a distance of 40 feet from any chimney or
smokestack.
(8) Shavings or other combustible materials shall not be used for
absorbing volatile liquids.
§ 303-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-13
1:291
§ 303-14. Use of flames, heating and lighting apparatus.
§ 303-15. Chimneys, heating appliances, etc.
All chimneys, smokestacks or similar devices for conveying smoke or hot
gases to the outer air and the stoves, furnaces, fire boxes or boilers to which
they are connected shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner
as not to create a fire hazard.
§ 303-16. Use of oxyacetylene torches.
(9) Cloth or paper cuttings shall be cleaned up and removed from the
building at the close of each day's work, or shall be stored in a
metal or metal-lined box with cover or in a fireproof vault or room.
E. Flammable decorative materials. Flammable window draperies,
curtains or other decorative materials shall not be hung in any building
used for public assembly. Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees
or other highly flammable materials shall not be used for decorative
purposes in show windows or other parts of stores unless flameproofed;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit
the display of saleable goods permitted and offered for sale. Electric
light bulbs in stores shall not be decorated with paper or other
combustible materials unless such materials shall first have been
rendered flameproof. Flameproofing shall be done under the
supervision of the Fire Department.98
A. No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn,
vessel, boat or any place where highly flammable, combustible or
explosive material is kept, unless such light or flame shall be well
secured in a glass globe, wire mesh cage or similar approved device.
B. No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting
flammable materials of the type stored or handled shall be used in the
storage area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair or other
highly flammable or combustible material; nor in the work area of any
shop or factory used for the manufacture, repair or renovating of
mattresses or bedding; nor in the work areas of any establishment used
for the upholstering of furniture.
A. Every person desiring to use oxyacetylene torches on any premises and
in or on any building shall first make application for permission to do so
to the Fire Chief. The application for such permission shall set forth the
location of the premises where the work is to be done and a description
of the work to be done. Before such oxyacetylene torches are used,
proper protection of surroundings shall be made by the use of asbestos
blankets or other fire-resisting materials. Ashes or sand shall be used
for the absorption of oil. A fire extinguisher, pails of water or small
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 303-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-16
1:292
§ 303-17. Safeguarding discontinued tanks.
Tanks used for storage of volatile liquids not in use for 30 days shall
be safeguarded against possible explosion by a method or methods
recommended by the Fire Chief.
§ 303-18. Smoking prohibited under certain conditions.
§ 303-19. Passageways to be kept free.
All doors and openings, external and internal, in all business buildings
shall be kept free from goods of any kind, and means of access and free
movement shall be provided for the convenient work of the Fire
Department.
§ 303-20. Damaging fire alarm boxes prohibited.
No person shall deface any of the fire alarm boxes, or appurtenances
thereto, or interfere with, cut or damage any of the wires, any indicator,
whistle blower, fire alarm box, switchboard, batteries or other equipment of
the fire alarm system.
§ 303-21. Knox-Box® key system. [Added by Ord. No. 88-89]
garden hose attached to water supply shall be conveniently located
close to the cutting operation. Such other precautions shall be taken as
may be ordered by the Fire Chief.
B. This section shall not apply to business or manufacturing
establishments where such oxyacetylene torches are used in connection
with regular business or manufacturing operations. They shall use the
same precautions to prevent fires as required of persons who must
obtain a permit.
A. No person shall by smoking or attempting to light or to smoke
cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco in any manner set fire to any
bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, household fittings or any part of
any building whatsoever, and thereby endanger life or property.
B. Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of
warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places of assembly,
and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled,
the Fire Chief is empowered and authorized to order the owner or
occupant in writing to post "No Smoking" signs in each building,
structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. The Fire
Chief shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any
building, structure or place in which smoking may be permitted.
A. The Knox-Box® system. The Knox-Box® key system will be the only key
system used by the Watertown Fire Department for gaining access to
industrial, institutional and commercial buildings within the City of
§ 303-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-21
1:293
§ 303-22. Bulk storage of flammable liquids.
Watertown. As the system is installed within the City, the individual
systems shall be keyed so only one key will be required for all systems
within the City.
B. Building owners' responsibility. Upon the adoption of this section, it
shall be the responsibility of building owners as follows:
(1) The building owner or a representative of the building owner shall
obtain an authorization form from the Watertown Fire Department,
Division of Fire Prevention, which form shall, when completed,
provide the following information:
(a) A pre-fire plan of the building.
(b) The location of the point of entry and the location of the Knox-
Box® or boxes.
(2) The form shall be submitted together with a check payable to the
Knox-Box® Company for the acquisition of the unit or units.
(3) The Fire Chief or officer in charge of the Division of Fire Prevention
shall review and approve the forms prior to their submission to the
Knox-Box® Company. If the Fire Chief or officer in charge of the
Division of Fire Prevention is of the opinion that the application
needs to be amended, the building owner shall be notified.
[Amended 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-8]
(4) Upon receipt of the Knox-Box®, the owner shall be responsible for
the installation of the same in the designated location and, upon
completion of installation, shall notify the Watertown Fire
Department that it has been installed.
C. Buildings with fire alarm systems. All industrial, institutional and
commercial buildings within the City of Watertown which have a
monitored alarm system of any type shall install a Knox-Box® system
within 60 days after the alarm system is installed (for new construction)
or within 60 days from the adoption of this section (for existing
systems).
D. New construction without an alarm system. For industrial, institutional
or commercial buildings constructed after the adoption of this section,
where access to or within the building is difficult because of secured
openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or
firefighting purposes, the Chief of the Watertown Fire Department may
require a Knox-Box® system installed at accessible locations, approved
by the Chief or the Officer in charge of the Division of Fire Prevention.
[Amended 6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-7]
A. Definitions. The following terms, when used in this section, shall have
the meanings given:
§ 303-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-22
1:294
§ 303-23. Individual storage of flammable liquids.
No person shall store or permit to be stored within this City any crude
petroleum, benzine, benzol, gasoline, naphtha, ether or other like volatile
combustibles or their compound except as hereinafter provided.
BULK OR STORAGE PLANT — A bulk or storage plant for the storage of
gasoline, naphtha, benzol or other highly flammable products is defined
as a storage plant, establishment or facilities with storage tanks or
other receptacles or structures constituting a part of one plant with a
total aggregate storage capacity, both above and below ground, of more
than 3,300 gallons.
FILLING STATIONS — A filling station or retail gasoline or oil station is
defined as a plant or establishment for the purpose of selling gasoline,
naphtha, benzol or other similar products as are ordinarily handled and
sold at filling stations, which plant or establishment has an aggregate
storage capacity, including that above and below ground, not exceeding
the amount permitted by the rules of the Wisconsin Department of
Safety and Professional Services.
B. Permit required. Any existing bulk station or storage plant within the
City shall not add to its present storage facilities unless, in each case, a
permit is authorized by the Common Council on the recommendation of
the Fire Chief. Such permit shall only be authorized when the Common
Council and the Fire Chief shall be of the opinion that public safety will
not be adversely affected by the erection of additional storage. This
section shall not apply to the storage and handling of fuel oils.
C. Tanks to be diked. All tanks now existing or which may be erected
hereafter shall be diked in accordance with the Flammable Liquids
Code of the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services.
All tanks shall be maintained and kept in good repair, and the Chief of
the Fire Department shall make or cause to be made periodic
inspections so as to determine whether or not such dikes are in good
repair.
A. Any person may keep for family use in a building owned or controlled by
him not to exceed two gallons of any of the liquids above-mentioned, in
a closed, approved metal can painted vermillion red and plainly marked
with the name of the oil. A quantity not exceeding one quart of any such
liquid may be kept in a glass bottle, plainly labeled with the name of the
liquid.
B. Any person using for mechanical purposes or dealing in gasoline or
other volatile liquid may keep not to exceed five gallons of any such
liquid in a closed, approved metal safety can painted vermillion red and
plainly marked with the name of the liquid.
C. Any person owning, handling or storing automobiles or other machines
using gasoline may keep not to exceed 25 gallons of gasoline in each
§ 303-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-23
1:295
§ 303-24. Fire hydrant placement. [Added by Ord. No. 05-56]
§ 303-25. Storage and use of explosives.
machine, confined in a tank, free from leak, securely capped and
protected by all necessary safety appliances.
D. All crude oil, benzine, benzol, gasoline, naphtha, ether and all other like
volatile liquids or their compounds, except in kind, quantity and manner
hereinbefore stated, shall be kept in storage tanks constructed of steel
and coated on the outside with tar or other rust-resisting material,
outside a building, buried underground to a depth of not less than two
feet, and shall be handled only by some pumping system approved by
the Fire Chief; or such liquid may be kept in tanks, free from leak,
securely capped and protected by all necessary safety appliances,
partly or wholly above ground, outside of and at least 20 feet distant
from any building or adjoining property, provided that for every such
installation a special permit shall be secured from the Chief of the Fire
Department.
E. No gasoline or other combustible liquids shall be handled except in
daylight or by incandescent electric light.99
A. Fire hydrants will be spaced no more than 300 feet apart.
B. Fire hydrants will not be placed closer than 40 feet to any building.
C. Buildings that are equipped with fire suppression systems, either a
sprinkler or standpipe system, that require Fire Department support
will provide at least two fire hydrants, one of which will be solely for the
supply of the fire suppression system. The total number will be
determined by the Fire Chief.
D. Fire hydrants installed for the supply of a Fire Department connection
(FDC) will be located not less than 40 feet and no more than 100 feet
from the FDC.
E. All streets that terminate in a cul-de-sac will have a fire hydrant
installed at the end of the cul-de-sac.
A. State code adopted. The provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code Chapter SPS 307, Explosives and Fireworks, are adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter.
B. Permit required. No person shall keep or store within the City any
explosive other than gunpowder except pursuant to a permit issued by
the Fire Chief. No explosives other than gunpowder shall be stored
within the City except in a fireproof vault located at least 100 feet from
any other building.
99.Editor's Note: Original § 16.21A, Fire lanes, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed by Ord. No. 13-05.
§ 303-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-25
1:296
C. Place of storage to be disclosed. Any person who shall sell or store
explosives shall disclose to the Fire Department, upon request, the
place or places where stored. The Fire Chief or his agent shall inspect
from time to time all places where explosives are kept or stored.
§ 303-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-25
1:297

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 303-26. Enforcement.
§ 303-27. Modifications. [Amended 6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-5]
A. The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Fire Department.
B. This chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility of any
person owning, operating or installing any equipment for damage to
persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be
held as assuming any such liability by reason of inspection or
reinspection authorized herein or a permit issued as herein provided or
by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized
herein.
A. Application for modification. The Fire Chief shall have power to modify
any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention and Protection Code upon
application in writing by the owner or the lessee or his duly authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the
decision of the Fire Chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of
the Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
B. Means of appeals.
(1) Any person with standing shall be permitted to appeal a decision of
the Fire Department to the Public Safety and Welfare Committee
when it is claimed that any one or more of the following conditions
exist:
(a) The true intent of the Code has been incorrectly interpreted.
(b) The provisions of the Code do not fully apply.
(c) A decision is unreasonable or arbitrary as it applies to
alternatives or new materials.
(2) An appeal shall be submitted to the Fire Department in writing
within 30 calendar days of notification of violation. The appeal shall
outline all of the following:
(a) The Code provision(s) from which relief is sought.
(b) A statement indicating which provisions of Subsection B above
apply.
(c) Justifications to the applicability of the provision(s) cited in
Subsection B above.
§ 303-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-27
1:299
§ 303-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to
comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, or who shall fail
to comply with orders of the Fire Chief or the Common Council or of a court
of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed therein shall be subject to
the penalty provided in § 1-4 of this City's Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
section shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
§ 303-29. Preventable false alarms. [Added by Ord. No. 95-41]
(d) A requested remedy.
(e) Justification for the requested remedy stating specifically how
the Code is complied with, public safety is secured, and fire
fighter safety is secured.
C. Meetings and procedures.
(1) Meetings of the Public Safety and Welfare Committee shall be held
at the call of the chair within 30 calendar days of the filing of a
notice of appeal.
(2) All hearings before the Public Safety and Welfare Committee shall
be open to the public.
(3) A quorum shall be required.
(4) In varying the application of any provision of this Code, or in
modifying an order of the Fire Department, a 2/3 vote of the
quorum shall be required.
(5) A decision of the Public Safety and Welfare Committee to modify an
order of the Fire Department shall be in writing and shall specify
the manner in which such modification is made, the conditions
upon which it is made, the reasons therefore, and justification
linked to specific code sections.
(6) A certified copy shall be sent by mail or delivered in person to the
appellant.
(7) The decision of the Public Safety and Welfare Committee shall be
final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have
through legal, equity, or other avenues of appeal or petition.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, a "preventable false alarm" is defined as
including activations caused by improper installation or maintenance,
erroneous transmissions, work on alarm systems when reasonable
steps are not taken to prevent the reporting of an alarm, fire drills or
tests without prior notification to the Fire Department of the same,
§ 303-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-29
1:300
work such as painting or welding in the area of the alarm system
resulting in activation, careless use of smoking materials or any other
act or omission that would cause a false report to be received by the
Fire Department.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-5]
ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device or system which transmits its
alarm signal from the location of the alarm to the dispatch center, other
fire dispatch facility, or central station by any means, except a direct
dial alarm device, as defined in this section.
ALARM SYSTEM — A system which is designed to summon or cause a
response by the Fire Department, or that gives a signal, either visual,
audible, or both, on the exterior portion of the property, but does not
leave that structure by wire, radio waves, or other transmission to a
control receiving location.
ALARM USER — The person, partnership, corporation or other entity of
any kind that owns or is in control of any building, structure or facility
or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is in operation.
AUDIBLE ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device which produces an
audible signal at the premises where it is installed, whether by means
of horns, bells, sirens, or other mechanisms, thereby notifying persons
within audible range of the signal that fire should be notified.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility that is manned at all times
by trained operators employed to receive, record, and validate alarm
signals and to relay information about validated signals to the dispatch
center when appropriate.
DIRECT DIAL ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated,
transmits a prerecorded message or other signal by telephone directly
to the dispatch center, requesting a fire response.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm signal originating from an alarm device,
alarm system or audible alarm device to which the Fire Department
responds and which results from:
False activation, including reporting a fire where no actual fire has
occurred, or reporting a fire alarm where there is no evidence to
substantiate, or forgetting to put alarm in test fire mode;
(1)
Alarm malfunction, including mechanical failure or electrical
failure;
(2)
(3) Alarm triggered by negligence, including overly sensitive settings.
C. Permit application and standards. [Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-5]
(1) No person shall install, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any alarm device within the City of Watertown without first
§ 303-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-29
1:301
completing an application supplied by the Clerk/Treasurer's office
accompanied by a permit fee as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule.
(2) The alarm permit application shall include the following
information:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user.
(b) The name, address, and telephone number of a person or firm
which can be contacted in the event of an emergency or false
alarm and is available upon request of the Fire Department
within 1/2 hour of notification of such emergency or false alarm
to provide a key to the premises for which the alarm has been
activated, for the purpose of inspecting the premises or
resetting the alarm system.
(c) Identification of the alarm company.
(d) Any other information deemed necessary by the Fire Chief for
the purpose of providing an appropriate response by the Fire
Department.
(e) Notice of liability for the response fee set forth in § 303-29D(4)
and notice that the response fee may be placed as a special
charge on the alarm user's tax roll pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis.
Stats., if not paid.
(f) Notice that, in the event that the Fire Department responds to
an alarm at the premises covered by the alarm system, and
neither the permit holder nor an authorized agent is present,
the permit holder consents to the entry into the premises, if
necessary, to ascertain the cause of the alarm.
D. False alarms. [Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-5]
(1) No person owning, using or possessing an alarm system shall cause
or permit the activation of a false alarm.
(2) No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm
system, knowing that no emergency exists.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the discretion of
the Fire Department to take into account mitigating circumstances
in enforcing this chapter.
(4) Response fees for false alarms.
(a) In the instance of a first false alarm response within any
twelve-month period, the City of Watertown Fire Department
shall cause to be issued a warning setting forth description of
the violation of this section with a copy of the ordinance to the
§ 303-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-29
1:302
owner as well as any occupant, lessee or legal possessor of the
address summoning a response.
(b) In the instance of any second false alarm response within any
twelve-month period, the City of Watertown Fire Department
shall cause to be issued a final warning setting forth
description of the violation of this section with a copy of the
ordinance to the owner as well as any occupant, lessee or legal
possessor of the address summoning a response.
(c) In the instance of any third or subsequent false alarm response
within any twelve-month period, the City of Watertown Fire
Department shall cause to be issued to an alarm user a due and
payable invoice for response costs in the minimum sum as set
by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule, the date payment is due, the right of the alarm user
to a hearing before the Fire Chief if a request therefor is made
before the date payment is due, and a warning that any unpaid
response fee will be allocated to the alarm user's property tax
roll as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., at
the alarm user's last known address with copy to the owner, at
the owner's last known address, as well as any occupant,
lessee or legal possessor of the address summoning a
response. The City of Watertown Fire Department shall collect
such additional amounts at the same rate in fifteen-minute
increments if the time expended by the Fire Department
exceeds one-half hour.
(d) In the instance of any fourth or subsequent false alarm
response within any twelve-month period, the City of
Watertown Fire Department shall cause to be issued to an
alarm user a due and payable invoice for response costs in the
minimum sum as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule, the date payment is due, the right
of the alarm user to a hearing before the Fire Chief if a request
therefor is made before the date payment is due, and a warning
that any unpaid response fee will be allocated to the alarm
user's property tax roll as a special charge pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats., at the alarm user's last known address
with copy to the owner, at the owner's last known address as
well as any occupant, lessee or legal possessor of the address
summoning a response. The City of Watertown Fire
Department shall collect such additional amounts at the same
rate in fifteen-minute increments if the time expended by the
Fire Department exceeds one-half hour.
(e) In the instance of any fifth or subsequent false alarm response
within any twelve-month period, the City of Watertown Fire
Department shall cause to be issued to an alarm user a due and
payable invoice for response costs in the minimum sum as set
by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
§ 303-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-29
1:303
schedule, the date payment is due, the right of the alarm
user to a hearing before the Fire Chief if a request therefor
is made before the date payment is due, and a warning that
any unpaid response fee will be allocated to the alarm user's
property tax roll as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats., at the alarm user's last known address with copy
to the owner, at the owner's last known address, as well as any
occupant, lessee or legal possessor of the address summoning
a response. The City of Watertown Fire Department shall
collect such additional amounts at the same rate in fifteenminute
increments if the time expended by the Fire
Department exceeds one-half hour.
(5) Periodic alarm testing will not result in a response fee, as long as
prior notification with the Fire Department dispatch center was
made, along with notification once the testing is completed.
(6) Storm-related false alarms which can be reasonably verified shall
be exempt from any response fees.
E. Collection of fees. [Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-5]
(1) For the purposes of this section, an alarm user who is lessee,
occupant, or tenant of the premises from which the false alarm
originated shall be deemed agent of the owner thereof.
(2) All charges for response fees are due and payable to the City of
Watertown within 30 days of mailing of the notice required under
this section, except, if a hearing is requested in a timely manner,
the charges are due within 10 days after an adverse decision is
rendered at such hearing.
§ 303-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 303-29
1:304
Chapter 319
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewers — See Ch. 512. Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 303-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-29
1:305

ARTICLE I
Compulsory Connection to Sewer and Water
[Adopted as § 10.12 of the former City Code; amended in its entirety
by Ord. No. 97-4]
§ 319-1. When required.
Whenever a sanitary sewer or water main becomes available to any
residential, commercial or industrial building (privately or publicly owned)
within the corporate City limits of the City of Watertown, the City's Health
Officer and/or Water Systems Manager shall notify the owner or the agent
of the owner, in writing, by registered mail addressed to the last known
address of the owner or the agent, to connect to said sanitary sewer
or water main and to install such other facilities as may be reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
§ 319-2. Mandatory connection at expense of owner.
If the owner or the agent of the owner fails to comply with the notice
of the Health Officer and/or the Water Systems Manager within 60 days
of the service or mailing thereof, the Health Officer and/or the Water
Systems Manager may cause connection to be made, and the expense
thereof shall be assessed as a special assessment against the property
pursuant to § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., as an exercise of the City's police power.
§ 319-3. Installment option.
Pursuant to § 66.0715(2), Wis. Stats, the owner or the agent of the owner
may, within 30 days after the completion of the work, file a written option
with the City Clerk/Treasurer, stating that he is electing to pay the cost of
the connection to the sanitary sewer or water main in five equal annual
installments, with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date that
the special assessment is levied.
§ 319-4. Private facilities prohibited after connection with sanitary
sewer.
After connection of any building or structure to the sanitary sewer system,
no privy, cesspool or waterless toilet shall be used in connection with such
building or structure. Once a building or structure is connected to the
sanitary sewer and/or water system, it must remain connected to those
systems and disconnection is not permitted.
§ 319-5. Irrigation wells.
Private wells may be installed on land parcels of 40 acres or more in size
for the exclusive purpose of providing a water source for irrigation systems.
The owner must comply with the application process set forth in § 512-60
of the City's Code. No permit will be issued by the Water Department if it
is determined that the proposed irrigation well will have an adverse effect
§ 319-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-5
1:307
on the Water Department's wells either as to water quality or reduction of
aquifer levels.
§ 319-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-5
1:308
ARTICLE II
Environmental Sanitation
[Adopted by Ord. No. 02-03 (§ 10.23 of the former City Code);
amended in its entirety 1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1]
§ 319-6. Administration.
This article shall be administered by the City of Watertown Public Health
Department.
§ 319-7. Enforcement.
§ 319-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The City of Watertown Public Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer or his/her authorized agent.
A. The Health Officer or the Health Officer's duly authorized
representative shall enforce the regulations of this article and may
issue orders to effect correction of violations and may issue citations
pursuant to the City of Watertown Code. All enforcement actions shall
minimally be analogous to §§ 254.85, 254.86, 254.87 and 254.88, Wis.
Stats.
B. The City Attorney for the City of Watertown may, in his discretion,
commence legal action and may proceed pursuant to the provisions
outlined in §§ 66.0119 and 66.0114, Wis. Stats., or pursuant to the
issuance of a summons and complaint.
C. The City of Watertown adopts by reference the following chapters of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code: Chapters ATCP 72 (Now part of ATCP
75), ATCP 73 (Now part of ATCP 75), SPS 390, ATCP 76, SPS 221, ATCP
78, ATCP 79 and ATCP 75 and all other state and federally referenced
rules and memorandums of understanding.
D. The City of Watertown recognizes and adopts the same exemptions for
inspections and licensure as contained in the aforementioned state
statutes, administrative codes and the State of Wisconsin Department
of Safety and Professional Services (DSPS) and Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection (DATCP) policies.
E. The City of Watertown is an agent for the Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection under the provisions as set forth in
§ 97.41, Wis. Stats. and ATCP 74.
F. The City of Watertown is an agent for the Department of Safety and
Professional Services under the provisions as set forth in SPS 221.
§ 319-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-8
1:309
LICENSE — The granting of permission in a written/certificate form from
the appropriate authority to carry on an activity. In this article, it is
synonymous with "permit."
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company,
corporation, organization, municipality, county, town or state agency,
whether tenant, owner, lessee or licensee, or the agent, heir or assignee of
any of these.
§ 319-9. License application.
License application shall be made to the City of Watertown Public Health
Department on forms approved by DSPS or DATCP and supplied by the
Department, accompanied by the appropriate license fee and pre-inspection
fee. Licenses hereunder shall not be granted or issued by the Department
unless and until the Health Officer or designee determines and certifies
compliance of the premises to be licensed with all the applicable terms
and conditions of all Wisconsin Administrative Codes under contract.
Applications for licenses required in this article shall be made in writing
to the Public Health Department on forms provided by the Public Health
Department and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
§ 319-10. License issuance.
A. The name, home address and date of birth of the entity requesting the
privilege of operating said business/conducting the activity.
B. The trade name and address of the establishment.
C. Whether the applicant is a person, corporation or partnership.
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the
registered agent's name, home address and date of birth.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall include the
names, home addresses and dates of birth of the partners.
D. The mailing address of the legal licensee.
E. The signature of all applicants and their agents to confirm that all
information on the application is correct and to acknowledge that any
change in the information on the application shall be reported to the
Health Officer within 14 days of the change.
A. The Health Officer shall issue a license to the applicant only after
compliance with the requirements of this article and upon payment to
the Public Health Department of all required fees. The Department's
decision to grant or withhold a license shall not exceed 30 calendar
days. The decision to withhold shall accompany written inspection or
documentation of justification or cause.
B. No license may be issued until all applicable fees have been paid.
§ 319-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-11
1:310
§ 319-11. License period.
The license period for licenses issued per the DSPS and DATCP contract
shall be from July 1 through the following June 30. Those licenses initially
issued during the period beginning on April 1 and ending on June 30 expire
on June 30 of the following year, except temporary and mobile food licenses.
Licenses are not transferable between persons, entities or any combination
thereof.
§ 319-12. Fees.
In addition to the permit fees, the licensee shall pay any DSPS and DATCP
administrative fee, the amount of which is on file with the Department, as
well as the fee on the schedule.
§ 319-13. Display of license.
All licensees shall post their license in plain public view on the premises
for which the license is issued. It shall be posted for the duration that the
license is in force.
§ 319-14. Inspection.
Authorized employees of the Public Health Department, upon presenting
proper identification, shall have the authority and duty to enter any licensed
premises during regular business hours to inspect the same, with respect
to a business open at least 40 hours per week. In the absence of regular
business hours, inspections shall be made at any reasonable hour. In the
event of an emergency, an inspection may be made at any time.
A. Nonproration of fees. Permit fees and other applicable fees are not
prorated for the fiscal year and must be paid in full at any time.
B. Preinspections and their associated fees. Preinspections are required to
be conducted for establishments within the scope of Ch. 254,
Subchapter VII, Wis. Stats., and Ch. ATCP 75, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Late fees. Late fees are assessed to all § 254.69, Wis. Stats.,
establishment licensees for payment after July 1.
D. Reinspection fees. In the event that the Watertown Public Health
Department observes violations during the course of its inspections, the
Department shall charge the party in violation a fee as set forth for each
reinspection necessary to confirm that the original violations have been
remedied.
E. No certified operator fee. If facility owners do not obtain certificate
issued by State of Wisconsin within 90 days, facility owners will be
assessed a charge of $150.
§ 319-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-15
1:311
§ 319-15. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
The Health Officer or designee may deny any license application or suspend
or revoke any license issued under this article for noncompliance with this
article or any other state or county law. The following procedure shall be
followed in the denial, suspension or revocation of any license issued under
this article:
A. A decision by the Health Officer to deny, suspend or revoke a license
shall be in writing and shall state, with specificity, the reasons for the
Heath Officer's decision and shall state any and all applicable statutes,
ordinances, rules, regulation or orders which may have been violated.
The Health Officer shall send to the licensee a copy of the written
decision by mail or by personal service. Said notice shall inform the
licensee or applicant of the right to have this decision reviewed and the
procedure for such review.
B. A licensee or applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Health Officer to
deny, suspend or revoke a license must send a written request for
review and reconsideration to the Health Officer within 10 working
days of receipt of the notice of the Health Officer's decision. The
request for review and reconsideration shall state the grounds upon
which the person aggrieved contends that the decision should be
reversed or modified.
C. Within 10 working days of receipt of the request for review and
reconsideration, the Health Officer shall review his initial
determination. The Health Officer may affirm, reverse or modify the
initial determination. The Health Officer shall mail or deliver to the
licensee or applicant a copy of the Officer's decision on review and shall
state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the
licensee or applicant of the right to appeal the decision, the time within
which appeal shall be taken, and the office or person with whom notice
of appeal shall be filed.
D. A licensee or applicant who wishes to appeal a decision made by the
Health Officer on review must file a notice of appeal within 10 days of
receipt of the Health Officer's decision on review. The notice of appeal
shall be filed or mailed to the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall
immediately file said notice with the City of Watertown Board of Health.
E. A licensee or applicant shall be provided a hearing on appeal within 30
days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The Health Officer shall serve
the licensee or applicant with notice of hearing by mail or personal
service at least five days before the hearing.
F. The hearing shall be conducted before the City of Watertown Board of
Health and shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures
outlined in § 68.11(2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
§ 319-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-15
1:312
§ 319-16. Temporary orders.
Whenever, as a result of an inspection conducted pursuant to this article,
the Health Officer or his/her designated agent has reasonable cause to
believe that any examined food constitutes, or that any construction,
sanitary condition, operation or method of operation of the premises or
equipment used on the premises creates, an immediate danger to the health
of the public, the Health Officer may proceed as stated in § 66.0417 or
254.85, Wis. Stats., to issue a temporary order to prohibit the sale or
movement of food for any purpose, prohibit the continued operation or
method of operation of equipment, or require the premises to cease any
other operation or method of operation which creates an immediate danger
to public health. Section 66.0417, Wis. Stats., is incorporated herein by
reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein.
§ 319-17. Construction or alteration of licensable food service
establishments.
G. Within 15 days of the hearing, the City of Watertown Board of Health
shall mail or deliver to the applicant its written determination, stating
the reasons therefor.
H. Operating without a license. Any person who shall operate without a
license as required above shall be subject to a forfeiture in the amount
of $500. Ongoing violations of operating without a license may be
subject to forfeitures in the amount of $500 for each day in which the
person continues to operate without a license.
I. Voided permit for failure to pay fees. If an applicant or owner fails to
pay all applicable fees, late fees and processing charges within 15 days
after the applicant or owner receives notice of an insufficiency or within
45 days after the expiration of the permit, whichever occurs first, the
permit is void. An owner whose permit is voided under this subsection
may appeal the decision.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, no person shall erect, construct,
enlarge or alter a food establishment without first submitting to the
Health Officer plans (drawings) which clearly show and describe the
amount and character of the work proposed and without first receiving
Public Health Department approval of the submitted plans. Such plans
shall include expected menu, floor plan, equipment plan and
specifications, plumbing layout, wall, floor and ceiling finishes, and
plans and specifications for food service kitchen ventilation. Submitted
plans shall give all information necessary to show compliance with
applicable health codes. Submitted plans shall be retained by the Public
Health Department. Plan submittal to the City of Watertown Health
Officer is in addition to any plan submittal requirement of the City of
Watertown Building Inspector.
B. At the option of the Health Officer, plans need not be submitted to
execute minor alterations. Minor alterations include, but are not limited
§ 319-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-17
1:313
§ 319-18. Alcohol beverages.
No applicant may obtain a "Class B" license or permit or a "Class C" license
or permit under § 125.68(5), Wis. Stats., unless the premises complies with
the rules promulgated by the Department of Health Services governing
sanitation in restaurants.
§ 319-19. Restaurants/meal food service.
to, the replacement of existing equipment, the replacement of existing
floor, wall or ceiling coverings or other cosmetic or decorating activity.
C. Any plans approved by the Public Health Department shall not be
changed or modified unless the Health Officer has reviewed and
approved the modifications or changes. Final approved plans will be
kept in perpetuity as part of the legal file for the establishment.
D. A preinspection fee shall be charged for any remodeling projects that
exceed the definition of "minor alterations" set forth in Subsection B,
examples of which shall include, but shall not be limited to,
circumstances in which the entire facility is closed for remodeling,
circumstances in which a section of the facility is closed for significant
remodeling, and circumstances in which new additions are added to the
facility even though the original facility remains open for business.
A. Requirements.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection A(2), no person, party, firm or
corporation shall operate a restaurant, temporary restaurant or
mobile restaurant, as defined in Ch. DHS 196, Wis. Adm. Code,
without first obtaining a license therefor from the City of
Watertown Public Health Department, nor shall any person, party,
firm or corporation operate contrary to the terms and conditions of
this article or ATCP 75, Wis. Adm. Code, which is incorporated
herein by reference and made part of this article as if fully set forth
herein.
(2) No license is required for the following:
(a) Churches, religious, fraternal, youth or patriotic organizations
such as VFW, American Legion, or other like organizations,
service clubs or civic organizations which occasionally
prepare, serve or sell meals to the general public. The term
"occasional" means not more than three days during any
twelve-month period.
(b) Taverns that serve free lunches of popcorn, cheese, crackers,
pretzels, cold sausage, cured fish or bread and butter.
(c) Any public or private school lunchroom for which food service
is directly provided by the school. The Department shall charge
§ 319-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-19
1:314
§ 319-20. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
a fee for inspection services to school lunchrooms required to
be inspected under federal or state law.
(d) A private individual selling food from a moveable or temporary
stand at a public farm sale.
(e) A concession stand at a locally sponsored sporting event, such
as a little league game.
B. Fees. In addition to the following City fees, the licensee shall pay any
DHS and DATCP administrative fee, the amount of which is on file with
the Department. Fees pursuant to this section shall be as set by the
Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule (not
including the state administrative fee above).
C. Administration and enforcement. In addition to the statutory and
Administrative Code references and powers as indicated in § 319-7, the
Health Officer/designee may issue temporary orders when the
Department has reasonable cause to believe that any examined food
constitutes, or that any construction, sanitary condition, operation or
method of operation of the premises or equipment used on the premises
creates, an immediate danger to public health or safety.
A. Requirement. No person, party, firm or corporation shall operate a bedand-
breakfast establishment as defined in ATCP 73, Wis. Adm. Code, for
more than 10 nights in a year without first obtaining an annual license
from the City of Watertown Public Health Department, nor shall any
person, party, firm or corporation operate contrary to the terms and
conditions of this article or ATCP 73, Wis. Adm. Code, which is
incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this article as if
fully set forth herein.
B. Zoning and construction standards. Prior to City of Watertown Public
Health Department approvals, the applicant must submit written
verification from the City of Watertown Building, Safety and Zoning
Division of approval of this commercial business in the building and
property considered for licensure as a bed-and-breakfast
establishment. In addition, the applicant must provide the City of
Watertown Public Health Department with written verifications that
this property meets all applicable local and state fire and building codes
from inspections of state and local building inspectors.
C. Fees for bed-and-breakfast licenses issued pursuant to this section shall
be as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule.
D. In addition to the above fees, the licensee shall pay any DATCP
administrative fee, the amount of which is on file with the City of
Watertown Public Health Department.
§ 319-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-21
1:315
§ 319-21. Hotels, motels and tourist rooming houses.
§ 319-22. Campgrounds; recreational and education camps.
§ 319-23. Public swimming pool.
§ 319-24. School inspections.
A. Requirement. No person, party, firm or corporation shall operate a
hotel, motel or tourist rooming house, as defined in ATCP 72, Wis. Adm.
Code, without first obtaining an annual license therefor from the City of
Watertown Public Health Department, nor shall any person, party, firm
or corporation operate contrary to the terms and conditions of this
article or ATCP 72, Wis. Adm. Code, and Ch. 254, Subch. VII, Wis.
Stats., provisions which are incorporated herein by reference and made
a part of this article as if fully set forth herein.
B. Fees. The fees for the licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be as
set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule.
A. Requirements. No person, party, firm or corporation shall operate a
campground, recreational camp or educational camp, as defined in
ATCP 78 or 79, Wis. Adm. Code, without first obtaining an annual
license therefor from the City of Watertown Public Health Department,
nor shall any person, party, firm or corporation operate contrary to the
terms and conditions of this article or ATCP 78 or 79, Wis. Adm. Code,
and Ch. 254, Subch. VII, Wis. Stats., provisions which are incorporated
herein by reference and made a part of this article as fully set forth
herein.
B. Fees. The fees for the licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be as
set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule.
A. Requirements. No person, party, firm or corporation shall operate a
public swimming pool, as defined in ATCP 76 or SPS 390, Wis. Adm.
Code, without first obtaining an annual license therefor from the City of
Watertown Public Health Department, nor shall any person, party, firm
or corporation operate contrary to the terms and conditions of this
article or ATCP 76 or SPS 390, Wis. Adm. Code, and Ch. 254, Subch.
VII, Wis. Stats., provisions which are incorporated herein by reference
and made a part of this article as fully set forth herein.
B. Fees. The fees for the licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be as
set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule.
A. Requirements. All schools participating in the National School Lunch
Program (NSLP) or School Breakfast Program (SBP) shall, at least
twice during each school year, obtain a food safety inspection
conducted by a state or local governmental agency responsible for food
safety inspection.
§ 319-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-24
1:316
§ 319-25. Retail food establishments.
§ 319-26. Tattoo and body piercing licenses.
B. Fees. The fees for the inspections conducted pursuant to this section
shall be as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule.
A. Requirements. No person, party, firm or corporation shall operate a
retail food establishment, as defined in Ch. ATCP 75, Wis. Adm. Code,
and § 97.30, Wis. Stats., without first obtaining an annual license
therefor from the City of Watertown Public Health Department, nor
shall any person, party, firm or corporation operate contrary to the
terms and conditions of this article or Ch. ATCP 75, Wis. Adm. Code, or
§ 97.30, Wis. Stats., which are incorporated herein by reference and
made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein.
B. License and inspection fees shall be as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule.
A. Adoption of code. The Tattooing and Body Piercing Code as
promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services and
codified in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, SPS 221, is adopted by
reference and made a part of this article as far as it is applicable. A
violation of SPS 221, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be a violation of this article.
B. Local license required. No person, firm or entity shall engage in or work
at tattooing or body piercing, as defined as SPS 221, without being
licensed as required in this article or SPS 221.
C. Fee schedule. The operator of a tattoo establishment or body-piercing
establishment or a combined tattoo and body-piercing establishment
shall pay an annual license fee to the City of Watertown Public Health
Department. See the current fees schedule for fees pursuant to this
section.
§ 319-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-26
1:317

ARTICLE III
Contagious Disease
[Adopted 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-29]
§ 319-27. Quarantine.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — An illness due to a specific infectious
agent or its toxic products that arises through transmission of that
agent or its products from an infected person, animal or inanimate
reservoir to a susceptible host, either directly or indirectly through an
intermediate plant or animal host, vector or the inanimate environment.
COMMUNICABLE PERIOD — The time during which an infectious
agent may be transferred directly or indirectly from an infected person
to another person, from an infected animal to humans or from an
infected person to animals.
CONTACT — A person or animal that has been in such association with
an infected person or animal or inanimate object or a contaminated
environment as to have had an opportunity to acquire infection.
DISINFECT — The elimination of an infectious agent on a body surface
in clothing, bedding, toys, surgical instruments or dressings, or other
inanimate articles or substances, including water and food, by means of
a chemical that is capable of destroying disease-causing organisms on
inanimate objects with the exception of bacterial spores.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT or DEPARTMENT — The City of Watertown
Public Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The City of Watertown Health Officer.
ISOLATION — As applied to patients, isolation represents separation
for the period of communicability of infected persons or animals from
others in such places and under such conditions as to prevent or limit
the direct or indirect transmission of the infectious agent from those
infected to those who are susceptible to infection or who may spread it
to others.
OWNER — A person who has legal title to a structure, building or
dwelling or personal property or a person who has charge, care or
control of a dwelling or unit of a dwelling as a tenant, occupant or as an
agent of or executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of
a person under this definition.
PERSON — Any individual, business, corporation, firm, institution,
public body or society, or any other entity.
PROPERTY — Real or personal property.
QUARANTINE — The restriction of activities of infected or well persons
or animals who have been exposed to a case of communicable disease
§ 319-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-27
1:319
during its period of communicability to prevent disease transmission
during the incubation period if infection should occur.
STUDENT — Any person, regardless of age, who is enrolled in a daycare
facility, preschool, kindergarten, elementary, middle or high school
or college or university.
B. General provisions. Title. This article shall be referred to as the "City of
Watertown Quarantine Ordinance."
C. Responsibilities of Health Officer. The City of Watertown Health Officer
or his/her designee will, upon the appearance of any communicable or
transmittable disease with the potential to spread to the public within
the City, investigate and take measures as enumerated below to protect
the public health and prevent and suppress outbreak of disease and an
epidemic.
D. Communicable disease measures. If the Health Officer suspects or is
informed of the existence of any communicable disease, the Health
Officer will at once investigate and make or cause such examinations to
be made as are necessary to diagnose a disease and determine
appropriate communicable disease measures. The diagnostic report of
a physician, a laboratory report, the notification or confirmatory report
of a parent or caretaker of the person suspected to be exposed to or to
have a communicable disease, or a reasonable belief in the existence of
a communicable disease will allow the Health Officer to immediately
quarantine, isolate, require restrictions, concurrent and terminal
disinfectant or take other communicable disease measures in the
manner, upon the persons or place of infection, and for the time
specified in rules promulgated by the Department. If the local Health
Officer is not a physician or if further information is needed, or where
there is a reasonable doubt or disagreement in diagnosis and/or where
advice is needed, he or she may seek consultation with a biological,
epidemiological, medical or other public health consultant as quickly as
possible. The Health Officer may order emergency medical treatment of
such person if necessary. The Health Officer may seize or take
possession of property for investigation and, if necessary, destroy or
dispose of property if the property is infected with a communicable
disease. Such orders shall be in writing and shall be effective
immediately and served upon the person or place by personal service or
certified mail.
(1) Infected persons. In the event of the suspicion or existence of any
communicable disease in any residence, household, establishment,
school, gathering or business located within the City, and until the
possibility or risk of contamination subsides to the satisfaction of
the Health Officer, the Health Officer or his or her designee may
investigate the residence, household, establishment, school,
gathering or business and may issue an order isolating the
occupants, forbidding gatherings and closing businesses and
establishments, and placarding the building, and taking whatever
§ 319-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-27
1:320
other measures necessary to control and prevent the spread of the
disease to members of the public until such time as the risk of
contamination has subsided.
(2) Infected student. In the event of the suspicion or existence of any
communicable disease in a student of a college, day-care facility or
school located within the City of Watertown, the student shall not
be permitted to attend any college, day-care facility or school
without written permission from his or her health care provider,
and no teacher, principal or school nurse in any college, day-care
facility or school shall allow any student affected by a
communicable disease to attend said college, day-care facility or
school except by the written permission of the student's health care
provider.
E. The Health Officer may require isolation of a person, quarantine of
contacts, concurrent and terminal disinfection, or modified forms of
these procedures as may be necessary. If deemed necessary, the Health
Officer may make exceptions or arrangements concerning contact with
the isolated person for purposes of medical treatment, religious support
or visits from the immediate family, as long as suitable measures as
determined or approved by the Health Officer are taken to prevent
contamination.
F. Discharge. The Health Officer may authorize the release of contacts or
a person from isolation or quarantine when the Health Officer or
designee is satisfied that the communicable period, if known, has
lapsed or the risk of contamination has subsided, and if necessary, the
contacts or person will pursue a prescribed course of medical treatment
or therapy to ensure recovery from the disease prior to discharge.
G. Cooperation of infected person or owner of business or establishment.
The Public Health Department is required to perform an
epidemiological investigation and to report threatened, suspected or
diagnosed diseases to state and federal agencies and, therefore,
requires certain medical and other information from the contacts,
infected persons or infected persons' physician, or the location of
infection, to identify the disease, to determine the cause or source, and
to determine the communicable disease measures to be taken. The
infected person or business or establishment where a disease appeared
or which is suspected to be affected shall cooperate with the Health
Officer or his or her designee and provide whatever information may be
necessary for the Health Officer to fulfill those responsibilities,
including allowing the Health Officer or his or designee access to
property to test and take samples and perform whatever other
investigative measures may be necessary, including preventing access
by members of the public until such order is lifted by the Health Officer.
H. Liability for costs and expenses. Expenses for diagnostic and necessary
medical care, the expense of conducting examinations and investigative
measures and tests for disease carriers made under the direction or
§ 319-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-27
1:321
§ 319-28. Animal quarantine.
approval of the Health Officer, food and other articles needed for the
care of the infected person or contact may be charged against the
infected person or contact or whoever is liable for the person's support
as a special assessment. The infected person or contact shall be liable
for the costs and expenses of maintaining quarantine and enforcing
isolation of the quarantined area, except in the case of tuberculosis, in
which case the City will bear the costs. Expenses for diagnostic and
investigative measures performed in the course of an epidemiological
investigation shall be charged against the business, establishment,
entity or owner where the disease commenced or continued or was
suspected to have commenced or continued.
I. When the Health Officer deems it necessary that a person be
quarantined or otherwise restricted in a separate place, the Health
Officer shall remove or cause the removal of the person, if it can be
done without danger to the person's health, to a suitable location of
isolation.
J. Confined or hospitalized person. When a person confined in a jail,
prison, mental health institute, hospital or other public place of
detention has a disease which the Health Officer deems dangerous to
the health of other residents or the public, the officer may in writing
order the removal or isolation of the person to a hospital or place of
safety to be provided for and safely kept. Upon recovery, the person
shall be returned; and if the person was committed by a court or under
process, the removal order or a copy shall be returned by the local
Health Officer to the committing court officer.
K. Penalties. Where any person knowingly violates the provisions of this
article or where intent to violate the provisions of this article is
manifested, the Health Officer or his or her designee is authorized to
take whatever reasonable steps are necessary to ensure enforcement of
departmental rules and local and state laws for the prevention and
control of communicable diseases.
L. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Health Officer may
appeal in writing, within 14 days of issuance of the notice and order,
addressed to the Board of Health, which shall schedule a hearing no
more than 14 days from receipt of the appeal. The decision of the Board
of Health shall be delivered to the appellant no more than seven days
following the date of hearing. Appeal of the Board of Health's decision
may be made to the county circuit court in accordance with state
statute. The filing of the appeal does not stay quarantine or other order
from the Public Health Department.
A. Infected animal. In the event of the suspicion or existence of any
communicable disease in an animal or bird within the City of
Watertown, the Health Officer or his or her designee may take whatever
communicable disease measures are necessary to investigate and to
§ 319-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-28
1:322
control and prevent the spread of the disease to members of the public
until such time as the risk of contamination has subsided.
B. Cooperation of owner. The Public Health Department is required to
perform an epidemiological investigation and report threatened,
suspected or diagnosed diseases to state and federal agencies and,
therefore, requires certain medical and veterinarian and other
information from the owners of the animal or animals suspected of
having a communicable disease. The owner of the animal infected or
suspected to be infected shall cooperate with the Health Officer or his
or her designee and provide whatever information is necessary,
including veterinarian records. The owner shall cooperate with the
Health Officer or his or her designee and provide whatever information
may be necessary for the Health Officer or his or designee to fulfill
those responsibilities, including allowing the Health Officer or his or
her designee access to property to test, take samples and perform
whatever other investigative measures may be necessary, including
preventing access by members of the public to property of the owner
until such order is lifted by the Health Officer.
C. The Public Health Department may summarily issue quarantine orders
to prevent, suppress, control or eradicate communicable or
transmittable diseases which may affect domestic or exotic animals or
birds in the City, or to prevent animals or birds from being moved or
commingled pending further testing, diagnosis or investigation related
to a suspected disease. No person may move any animal or bird in
violation of a quarantine order or fail to comply with the terms and
conditions of a quarantine order or other Public Health Department
order.
D. Service of notice. A quarantine order under this article shall be served
upon a person having custody or control of the quarantined animals or
shall be posted on the premises affected by the quarantine order. A
quarantine order may be served by any of the following methods:
(1) Personal service.
(2) Certified mail.
(3) Posting a copy of the order at two conspicuous places on the
premises affected by the quarantine.
E. Contents of order. A quarantine order issued under this article shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of a person having custody or control of the
quarantined animals, if known.
(2) A description of the animals affected by the quarantine.
(3) A description of the premises affected by the quarantine.
(4) The reason or justification for the quarantine.
§ 319-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-28
1:323
§ 319-29. Burial of deceased contagious disease persons.
No one having charge or control of any schoolhouse or church, or of any
room or building used for school or church purposes, or for any public
assembly in this City shall permit the body of any person dead from
smallpox, diphtheria, scarlet fever, Asiatic cholera, or other dangerous
contagious diseases to be taken into such building or room for the purpose
of holding funeral services over such body; and no sexton, undertaker or
other person having charge or direction of the burial of any body dead from
any of these diseases herein mentioned shall permit the casket or coffin
containing such body to be opened in the presence of any child; neither shall
any child be permitted to act as pallbearer or carrier at any such funeral;
and the Health Officer shall have power to prevent the attendance at the
funeral or burial of any person dead from dangerous contagious diseases of
all persons other than those necessary for the interment of such body; and
(5) The duration of the order and all terms and conditions applicable to
the order.
(6) Notice that a person adversely affected by the order may request a
hearing under this article.
F. Proof of service. Service of a quarantine order may be proved by
affidavit or by certified mail return receipt.
G. Liability for expenses. Expenses for diagnostic and necessary
veterinarian care, the expense of conducting examinations and
investigative measures and tests for disease carriers made under the
direction or approval of the Health Officer, food and other articles
needed for the care of the infected animal, costs and expenses of
maintaining a quarantine and enforcing isolation of quarantine areas
shall be charged against the owner of the animal.
H. Penalties. Where any person knowingly violates the provisions of this
article or where intent to violate the provisions of this article is
manifested, the Health Officer or his or her designee is authorized to
take whatever reasonable steps are necessary to ensure enforcement of
departmental rules and local and state laws for the prevention and
control of communicable diseases.
I. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Health Officer may
appeal in writing, within 14 days of issuance of the notice and order,
addressed to the Board of Health, which shall schedule a hearing no
more than 14 days from receipt of the appeal. The decision of the Board
of Health shall be delivered to the appellant no more than seven days
following the date of hearing. The City elects to not be bound by the
provisions of Ch. 68, Wis. Stats. Appeal of the Board of Health's
decision may be made to the Jefferson County Circuit Court in
accordance with state statute. The filing of the appeal does not stay
quarantine or other order from the Public Health Department.
§ 319-28 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-29
1:324
any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the general penalty provisions (§ 1-4) of the Code.
§ 319-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-29
1:325

ARTICLE IV
Hazardous Materials
[Adopted 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1]
§ 319-30. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall be defined as follows:
COSTS — All expenses incurred by the City or by another authorized
emergency response agency for any removal or remedial action.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE AGENCY — A unit of local government, volunteer
organization or other support agency, including licensed hazardous waste
contractors, that provide one or more of the following services: (1)
firefighting services; (2) emergency medical treatment or transportation;
(3) emergency medical services; (4) hazardous materials response teams;
(5) emergency service, disaster response or civil defense services; (6) public
works or maintenance; (7) police agencies (federal, state or local); (8)
remediation, mitigation or disposal of hazardous materials by a hazardous
waste contractor.
FACILITY — Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or
pipelines, including but not limited to any pipe into a sewer or publicly
owned treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill,
storage container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rolling stock or aircraft.
Also any site or area where a hazardous material has been deposited,
stored, disposed of, abandoned, placed or otherwise come to be located.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, substance or mixture of
materials or substances which are toxic, flammable, corrosive, explosive,
carcinogenic or radioactive, including, but not limited to, any substance
or material which is designated a hazardous material pursuant to the
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. § 5101 et seq.) in
quantity and form which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health, property or the environment when improperly released,
treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
MATERIALS INCIDENT — A situation involving an actual, suspected or
possible hazardous material for which the Fire Department or other
emergency response agency must respond in order to ensure the safety of
personnel or property.
MUTUAL AID — Any action taken by the Fire Department or any public
agency pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, including but not
limited to agreements made as part of the Mutual Aid Box Alarm System
(MABAS).
PERSON — Any individual, business, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trust, estate, joint venture or other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assign.
RELEASE — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping,
emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing of a
hazardous material into or on any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer or
§ 319-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-30
1:327
pipe so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter
the environment.
REMEDIAL ACTION — Any action consistent with permanent, remedy taken
instead of, or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release or
threatened release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent
or minimize the release of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate
to cause a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property
or the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions
at the location of the release as storage, confinement, perimeter protection
using dikes, trenches or ditches, clay cover, neutralization, cleanup of
released hazardous materials or contaminated materials, recycling or reuse,
diversion, destruction, segregation of reactive wastes, repair or
replacement of leaking containers, collection of leachate and runoff, onsite
treatment or incineration, provision of alternate water supplies, and
any monitoring reasonably required to assure that such actions protect the
public health and welfare and the environment.
REMOVAL — The cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials from
the environment; such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to
monitor, assess, and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous
materials, the disposal of removed material, or the taking of such action as
may be necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public
health or welfare of the environment.
RESPONSE — Any removal or remedial action to a materials incident or
other incident.
§ 319-31. Prohibited acts.
No person shall cause, threaten or allow the release of hazardous materials
into the environment unless such release is an accordance with an
appropriate permit granted by a state or federal agency having primary
jurisdiction over the release and such release is in such place and manner
as will not create a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
property or the environment.
§ 319-32. Response authority.
A. The Fire Chief or his authorized representative has authority to respond
to any release or threatened release of hazardous materials within the
City or affecting the public water supply, wells or sewage treatment
works located within the City. This authority includes, but is not limited
to, remedial action and removal.
B. The Fire Chief will have primary authority to respond to any release or
threatened release of hazardous materials as described above. The Fire
Chief will report any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials to all appropriate federal, state and local public health, safety
and emergency agencies within 24 hours of any substantial release of
hazardous materials. The Fire Chief will relinquish his response
authority at such time, if any, as the federal, state or local emergency
§ 319-30 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-32
1:328
§ 319-33. Liability for costs.
Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, the following persons
shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs of removal and remedial
action incurred by the City as a result of a release or threatened release of
a hazardous material:
§ 319-34. Costs and penalties.
response agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or
threatened release has assumed responsibility for response to the
release or threatened release.
C. The Fire Chief, during such time as response authority is vested in him,
is authorized to utilize all City personnel and equipment and he may, in
his sole discretion, take such remedial or removal action as he may
deem necessary or appropriate to respond to the release or threatened
release of hazardous material, including the use of material, and in
accordance with any Mutual Aid Box Alarm System (MABAS)
agreements.
D. All responding personnel will cooperate with and operate under the
direction of the Fire Chief or other person then exercising response
authority under this article until such time as the person exercising
such response authority has determined that the response is complete
or responsibility for response is assumed by the federal, state or local
emergency response agency having primary jurisdiction over the
release or threatened release.
A. The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from which there is a
release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous material.
B. Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or treatment
of a hazardous material, owned or operated the facility or vessel used
for such disposal, transport, treatment or storage from which there was
a release or substantial threat of a release of any such hazardous
material.
C. Any person who by contract, agreement or otherwise has arranged with
another party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or treatment of
hazardous materials owned, controlled or possessed by such person at
a facility owned or operated by another party or entity, from which
facility there is a release or substantial threat of a release of such
hazardous materials.
D. Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials for
transport to disposal, storage or treatment facilities or sites from which
there is a release or a substantial threat of release of such hazardous
substances.
A. Any person who is liable for the release or threatened release of a
hazardous material, who fails without sufficient cause to pay for or
§ 319-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-34
1:329
provide removal or remedial action upon or in accordance with a notice
and request of the City or in accordance with any order of any court
having jurisdiction on the matter, shall be liable to the City for any costs
incurred by the City as a result of such failure to provide or take such
removal or remedial action, together with the cost of any removal or
remedial action taken by the City in accordance with the article and all
attorneys' fees and related legal costs incurred in connection therewith.
B. In addition, any such person shall be guilty of a violation of this article
and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on
which a violation occurs or continues. Where such violation is found to
be the result of willful and/or wanton conduct or gross negligence, or
the person committing such violation attempts to evade responsibility
hereunder by leaving the scene of the occurrence or by other means,
that person shall be subject to a fine as provided for above or a fine in
an amount equal to three times the costs, including attorney's fees and
legal costs, for which it is liable under Subsection A, whichever is
greater.
C. Charges for removal or remedial action when rendered by the City or
any agency in accordance with any mutual aid agreement shall be as
follows:
(1) The cost of vehicles as determined by the responding agency, but in
no case less than $125 per hour per vehicle; and
(2) The cost of all personnel including any overtime cost incurred as a
result of removal or remedial action, but in no case less than $35
per hour; and
(3) The cost of all materials and equipment used, expended, depleted,
destroyed or removed from service in accordance with federal,
state or local ordinance as a result of mitigation or containment
operations or at the request of the City or any responding agency;
and
(4) The costs of service and/or goods provided by a private or public
entity which are used, expended, depleted or destroyed as a result
of the response.
§ 319-34 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-34
1:330
ARTICLE V
Practice of Certain Trades and Professions Requiring State
Licensing, Registration or Credentials
[Adopted 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-22]
§ 319-35. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall be defined as follows:
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — Tuberculosis, scabies, lice or any other type
of disease which might be reasonably spread by this type of employment.
MASSAGE — The manipulation of the soft tissue of the body for therapeutic
purposes and may include, but is not limited to, effleurage, petrissage,
tapotement, compression, vibration, friction, stroking or kneading, either
by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus, for the purpose of
body massage. This may include the use of oil, salt glows, hot and cold
packs or other recognized forms of massage therapy. The term does not
include diagnosis or any service or procedure for which a license to practice
medicine is required by law.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A location where the primary or secondary
function is to offer massage by a massage therapist.
MASSAGE ROOM — The area where the therapeutic massage is practiced.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — A person who holds a current and valid license for
that purpose from the State Department of Regulation and Licensing under
Ch. 460, Wis. Stats., and engages in the practice of massage therapy within
the scope of his or her license.
ON-SITE MASSAGE — Includes home visits and massage in public
buildings. This privilege shall be available only to those massage therapists
who hold a current and valid state license as noted above.
§ 319-36. Massage establishments, massage therapists; regulation.
No person shall suffer, cause or permit the operation of a massage
establishment or operate as a massage therapist or employee, except in
strict compliance with this article.
§ 319-37. Exceptions.
This article does not apply to the following classes of individuals while
engaged in the duties of their respective professions:
A. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, registered nurses or
physical therapists licensed or registered to practice their respective
professions under the laws of the state, when practicing within that
profession and not acting independently as a massage therapist.
B. Barbershops and beauty parlors, barbers and beauticians licensed
under the laws of the state, provided that such massage as is practiced
is limited to the head and scalp.
§ 319-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-37
1:331
§ 319-38. Nuisance.
Operation without a license a public nuisance. The activity of an individual
as a massage therapist without a valid state license is deemed a public
nuisance and may be enjoined by the City with costs of abatement
enforcement, collectible via special charge as provided by § 66.0627, Wis.
Stats., and is in addition to any other method provided by law to collect
special charges for current services.
§ 319-39. Advertising and the allowing of state-regulable activities
requiring licensing, registration or credentials.
§ 319-40. Violation and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code, except that said penalty shall
C. Accredited high schools, colleges, coaches and trainers therein while
acting within the scope of their employment.
A. No person who is required to hold a license, certificate of registration
or other credential pursuant to Chs. 440 through 480, Wis. Stats., shall
practice that profession within the corporate limits of the City of
Watertown unless that person holds a valid, unexpired license,
certificate of registration or credential issued by the State of Wisconsin.
B. No person who is required to hold a license, certificate of registration
or other credential pursuant to Chs. 440 through 480, Wis. Stats., shall
advertise the availability of services to be performed within the
corporate limits of the City of Watertown unless they hold a valid,
unexpired license, certificate of registration or credential issued by the
State of Wisconsin.
C. No business whose employees, independent contractors or similarly
interested associates or affiliates are required to hold a license,
certificate of registration or other credential pursuant to Chs. 440
through 480, Wis. Stats., shall allow such employees, independent
contractors or similarly interested associates or affiliates to practice
that profession within the corporate limits of the City of Watertown
unless the employee, independent contractor or similarly interested
associate or affiliate holds a valid, unexpired license, certificate of
registration or credential issued by the State of Wisconsin.
D. No business whose employees, independent contractors or similarly
interested associates or affiliates are required to hold a license,
certificate of registration or other credential pursuant to Chs. 440
through 480, Wis. Stats., shall advertise the availability of services to be
performed within the corporate limits of the City of Watertown unless
the employees, independent contractors or similarly interested
associates or affiliates of the business hold a valid, unexpired license,
certificate of registration or credential issued by the State of Wisconsin.
§ 319-37 WATERTOWN CODE § 319-40
1:332
not be less than $500 nor more than $1,000. Each violation and each day
on which a violation of any provision of this article occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense. This article shall not preclude the use
of any other remedy available to the City to prevent or abate the activities
regulated under this article.
§ 319-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-40
1:333
Chapter 325
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253. Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 325-1. Purpose.
It shall be a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of property of special historic character or interest is
a public necessity and is required in the interest of the health, prosperity,
safety and welfare of the people.
§ 325-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY OBJECT — Objects constructed or erected by man which
enhance the Cityscape by serving as amenities (e.g., fountains, cemetery
monuments, statues and works of art, etc.).
ALTERATION — Any substantive change in the external architectural
features of any accessory object, building or structure located within a
historic district or on a historic site.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — The general architectural arrangement of
such portion of the exterior of any accessory object, building or structure
which is designed to be viewed or is viewable by the public, including but
not limited to the kind, color and texture of the building material and the
type and design of all windows, doors, lights and other fixtures appurtenant
to such exterior.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for
the enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or materials.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS or CERTIFICATE — A certificate
issued by the Historic Preservation Commission condoning a proposed
alteration or demolition of any accessory object, building or structure
located within a historic district or on a historic site.
CODE — The Municipal Code of the City of Watertown.
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY — Property within a historic district which is
identified as historically significant by official designation or request of the
owner.
§ 319-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 325-2
1:334
DEMOLITION — The substantial or complete deterioration, removal or
destruction of any accessory object, building or structure located in a
historic district or on a historic site.
DISTRICT — See "historic district."
FENCE — A wooden, masonry, metal or plastic structure intended to
enclose an open space for purposes of security, confinement or aesthetic
ornamentation.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographic area designated by the Common
Council under the provisions of this chapter that contains accessory objects,
buildings, improvements or structures which have a special historical
character or significance representing one or more periods or eras in the
history of the City.
HISTORIC SITE — Any property, including an accessory object, building,
improvement or structure, designated by the Common Council under the
provisions of this chapter as having a special historical character or
significance.
IMPROVEMENT — Any place, structure, building, fixture or object which,
in whole or in part, constitutes an exterior betterment, adornment or
enhancement of any real property.
MAINTENANCE — Work intended to repair or replace any part of any
improvement, to correct any deterioration or decay of or any damage to
such improvement or any part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly as
practicable, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration,
decay or damage.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — The construction of a new building, improvement
or structure on a vacant area of real estate, including real estate vacated as
a result of a demolition, and horizontal additions or attachments to existing
buildings, improvements or structures.
REHABILITATION — The process of improving property through repair
or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while
preserving those portions and features of the property which are
historically significant.
RESTORATION — The process of bringing a property back to its original or
unimpaired state.
STRUCTURE — Any construction erected by man and not intended for
shelter (e.g., bridges, flagpoles, street clocks and street signs, etc.).
§ 325-3. Historic Preservation Commission. [Amended by Ord. No.
06-03]
A. Creation. In order to effect the purpose and policy of this chapter, a
Historic Preservation Commission is hereby created.
B. Composition of Commission. The Commission shall be composed of
seven members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-3
1:335
vote of the Common Council. The Building Inspector and City Planner
shall function as additional nonvoting advisory members. Each citizen
member must either reside in the City or have an established business
in the City and have, to the extent practicable, a knowledge of and
interest in historic preservation and revitalization. [Amended by Ord.
No. 08-28]
C. Commission appointments. Citizen members shall be appointed to a
three-year term commencing in April of the year of appointment, except
that citizen members comprising the initial Commission membership
shall be appointed to staggered terms. Appointments shall be made to
fill the unexpired term of any vacant position on the Commission.100
D. Commission organization. The Commission, at its first meeting and
during each May thereafter, shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson
and Secretary, the latter shall record the meetings of the Commission.
The Building Inspector or City Planner may function in the role of
Secretary. The Commission shall meet at least once every two months
or as otherwise required in this chapter. All meetings shall be subject to
the State's Open Meeting Law,101 and a copy of the minutes of each
meeting shall be forwarded to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
E. Commission jurisdiction. Subject to other directives of the Common
Council, the jurisdiction of the Commission shall be limited to the
incorporated area of the City of Watertown.
F. Responsibilities and authority. In addition to adopting rules and
regulations for its own operations, the Commission: [Amended by
Ord. No. 08-28]
(1) When requested by the general public or by officially designated
agencies or agents of the City or by the Main Street Program, shall
review and make recommendations regarding proposals for
construction, renovation, maintenance, moving and demolition of
buildings, structures, improvements, fences and accessory objects,
and shall review and make recommendations regarding requests
for facade and sign grants to the Main Street Board of Directors.
(2) Shall endeavor to effect and accomplish the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of all property and materials which
represent or reflect elements of the City's cultural, archaeological,
social, economic, political and architectural history.
(3) Shall endeavor to safeguard the City's heritage as embodied and
reflected in designated historic sites and historic districts.
(4) Shall endeavor to foster civic pride in the history and noble
accomplishments of the past.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
101. Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats.
§ 325-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 325-3
1:336
(5) Shall endeavor to protect and enhance the City's attractiveness to
residents, tourists and visitors.
(6) Shall serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry.
(7) Shall relate municipal programs for preserving housing and
revitalizing commercial areas to the objectives of historic
preservation and revitalization.
(8) Shall provide a means of education to the public regarding the
desirability of historic preservation as an enhancement of the
quality of life.
(9) May act as a clearinghouse to aid and assist individuals and public
entities in the designation of their properties for local and/or
national historic register status.
(10) Shall act as an advisor to the Plan Commission or when otherwise
requested by other City commissions, committees or agencies in
the preservation and enhancement of sites, buildings,
improvements and structures having historic significance.
(11) Shall endeavor to maintain or cause to be maintained a
comprehensive survey of sites, structures, improvements, buildings
and accessory objects in the City identifying the City's historic
resources.
(12) Shall prepare or cause to be prepared a current list and
recommendations of potential historic sites and historic districts
within the City and, where appropriate, forward designation
nominations to the Common Council.
(13) When requested by the general public or by officially designated
agencies or agents of the City, shall review and make
recommendations regarding proposals for construction,
renovation, maintenance, moving and demolition of buildings,
structures, improvements, fences and accessory objects.
(14) Subject to the provisions of this chapter, is authorized to consider
and issue or deny certificates of appropriateness.
(15) Shall administer, on behalf of the City, any historical materials,
property, easements or other interests in real property which the
City may have or may accept as gifts or grants or may otherwise
acquire and for which the Common Council may designate the
Commission the administrator thereof.
(16) Subject to any appropriation by the Common Council or funds from
other sources, may employ clerical and technical assistants or
consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to carrying out
the work of the Commission. Such expenditures shall be subject to
the City's budgetary and accounting processes and approval of the
Common Council, where appropriate or required.
§ 325-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-3
1:337
§ 325-4. Nomination of historic sites and districts.
§ 325-5. Nomination criteria.
A historic site or historic district nomination may be given for any site,
building, improvement, structure or geographic area of particular historic
significance for which two or more of the following concerns can be
substantiated:
§ 325-6. Nomination and designation procedures.
(17) Subject to review by the Common Council, may receive and solicit
funds for the purpose of historic site and historic district
preservation, which funds shall be placed in a special City reserve
account for such purpose.
A. Historic sites. The Commission may nominate any property within the
City of particular historic significance for designation as a historic site
by the Common Council.
B. Historic districts. The Commission may nominate certain geographic
areas within the City which are distinct in their historic significance for
designation as a historic district by the Common Council.
A. It has character or interest as part of the heritage of the City.
B. It is a site of a significant historical event.
C. It can be identified with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and heritage of the City.
D. It embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or
specimen.
E. It can be identified as the work of an architect or master builder whose
individual work has influenced the development of the City.
F. It has a relationship to other distinctive buildings, structures,
improvements or areas which are eligible for preservation according to
a historic design or motif.
A. Form of nomination. Each historic site or historic district nomination
shall be forwarded to the Common Council through the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer in the form of an introductory resolution, which shall
include:
(1) An analysis of the historic significance;
(2) A statement of the specific nomination criteria met;
(3) A statement of preservation objectives; and
§ 325-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 325-6
1:338
§ 325-7. Certificate of appropriateness.
(4) Preservation guidelines and requirements for alteration,
restoration and rehabilitation efforts unique to the nominated
historic site or historic district which are in addition to those set
forth in this chapter. Owner-imposed guidelines and requirements
which are consistent with the purpose and policy of this chapter
may also be incorporated.
B. Initial Council action. Within 30 days of receipt of the nomination by the
City Clerk/Treasurer, the Common Council shall, by motion, deny the
nomination; refer the nomination back to the Commission or to any
other appropriate City department, committee or commission for
further deliberation; or give preliminary approval of the nomination.
C. Public hearing. In the event of a preliminary approval of a nomination
by the Common Council, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall schedule a
public hearing on the nomination before the Common Council,
published notice of which shall be given at least two weeks in advance
of the hearing. In addition, the Commission shall provide the City Clerk/
Treasurer with a list of names and addresses of all owners of real
property located, in whole or in part, in the nominated historic site or
historic district and, in the case of a nominated historic district, all
owners of real property located, in whole or in part, within 200 feet of
the nominated historic district. A letter shall be mailed to each
individual or party listed, informing them of the nomination and date of
the public hearing. A copy of the nominating resolution, including all
appendages and attachments, shall be maintained in the office of the
City Clerk/Treasurer for inspection by the general public.
D. Designation. Subsequent to the public hearing and upon the further
recommendation of the Commission, the Common Council shall either
affirm or deny the nomination by passage or rejection of the nominating
resolution. Passage shall be by a two-thirds vote of the whole Council.
In the event of passage, the nominated site, building, improvement,
structure or geographic area shall be officially designated as a historic
site or historic district within the City, in accordance with and subject to
the terms and provisions of the nominating resolution and this chapter,
said designation to be effective as of the date of passage of the
nominating resolution.
E. Repeal of designation. Any action to repeal or amend any prior historic
site or historic district designation may be commenced only if the
subject property has lost the historic or architectural features for which
it was originally listed and shall be subject to the public hearing and
notification requirements of Subsection C above and shall require a
two-thirds vote of the whole Common Council. [Amended by Ord. No.
08-04]
A. Requirement. No owner, renter, occupant or person in charge of a
historic site or contributing property located within a historic district
§ 325-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-7
1:339
shall demolish, reconstruct or alter, except for routine maintenance,
all or any part of the exterior of such property, or demolish, construct
or reconstruct any publicly visible exterior accessory object, building,
fence, improvement or structure upon such property, or permit any
such work to be performed upon such property, unless a certificate of
appropriateness ("certificate") has been granted by the Commission.
This requirement is in addition to any other certificate, permit, license
or other form of authorization that may be required elsewhere in the
Code.102
B. Building permit. Any application for a building permit under Chapter
253 of the Code, requesting permission to perform new construction,
alterations, demolition, rehabilitation or restoration of an exterior
nature on a historic site or contributing property within a historic
district, shall be forwarded to the Commission by the Building
Inspector, along with the Building Inspector's initial comments and
recommendations regarding the application. Such building permit
application shall also include an application for a certificate pursuant to
the terms of this chapter. In no event shall a building permit be issued
by the Building Inspector unless a required certificate has first been
granted by the Commission.
C. Application submission. An application for a certificate shall be
forwarded to the Commission through the office of the Building
Inspector on application forms developed jointly by the Commission and
the Building Inspector. The Commission or Building Inspector is
authorized to request additional information from the applicant which
is reasonable and necessary to the Commission's deliberation and
review of the application.
D. Guidelines for application review. In deliberating and reviewing the
merits of any certificate application, the Commission shall consider the
following:
(1) In general. The economic impact on the applicant in conforming
with the following guidelines and the proposed economic best use
of the property should be given great weight in the Commission's
deliberations but shall not be singularly determinative when
considering whether a certificate should be granted or denied.
(2) Alteration, rehabilitation, restoration and new construction.
(a) The proposed work should not detrimentally change, destroy,
cover or otherwise adversely affect any significant historical
feature of the property upon which said work is to be
performed.
(b) In the case of the construction or placement of any new
accessory object, building, fence, improvement or structure,
102. Editor's Note: Original § 29.07(2), Signs exempt, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed by Ord. No. 10-07.
§ 325-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 325-7
1:340
the exterior of such construction or placement should be in
historical harmony with other neighboring accessory objects,
buildings, fences, improvements or structures.
(c) The proposed construction, reconstruction or alteration should
conform with the objectives and guidelines articulated in the
nominating resolution of the affected historic site or historic
district.
(d) Every reasonable effort should be made to provide a
compatible use for a property which requires minimal
alteration of the property exterior or its environment.
(e) The distinguishing original qualities or character of the
property and its environment should be preserved when
possible.
(f) The property should be recognized as a product of its own
specific time or era of construction. Alterations that have no
historical basis and which seek to create an earlier or later
design and construction period appearance should be
discouraged.
(g) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time and
are evidence of the history and development of the property
and its environment or changes which may have acquired
design and construction significance in their own right should
be recognized and weighed as a factor.
(h) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship which characterize the property should be
treated with sensitivity.
(i) Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather
than replaced wherever possible. In the event replacement is
necessary, the new material should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture, size and other
visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural
features should be based on accurate duplications of features,
substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather
than on conjectural designs or the availability of materials.
(j) Surface cleaning of the property should be undertaken with
the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning
methods that may damage historic building materials should
not be undertaken without the express authorization of the
Commission.
(k) Contemporary design for alterations to existing property
should not be discouraged when such alterations do not
destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material
and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color,
§ 325-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-7
1:341
material and character of the property, neighborhood or
environment.
(l) Wherever possible, alterations to existing property should be
accomplished in such a manner that if such alteration was to
be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of
the property would be unimpaired.
(m) Contemporary design used in any new construction in a
historic district should correspond in height, width, proportion,
relationship to street, roof forms, composition, proportion of
openings, materials and color to existing buildings and
improvements in the historic district.
(3) Demolition.
(a) Whether the property is of such historic significance that its
demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and
contrary to the general welfare of the people of the City, state
or nation.
(b) Whether demolition of the property would be contrary to the
purpose and policy of this chapter and to the historic
preservation objectives and guidelines as specifically
articulated in the nominating resolution for the affected
historic site or historic district.
(c) Whether the property is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, texture or material that it could not be reproduced or
be reproduced only with great difficulty or expense.
(d) Whether retention of the property would promote the general
welfare of the people of the City and state by encouraging
study of American history, architecture and design, or by
developing an understanding of American culture and
heritage.
(e) Whether the property is in such a deteriorated condition that it
is not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or
restore. However, any hardship or difficulty claimed by the
applicant which is self-created or is the result of any failure to
maintain the property in good repair should not in and of itself
qualify as a basis for granting a certificate.
(f) In the event that new construction or a change in use is
proposed, the guidelines set forth in Subsection D(2) above
shall also be considered.
E. Application process.
(1) Upon submission of a certificate application, the Commission may
meet for the purpose of application introduction and applicant
presentation. The applicant shall be notified by mail of the time and
§ 325-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 325-7
1:342
date of the meeting and should be prepared to appear, either
in person or by representative, along with all supporting
documentation, plans, drawings, sketches and the like, for
presentation to the Commission. At such meeting, the Commission
may grant or deny the certificate; reasonably request additional
information from the applicant; and/or lay over the matter to a
subsequent meeting.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection E(1) above, within 30 days of the date
of application submission the Commission shall either grant or
deny the certificate. In the event that application deliberation and
review require additional time, and subject to the concurrence of
the applicant, this thirty-day period may be extended by a single
thirty-day period.
(3) In the event of an application involving demolition, the Commission
shall have the authority to order the suspension of the proposed
demolition for a period not to exceed 90 days, during which good
faith negotiations shall be conducted between the Commission and
applicant regarding possible location, rehabilitation and
restoration alternatives to the demolition. During said suspension
period, the applicant shall take whatever steps are necessary to
prevent further deterioration of the property.
(4) If the Commission fails to grant or deny the certificate after the
longer of the thirty-day period (as extended) or suspension period
(if ordered), the certificate shall be deemed to have been granted.
(5) A certificate granted by the Commission shall be issued to the
applicant by the Building Inspector within three working days of its
granting.
(6) Any certificate denial or suspension order by the Commission shall
be evidenced by a written notice to the applicant, setting forth in
detail the Commission's rationale for the denial or suspension and,
in the case of a denial, what alternatives exist or what steps, if any,
could be taken which could result in the granting of the certificate.
The effective date of any such denial or suspension order shall be
the earlier of the date of personal delivery or three days after the
date of deposit in the United States Mail of the written notice.
(7) Any individual or person whose application has been denied or who
is subject to a suspension order may seek administrative appeal
under § 10-9 of this Code. For purposes of this appeal, proceedings
before the Historic Preservation Commission shall not constitute a
hearing substantially in compliance with § 10-10, nor must the
appellant follow the administrative review procedure of §§ 10-7 and
10-8 prior to initiating administrative appeal.
(8) The Common Council shall grant legislative review if a written
request by the appellant is concurred in by 1/3 of the Common
Council membership. The Council may, upon granting review,
§ 325-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-7
1:343
§ 325-8. Interior alterations.
Interior alterations of a building or improvement located on a historic site
or within a historic district shall not require a certificate of appropriateness.
However, in the interest of preserving and maintaining an inventory of
historically or architecturally significant interior building materials and
appointments, the Commission shall, whenever possible, endeavor to
contact the owner or persons performing such work for the purpose of
encouraging the restoration or rehabilitation of any such material or
appointment or its careful removal to an ascertainable location. The
Building Inspector shall immediately notify the Commission of any request
for a building permit for interior alterations where such building materials
or appointments may be affected.
§ 325-9. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector or his appointed representative shall periodically
inspect any undertaking authorized by the Commission and set forth in the
granting and issuance of a certificate. If a violation of the conditions of any
certificate or any unauthorized change of any accessory object, building,
improvement, site or structure subject to and protected by the provisions of
this chapter is discovered, the Building Inspector is authorized to cite the
offending party under authority of this chapter and, in addition, may issue
a stop order in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 253 of
this Code where a continuing violation would result in irreparable harm to
the historic, architectural or cultural preservation of the property subject to
the violation.
§ 325-10. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation of Chapter 253 of the
Code and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in that chapter.
§ 325-11. Conflicts.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter is in conflict with any
section, clause or provision of Chapter 550, Zoning, of this Code, then
Chapter 550 shall control.
overturn, modify or uphold the decision of the administrative
appeal board.
§ 325-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 325-11
1:344
Chapter 332
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 282.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 303.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 319.
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 419.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 332-1. Administration and enforcement.
A. Scope.
(1) Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Minimum Housing
Standards Code for Dwellings and Multifamily Dwellings" and is
herein referred to as the "Housing Code of the City of Watertown,
Wisconsin."
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare in buildings used for dwelling purposes as
hereinafter provided, by:
(a) Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and
facilities for light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for
safety from fire; for space, use and location; for safe and
sanitary maintenance; and for cooking equipment in all
dwellings and multifamily dwellings now in existence.
(b) Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants
of dwellings and multifamily dwellings.
(c) Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
(3) Matters covered. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
structures used for human habitation which are now, or may
become in the future, substandard with respect to structure,
protection against fire hazard, equipment or maintenance,
inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of proper heating,
unsanitary conditions, and overcrowding, or otherwise may be
deemed to constitute a menace to the safety, health or welfare of
their occupants, except as provided in Subsection B(4). The
existence of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely
affects public safety, health and welfare and leads to the
continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight. Adequate
protection of the public, therefore, requires the establishment and
enforcement of these minimum housing standards.
§ 325-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-1
1:345
(4) Travel trailers and mobile homes. All movable units used for human
habitation, and the areas, grounds or parcels on which they are
located, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.103
B. Applicability. Every portion of a building or premises used or intended
to be used for residential purposes, except hotels and motels serving
transient guests only, rest homes, convalescent homes, and nursing
homes, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, irrespective of
when such buildings shall have been constructed, altered or repaired,
except as hereinafter provided.
(1) Application of Building Code. Any alterations to buildings or
changes of use therein which may be caused directly or indirectly
by the enforcement of this chapter shall be done in accordance with
Chapter 253, Building Construction, of this Municipal Code.
(2) Application of zoning law. Nothing in this chapter shall permit the
establishment of or conversion to a multifamily dwelling in any
zone except where permitted by the zoning law, nor the
continuation of such nonconforming use in any zone except as
provided for in Chapter 550, Zoning, of this Municipal Code.
(3) Conflict with other ordinances. Except as provided in Subsection
B(4), in any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or
health ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the
effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the
higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and
health of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of
this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other
ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the effective date
of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the
promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and such other ordinances
or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they
may be found in conflict with this chapter.
(4) Existing buildings. This chapter establishes minimum requirements
for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for
human habitation and does not replace or modify requirements
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use
of buildings, equipment or facilities except as provided in this
section.
(5) Existing remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the municipality or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any
buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-1
1:346
C. Enforcement authority.
(1) Enforcement officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Health Officer, Building Inspector, Fire Inspector, Electrical
Inspector and Director of Public Works, either severally or as a
group, to enforce the provisions of this chapter as herein provided.
(2) Administrative liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by
statute or local law or ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of
the municipality charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall
render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in
the discharge of his duties under this chapter. No person who
institutes, or assists in the prosecution of, a criminal proceeding
under this chapter shall be liable to damages hereunder unless he
acted with actual malice and without reasonable grounds for
believing that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of an
unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent or employee of the municipality as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
chapter shall be defended by the legal representative of the
municipality until the final determination of the proceedings
therein.
(3) Inspections. The building officials shall make or cause to be made
inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, multifamily
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and
premises in order to safeguard the safety, morals and welfare of the
public under the provisions of this chapter. The building officials
are authorized to enter any dwelling, dwelling unit, multifamily
dwelling, rooming house or premises at any reasonable time for the
purpose of performing their duties under this chapter. The owner,
operator or occupant of every dwelling, multifamily dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit or the person in charge thereof shall
give the Building Official free access thereto and to all parts thereof
and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable times
for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. It shall
be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance or impede an
inspector or officer authorized under this chapter in the
performance of his duties, and every such inspector or officer shall
have the right to enter, examine and survey all premises, grounds,
structures, dwellings and multifamily dwellings and every part
thereof at all reasonable times upon display of proper
identification.
(4) Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit shall give the owner or operator thereof or his agent
or employee access to any part of such dwelling unit, rooming unit
or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such
inspections, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 332-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-1
1:347
D. Condemnation.
(1) Dangerous structures. If all or part of any building or structure
(including among others a fence, billboard or sign) or the
equipment for the operation thereof (including among others the
heating plant, plumbing, electric wiring, moving stairways,
elevators and fire-extinguishing apparatus) shall be found in the
opinion of the enforcing official to be in an unsafe condition,
dangerous to life, limb or property, he shall proceed to have the
same condemned pursuant to the applicable provisions of
§ 66.0413, Wis. Stats., or such other code or codes of the
municipality pertaining to unsafe structures. [Amended by Ord.
No. 02-48]
(2) Structures unfit for human occupancy. Wherever the Building
Official finds that any dwelling or multifamily dwelling constitutes a
hazard to the safety, health or welfare of the occupants or to the
public because it lacks maintenance; or is in disrepair, unsanitary,
vermin-infested or rodent-infested; or because it lacks the sanitary
facilities or equipment, or otherwise fails to comply with the
minimum provisions of this chapter, but has not yet reached such
state of complete disrepair as to be condemned as a dangerous
structure as hereinbefore provided, he may declare such dwelling
or multifamily dwelling as unfit for human habitation and order it to
be vacated. If any dwelling or multifamily dwelling or any part
thereof is occupied by more occupants than permitted under this
chapter or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law, such
dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be deemed an unlawful
structure, and the Building Official may cause such dwelling to be
vacated. It shall be unlawful to again occupy such dwelling until it
or its occupation, as the case may be, has been made to conform to
the law.
(3) Notice. Notice of the declaration of any building under this chapter
as unfit for human habitation and order to vacate it shall be served
as provided in § 66.0413(1)(h), Wis. Stats. [Amended by Ord. No.
02-48]
(4) Posting of notice. Any dwelling or multifamily dwelling declared as
unfit for human habitation shall be posted with a placard by the
Building Official. The placard shall include the following:
(a) Name of City.
(b) The name of the authorized department having jurisdiction.
(c) The chapter and section of the code under which it is issued.
(d) An order that the dwelling or multifamily dwelling when
vacated must remain vacant until the provisions of the order
are complied with and the order to vacate is withdrawn.
§ 332-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-1
1:348
(e) The date that the placard is posted.
(f) A statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the
placard.
(5) Form of notice. Whenever the Building Official has declared a
dwelling or multifamily as unfit for human habitation, it shall be
done as described in § 66.0413(1)(br), Wis. Stats. [Amended by
Ord. No. 02-48]
(6) Service of notice. Service of notice to vacate must be given as
described in § 66.0413(1)(d), Wis. Stats. [Amended by Ord. No.
02-48]
(7) Removal of placard or notice. No person shall deface or remove the
placard from any dwelling or multifamily dwelling which has been
declared or placarded as unfit for human habitation except by
authority in writing from the Building Official.
(8) Vacating of declared building. Any dwelling or multifamily dwelling
which has been declared and placarded as unfit for human
habitation by the Building Official shall be vacated within a
reasonable time as required by the Building Official, and it shall be
unlawful for any owner or operator to let to any person for human
habitation said dwelling, multifamily dwelling or dwelling unit, and
no person shall occupy any dwelling or multifamily unit which has
been declared or placarded by the Building Official as unfit for
human habitation after the date set forth in the placard.
(9) Occupancy of building. No dwelling or multifamily dwelling which
has been declared or placarded as unfit for human habitation shall
again be used for human habitation until written approval is
secured from the Building Official. The Building Official shall
remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which
the declaration and placarding action were based have been
eliminated.
(10) Report of notice to vacate. The Building Official shall furnish a copy
of each notice to vacate a building to the Health Officer and the
Chief of the Fire Department, and any other designated official of
the municipality concerned therewith.
E. Violations. Notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of record,
provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon
such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally or, if not
found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode with a
person of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the
contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by mail to his last known
address, or if the letter with the copy is returned showing it has not
been delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place
in or about the dwelling affected by the notice.
§ 332-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-1
1:349
(1) Service of notice. Whenever the Building Officials determine that
there has been or is a violation, or that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been or is a violation of any
provision of this chapter, they shall give notice of such violation or
alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor.
Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
(c) Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action
required.
(d) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
(2) Prosecution of violation. In case any violation order is not promptly
complied with, the Building Officials may request the legal
representative to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation,
ordering him:
(a) To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
(b) To restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of
such building;
(c) To require the removal of work in violation;
(d) To prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure or
part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in
violation of or not in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, or in violation of a plan or specification under which
an approval, permit or certificate was issued; or
(e) To enforce the penalty provisions of this chapter.
(3) Violations and penalties. Every person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 1-4 of this Municipal Code. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and
provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
F. Right of appeal. [Amended by Ord. No. 96-9]
(1) Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or decision of
the enforcement officers in any matter relative to the interpretation
or enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter of the City of
Watertown Code may appeal said decision or interpretation.
§ 332-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-1
1:350
§ 332-2. Definitions.
(2) The owner of any dwelling, building or structure, a tenant, or any
person affected by the notice or order of the Building Officials
provided under Subsection E above may appeal the action taken by
the Building Officials, within 30 days of the date of service of the
written notice and/or order to comply upon such owner, tenant or
other person, to the circuit court of the county in which said
dwelling, building or structure is located for an order restraining
the Building Officials from taking the action under Subsection E
above as specified in the written notice or order to comply. Such
appeal must be in writing, which must specify the grounds therefor
and must address the contents of the written notice and/or order to
comply. A copy of such written appeal shall be served upon the
Building Officials within 30 days of service of the written notice and
order to comply upon the owner, tenant or other person.
G. Other violations. This chapter shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the municipality existing prior to the
effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall
continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
A. Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section.
(1) Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular member includes the plural and the plural the
singular.
(2) Terms defined in Building Code. Where terms are not defined in
this section and are defined in the Watertown Building Code (see
Ch. 253, Building Construction), they shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as in the Building Code.
(3) Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined under the
provisions of this chapter or under the provisions of Chapter 253,
Building Construction, they shall have ascribed to them their
ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context herein may
imply.
(4) Whenever the words "multifamily dwelling," "residence building,"
"dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "premises" are
used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
B. Applied meaning of words and terms. As used in this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
§ 332-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:351
APPROVED — "Approved," as applied to a material, device or method of
construction, shall mean approved by the Building Officials under the
provisions of this chapter or approved by other authority designated by
law to give approval in the matter in question.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
BOARDINGHOUSE, LODGING HOUSE; TOURIST HOUSE — See
"dwellings."
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code of the City of Watertown,
Wisconsin, latest edition, including amendments; see Chapter 253,
Building Construction.
BUILDING OFFICIALS — The officials designated by the City to enforce
building, zoning or similar laws and this chapter, or their duly
authorized representatives.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DEFAULT — For a residential building containing four or fewer dwelling
units, when the mortgagor is 60 days past due on the mortgagor's
obligation to make a scheduled payment under a mortgage or a
mortgage note. With respect to all other residential buildings, "default"
shall mean when the mortgagor is 90 days past due on the mortgagor's
obligation to make a scheduled payment under a mortgage or a
mortgage note.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
DWELLINGS —
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for or used
exclusively for residence purposes by one family or housekeeping
unit.
(1)
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for or used
exclusively by two families or housekeeping units.
(2)
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building or portion thereof
designed for or used by three or more families or housekeeping
units. See § 332-2A(4).
(3)
BOARDINGHOUSE; LODGING HOUSE — A dwelling or part
thereof occupied by a single housekeeping unit where meals and
lodging are provided for compensation by previous arrangement
but not for transients.
(4)
DORMITORY — A building arranged or used for lodging six but not
more than 20 individuals and having common toilet and bathroom
facilities.
(5)
§ 332-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-2
1:352
DWELLING UNIT — One room or a suite of two or more rooms designed
for or used by one family for living and sleeping purposes and having
only one kitchen or kitchenette. See § 332-2A(4).
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS — The officials designated herein or
otherwise charged with the responsibility of administering this chapter,
or their authorized representatives.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poison spraying, fumigating, or trapping; or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
FAMILY — A person living alone, or two or more persons living together
as a single housekeeping unit, in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from
a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, motel or hotel, or
fraternity or sorority house.
FORECLOSING — The process by which a property, placed as security
for real estate loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the
borrower defaults.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of all habitable space in a
building or structure.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged for
living, eating and sleeping purposes (not including bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other
accessory floor spaces).
HOTEL — See "dwellings."
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a multifamily
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises, of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
HOTEL — Any building or portion thereof used as a temporary
abiding place for remuneration, with or without meals, containing
five or more guest rooms or suites where no provision for cooking
is made in any individual guest room or suite; except hospitals and
jails.
(6)
TOURIST HOME — A building or part thereof, other than a hotel,
boardinghouse, lodging house or motel, where lodging is provided
by a resident family in its home for compensation, mainly for
transients.
(7)
§ 332-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:353
MORTGAGE — Any consensual lien created by a written instrument
which grants or retains an interest in real estate to secure debt or other
obligation. The term includes, without limitation: mortgages securing
reverse mortgage loans; mortgages securing revolving credit loans;
every deed conveying real estate, although an absolute conveyance in
its terms, which shall have been intended only as a security in the
nature of a mortgage; and equitable mortgages.[Added 7-21-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-23]
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including but not limited to, service
companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant
or employee of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or
assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests or obligations under the
mortgage agreement.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
MORTGAGOR — The person whose interest in the real estate is the
subject of the mortgage and any person claiming through a mortgagor
as successor. Where a mortgage is executed by a trustee of a land
trust, the mortgagor is the trustee and not the beneficiary or
beneficiaries.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
MOTEL — For purposes of this chapter, a motel shall be defined the
same as a hotel.
MULTIFAMILY (MULTIPLE) DWELLING — See "dwellings."
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age (including owner or
operator) living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual
possession of said dwelling or rooming unit.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
multifamily dwelling or rooming house in which dwelling units or
rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or
lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee
of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or
corporation in control of a building, or their duly authorized agents.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURES — Water heating facilities, water
pipes, gas pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, or other
similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents or other similarly
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or
vent lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon. See § 332-2A(4).
RESIDENCE BUILDING — A building in which sleeping
accommodations or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as
§ 332-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-2
1:354
a unit are provided, except when classified as an institution under the
Building Code. See § 332-2A(4).
ROOMING HOUSE — Any residence building, or any part thereof,
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the
owner or operator to more than five persons who are not members of
the family. See "dwellings: boardinghouse." See also § 332-2A(4).
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but
not for cooking or eating purposes. See § 332-2A(4).
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other
similar material.
SECURING — Measures that assist in making the property inaccessible
to unauthorized persons.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
VENTILATION — The process of supplying and removing air by natural
or mechanical means to or from any space.
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this chapter, they shall mean that
such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful
manner.
VACANT — [Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
(1) MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers or stacks without wind-driven devices.
(2)
Any real estate improved with a complete structure containing one
or more dwelling units or an incomplete structure if the real estate
is zoned for residential development, where the structure is empty
or otherwise uninhabited by persons and the structure or lot is in
need of maintenance, repair or securing, and with respect to which
one or more of the following conditions exist:
(a) All lawful construction operations have ceased for six months;
It has been declared unfit for occupancy and ordered to remain
vacant and unoccupied under an order issued by a building
inspector, environmental health inspector and/or a fire
inspector pursuant to § 332-1D or by an order issued by a court
of competent jurisdiction;
(b)
(1)
§ 332-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:355
§ 332-3. Environmental requirements.
YARD — An open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied or
unobstructed from the ground upward.
No construction or legal repairs have commenced for six
months;
(c)
The doors or windows are smashed through, broken, unhinged,
removed or continuously unlocked;
(d)
Law enforcement officials have received at least one report of
trespassers or vandalism or other illegal acts being committed
at the property in the last six months; and
(e)
Gas, electric or water services to the entire premises have
been terminated.
(f)
A property shall not be considered vacant if: (i) there is an
unoccupied building which is undergoing construction, renovation
or rehabilitation that is proceeding diligently to completion, and
the building is in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes,
regulations and legislation; (ii) there is a building occupied on a
seasonal basis, but otherwise secure; (iii) there is a secure building
on which there are bona fide rental or sale signs; or (iv) there is a
building that is secure, but is the subject of probate action, action
to quiet title, or other ownership dispute; or (v) there is otherwise
a building that is secure and in substantial compliance with all
applicable ordinances.
(2)
A. Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
conditions of property and buildings to be used for human occupancy.
Every building or structure occupied by humans, except as exempted by
§ 332-1B(4), and the premises on which it stands shall comply with the
conditions herein prescribed as they may apply thereto.
B. Exterior property areas. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or
let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living
therein or premises which does not comply with the following
requirements. The Building Officials shall cause periodic inspections to
be made of dwelling premises to secure compliance with these
requirements.
(1) Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish
or garbage.
(2) Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained
so as to provide adequate drainage therefrom and from any
building or structure located thereon.
§ 332-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-3
1:356
(3) Noxious weeds. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from
species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental
to the public health.
(4) Vermin and rodent harborage. Every owner of a dwelling or
multifamily dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of
rodents, vermin or other pests in all exterior areas of the premises,
except that the occupant shall be responsible for such
extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a singlefamily
dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public
parts of the premises of other than a single-family dwelling,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(5) Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
C. Exterior structure. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to
another for occupancy any dwelling or multifamily dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit or portion thereof for the purpose of
living therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Foundations, walls and roof. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof
and all other exterior surface shall be maintained in a workmanlike
state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition
as to exclude rodents.
(2) Foundation and exterior walls. Every foundation and exterior wall
shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers,
and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to
the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the
building.
(3) Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no
defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls
or interior portion of the building.
(4) Stairs, porches and railings. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be
adequate for safety, as provided in the Building Code, and shall
comply with the following subsections:
(a) Structural safety. Every outside stair, every porch, and every
appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be
safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is
subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(b) Handrails. Where the Building Officials deem it necessary for
safety, every flight of stairs which is more than two risers high
shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the
Building Code, and every porch which is more than two risers
high shall have handrails so located and of such design as
required by the Building Code. Every handrail and balustrade
§ 332-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-3
1:357
shall be firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good
condition.
(5) Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door and
basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in
sound condition and repair.
(6) Windows to be glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied
with glass window panes or an approved substitute which are
without open cracks or holes.
(7) Windows to be tight. Every window sash shall be in good condition
and fit reasonably tight within its frame.
(8) Windows to be openable. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position
by window hardware.
(9) Door hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch
shall be maintained in good condition.
(10) Doors to fit in frame. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit
reasonably well within its frame.
(11)Window and door frames to fit in wall. Every window, door and
frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the
adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as
possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering the
dwelling or multifamily dwelling.
(12) Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents,
rain and surface drainage water into the dwelling or multifamily
dwelling.
(13) Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being
easily opened from the inside.
(14) Screening. Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection
against rodents and vermin in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) Guards for basement windows. Every basement or cellar
window which is openable shall be supplied with corrosionresistive
rodentproof shields of not less than No. 22 U.S. gauge
perforated steel sheets, or No. 20 B&S gauge aluminum, or No.
16 U.S. gauge expanded metal or wire mesh screens, with not
more than 1/2 inch mesh openings, or with other material
affording equivalent protection against the entry of rodents,
including storm windows.
(b) Insect screens. From June 1 to October 15 of each year every
door opening directly from any dwelling or multifamily
§ 332-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-3
1:358
dwelling to the outdoors and every window or other outside
opening used for ventilation purposes shall be supplied with a
screen of not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging
screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition, except that no such screens shall be required for a
dwelling unit on a floor above the fifth floor.
D. Interior structure. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to
another for occupancy any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or portion thereof, for the purpose of
living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Free from dampness. In every dwelling, multifamily dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house and rooming unit, cellars, basements
and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from
dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or
deterioration of the structure.
(2) Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
dwelling and multifamily dwelling used for human habitation shall
be maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the
imposed loads in accordance with the provisions of the Building
Code.
(3) Interior stairs and railings. Stairs shall be provided in every
dwelling, multifamily dwelling, rooming house and boardinghouse
where required by the Building Code.
(4) Maintained in good repair. All interior stairs of every structure used
for human habitation shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive
wear or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be safe to use.
(5) Handrails. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more
than two risers high shall have handrails or railings located in
accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. Every
handrail or railing shall be firmly fastened and must be maintained
in good condition. Properly balustraded railings, capable of bearing
normally imposed loads, shall be placed on the open portions of
stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
(6) Bathroom floors. Every toilet and bathroom floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to
water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(7) Sanitation. The interior of every dwelling and multifamily dwelling
used for human habitation shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of rubbish or
garbage. Rubbish, garbage and other refuse shall be properly kept
§ 332-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-3
1:359
§ 332-4. Space and occupancy requirements.
inside temporary storage facilities as required under § 332-4A(6)
and (7) of this chapter.
(8) Insect and vermin harborage. Buildings used for human habitation
shall be kept free from insect and vermin infestation, and where
insects or vermin are found they shall be promptly exterminated by
acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health.
After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
(9) Extermination from buildings. Every owner of a dwelling or
multifamily dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests whenever infestation exists
in two or more of the dwelling units or in the shared or public part
of the structure.
(10) Extermination from single dwelling units. The occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be
responsible for such extermination within the unit occupied by him
whenever his dwelling unit is the only unit in the building that is
infested.
(11) Responsibility of owner. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions,
whenever infestation of vermin is caused by failure of the owner to
maintain any dwelling or multifamily dwelling in a verminproof
condition, extermination of such vermin shall be the responsibility
of the owner.
A. Basic facilities. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to
another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the
following requirements.
(1) Sanitary facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall
be supplied and maintained in sanitary, safe working condition:
(a) Water closet. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls
a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords
privacy and which is equipped with a water closet.
(b) Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which,
when a water closet is required, shall be in the same room with
said water closet.
(c) Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room
which affords privacy to a person in said room and which is
equipped with a bathtub or shower.
(d) Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink
apart from the lavatory required under Subsection A(1)(b).
§ 332-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-4
1:360
(2) Water and sewer system. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin,
bathtub or shower and water closet required under the provisions
of Subsection A(1) shall be properly connected to either a public
water and sewer system or to an approved private water and sewer
system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water.
(3) Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner,
properly maintained and properly connected with hot water lines to
the fixtures required to be supplied with hot water under
Subsection A(2). Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin,
bathtub, shower and laundry facility or other similar units, at a
temperature of not less than 120° F. at any time needed.
(4) Heating facilities. Every dwelling and multifamily dwelling shall
have heating facilities, and the owner of the heating facilities shall
be required to see that they are properly installed, safely
maintained and in good working condition, and that they are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to a temperature of at
least an average of 70° F. with an outside temperature of 10° below
zero. The owner shall maintain at all times a minimum room
temperature of 65° F. in all habitable rooms, including bathrooms
and toilet rooms, when rented.
(5) Operation of heating facilities and incinerators. Every heating or
water heating facility and incinerator shall be installed and shall
operate in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code
or the air pollution control ordinances of the municipality.
(6) Rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling, multifamily dwelling and
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and
covers for storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator or agent in
control of such dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be
responsible for the removal of such rubbish.
(7) Garbage storage or disposal facilities. Every dwelling or
multifamily dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate
mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each
dwelling unit, or an incinerator unit to be approved by the Building
Officials in the structure for the use of the occupants of each
dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can for each
dwelling unit.
B. Installation and maintenance. No person shall occupy as owneroccupant
or let to another for occupancy any dwelling, multifamily
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit for the purpose
§ 332-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-4
1:361
of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply
with the following requirements:
(1) Facilities and equipment. All required equipment and all building
space and parts in every dwelling and multifamily dwelling shall be
constructed and maintained so as to properly and safely perform
their intended function in accordance with the provisions of the
Building Code.
(2) Maintained clean and sanitary. All housing facilities shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as
not to breed insects and rodents or produce dangerous or offensive
gases or odors.
(3) Plumbing fixtures. In buildings and structures used for human
habitation, waterlines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be
properly installed, connected and maintained in working order and
shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable
of performing the function for which they are designed. All repairs
and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
the State Plumbing Code.
(4) Plumbing systems. In buildings and structures used for human
habitation, every plumbing stack and waste and sewer line shall be
so installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be
kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural
deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall
be made in accordance with the provisions of the State Plumbing
Code and all other codes having jurisdiction. If a sewer and water
system is made available by the City, all dwellings must connect
thereto.
(5) Heating equipment. Every space heating, cooking and water
heating device located in a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall
be properly installed, connected and maintained and shall be
capable of performing the function for which it was designed in
accordance with the provisions of all codes having jurisdiction.
(6) Electrical outlets and fixtures. Every electrical outlet and fixture, as
required pertaining to light and ventilation, shall be installed,
maintained and connected to the source of electric power in
accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code of the City of
Watertown.
(7) Correction of defective system. Where it is found, in the opinion of
the Building Officials, that the electrical system in a building
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building by reason of
inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar
reasons, they shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate
the hazard.
§ 332-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-4
1:362
C. Occupancy requirements. No person shall occupy or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which
does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable rooms in existing buildings,
except as provided in § 332-1B(4), shall have a clear ceiling height
of not less than 7 1/3 feet, except that in attics or top half-stories
the ceiling heights shall be not less than seven feet over not less
than 1/3 of the area when used for sleeping, study or similar
activity. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those
portions of the floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height
of five feet or more may be included.
(2) Required space in dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain
a minimum gross floor area of not less than 150 square feet for the
first occupant and 100 square feet for each additional occupant.
The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all
habitable rooms.
(3) Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a
minimum gross floor area of at least 70 square feet. Every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant
thereof.
(4) Access limitation of dwelling unit to commercial uses. No habitable
room, bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to
a dwelling unit shall open directly into or shall be used in
conjunction with a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or
dentist's examination or treatment room, or similar room used for
public purposes.
(5) Location of bath and second sleeping room. No residence building
or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have
such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping
room, nor shall the room arrangement be such that access to a
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping
room or a bathroom or water closet compartment. No bathroom
shall be so located that access thereto is solely through a kitchen.
(6) Occupancy of dwelling units below grade. No dwelling unit
partially below grade shall be used for living purposes unless:
(a) Floors and walls are watertight.
(b) Total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are
in accordance with this chapter.
§ 332-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-4
1:363
(c) Required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window
area.
D. Light and ventilation. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let
to another for occupancy any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house or rooming unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Natural light in habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have
at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors
or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between
stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of
such room, except in kitchens when artificial light may be provided
in accordance with the provisions of the City of Watertown,
Wisconsin, Building Code. Whenever walls or other portions of a
structure face a window of any room, and such obstructions are
located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level
above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not
be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area for the room.
(2) Light in nonhabitable work space. Every laundry, furnace room,
and all similar nonhabitable work spaces located in a dwelling or
multifamily dwelling shall have one supplied electric light fixture
available at all times.
(3) Light in public halls and stairways. Every public hall and inside
stairway in every dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be
adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least five
footcandles per square foot in the darkest portion of the normally
traveled stairs and passageways.
(4) Electric outlets required. Where there is electric service available
to the building or structure, every habitable room of a dwelling or
multifamily dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote
outlets, one of which may be a ceiling or wall-type electric light
fixture. In kitchens, three separate and remote wall-type electric
light convenience outlets or two such convenience outlets and one
ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture shall be provided. Every
public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or
furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture. In
addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry
room, there shall be provided at least one electric outlet.
(5) Adequate ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window which can be easily opened or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in
every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum
window area size required in Subsection D(1), except where
§ 332-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-4
1:364
§ 332-5. Responsibilities of occupants, owners and operators.
mechanical ventilation is provided in accordance with the
provisions of the Building Code of the City of Watertown,
Wisconsin.
(6) Ventilation and light in bathroom and water closet. Every bathroom
and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required by this
Subsection D, except that no window shall be required in
bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an
approved ventilation system.
E. Minimum requirements for safety from fire. No person shall occupy as
owner-occupant or shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling,
multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit,
lodging house or lodging unit which does not comply with the
applicable provisions of the fire prevention sections of Chapter 303 of
this Municipal Code and the following additional requirements for
safety from fire:
(1) Storage of flammable liquids prohibited. No dwelling, multifamily
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a
building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or
storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110° F. or lower.
(2) Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating
equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking
and water heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and
obstructions and kept functioning properly so as to be free from
fire, health and accident hazards. All installations and repairs shall
be made in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code or
other laws or ordinances of the municipality applicable thereto.
Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited.
(3) Smoke detectors. Section 101.145 of the Wisconsin Statutes
requires the installation and maintenance of smoke detectors in all
residential buildings, as defined in the statute. Said statute is
incorporated by reference herein. The Building Inspectors and Fire
Inspector of the City of Watertown are hereby designated as the
City officials entitled to make inspections for smoke detector
installation and maintenance. Any owner of a residential building
who fails to install or maintain smoke detectors as required by
§ 101.145, Wis. Stats., shall be subject to a minimum forfeiture of
$200. Any person who removes batteries from a smoke detector,
rendering the smoke detector inoperative, shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $500. [Added by Ord. No. 91-20]
A. Scope. Occupants of dwellings, multifamily dwellings and dwelling
units and owners or operators of rooming houses shall be responsible
for maintenance thereof as provided in this section.
§ 332-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-5
1:365
(1) Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep that part
of the dwelling unit and premises thereof which he occupies,
controls or uses in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose
of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
rubbish containers required by § 332-4A(6) of this chapter.
(3) Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
dispose of his garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it
in the garbage disposal facilities or, if such facilities are not
available, by removing all nonburnable matter and securely
wrapping such garbage and placing it in tight metal garbage
storage containers as required by § 332-4A(7) of this chapter, or by
such other disposal method as may be required by applicable laws
or ordinances of the municipality.
(4) Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of
a dwelling unit shall keep the supplied plumbing fixtures therein
clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
(5) Installation and care of plumbing fixtures furnished by occupant.
Every plumbing fixture furnished by the occupant of a dwelling unit
shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working
condition, kept clean and sanitary and free of defects, leaks or
obstructions.
B. Rooming houses. Every person who operates a rooming house or who
occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any
rooming house shall comply with the provisions of every section of this
chapter, except as provided in the following subsections:
(1) Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower properly connected to
an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming
house wherever said facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be
located within the residence building served and shall be directly
accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not
more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required
facilities shall not be located in the cellar.
(2) Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes
by more than three persons shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor area for each occupant thereof.
§ 332-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-5
1:366
§ 332-6. Maintenance of vacant and foreclosing residential
properties. [Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
(3) Bed linen and towels. The operator of every rooming house shall
supply bed linen and towels therein at least once each week and
prior to the letting of any room to another occupant. The operator
shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in
a clean and sanitary manner.
(4) Shades, drapes, etc. Every window of every rooming unit shall be
supplied with shades, drawn drapes or other devices or material
which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupant of
the rooming unit.
(5) Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the
rooming house, and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or
building within which the rooming house is contained is leased or
occupied by the operator.
(6) Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower required by Subsection B(1) shall be located
within the rooming house and within a room or rooms, which:
(a) Afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms.
(b) Are accessible from a common hall and without going outside
the rooming house or through any other room therein.
A. Scope. It is the intent of this section to protect and preserve public
safety, security and quiet enjoyment of occupants, abutters and
neighbors by:
(1) Requiring all residential property owners, including lenders,
trustees and service companies, to properly maintain vacant and/or
foreclosing properties.
(2) Regulating the maintenance of vacant and/or foreclosing
residential properties to prevent blighted and unsecured
residences.
B. Registration of vacant and/or foreclosing residential properties. If a
building official or enforcement official believes or receives a complaint
that a property is vacant, the Building Official or enforcement official
shall cause an inspection to be done to determine if the owners and/or
mortgagee must register vacant and/or foreclosing residential
properties with the Building, Safety and Zoning Division on forms
provided by the Division. All registration must state the individual
owner's, mortgagee's or agent's phone number and mailing address.
The mailing address may not be a post office box. This registration must
§ 332-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-6
1:367
also certify that the property was inspected and identified, whether the
property is vacant at the time of filing.
(1) If the property is vacant, the owner, mortgagee and/or registrant
must designate and retain a local individual or local property
management company, physically located within 25 miles of the
exterior boundaries of the City of Watertown, responsible for the
security and maintenance of the property. This designation must
state the individual or company's name, phone number and local
mailing address. The mailing address may not be a post office box.
(2) If the property is determined to be vacant and that foreclosure
proceedings have not been initiated, the registration must be
received within 14 days of the first citation for improper
maintenance.
(3) All property registrations are valid for one calendar year. An annual
registration fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule must accompany the registration form.
Subsequent annual registrations and fees are due within 30 days of
the expiration of the previous registration and must certify whether
the foreclosing and/or foreclosed property remains vacant or
not.104
C. Mortgagee to inspect real estate.
(1) Beginning 45 days after a default, a mortgagee shall determine, on
a monthly basis, if the building on the property subject to its
mortgage is vacant. Such determination may be made by
communication with the mortgagor, a visual inspection of the real
estate, or other means reasonably calculated to determine if the
building is vacant.
(2) This section shall not require a mortgagee to perform any action
which it is barred from doing by an automatic stay pursuant to a
bankruptcy proceeding.
D. Water supply shutoff. No later than 30 days after registration of a
vacant or foreclosing property pursuant to this section or upon
determination by the Building, Safety and Zoning Division that a
building is vacant, the owner, mortgagee and/or registrant must contact
the Water Department to shut off the water supply to the building.
However, the owner and/or registrant shall not knowingly request the
Water Department to shut off the water supply to any secure building
with a sealed, operational sprinkler system.
E. Maintenance requirements. Properties subject to this section must be
maintained in accordance with this chapter and all relevant sanitary
codes, building codes, and other local regulations concerning external
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-6
1:368
and/or visible maintenance. The owner, mortgagee, local individual or
local property management company must be physically located within
25 miles of the exterior boundaries of the City of Watertown; must
inspect and maintain the property on a monthly and an as-needed basis
for the duration of the vacancy.
(1) The property must contain a posting with the name and twentyfour-
hour contact phone number of the local individual or local
property management company, who are physically located within
25 miles of the exterior boundaries of the City of Watertown,
responsible for the maintenance. This sign must be posted on the
front of the property so it is clearly visible from the street.
(2) Adherence to this section does not relieve the owner and/or
mortgagee of any applicable obligations set forth in code
regulations, covenant conditions and restrictions, and/or
homeowners' association rules and regulations.
F. Inspections. See § 332-1C(3).
G. Enforcement. See § 332-1C.
H. Violation and penalties. See § 332-1E.
I. Termination.
(1) Upon the occurrence of any of the following, the requirements of
Subsections B and C of this section shall terminate with respect to
a mortgagee:
(a) Recorded assignment of the mortgagee's mortgage.
(b) Recorded satisfaction or release of the mortgagee's mortgage.
(2) Upon the occurrence of any of the following, the requirements of
Subsections B and C of this section shall terminate with respect to
a building:
(a) Recorded conveyance of title to the underlying real estate,
pursuant to foreclosure proceedings or otherwise;
(b) The building ceases to be vacant; or
(c) The building is demolished with all permits required by City of
Watertown's Code.
(3) Within 20 days of termination pursuant to this section, a mortgagee
shall notify the Building, Safety and Zoning Division on a form
provided by the Building, Safety and Zoning Division for such
purpose.
J. Exclusions. This section does not apply to the Federal Housing Finance
Agency as an owner and/or mortgagee of properties.
§ 332-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-6
1:369
Chapter 341
IMPACT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building permits — See Ch. 253, especially
§§ 253-9 and 253-11.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 512.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
K. Notice. A copy of this section is to be mailed to all loan institutions,
banks, real estate offices and management companies located in and/or
having legal or equitable interest in residential property located in the
City of Watertown.
§ 332-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 332-6
1:370
ARTICLE I
Water Supply
[Adopted by Ord. No. 01-28 (§ 17.09 of the former City Code);
amended by Ord. No. 04-9; Ord. No. 06-20A]
§ 341-1. Legislative purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted in § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., the purpose of
this article is to establish a mechanism for the imposition of impact fees,
due to increased land development within the service area of the City of
Watertown and the Water Utility of the City of Watertown, upon such new
land development to finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing,
upgrading, expanding, and constructing additional water treatment
facilities, wells, pumping stations, and storage systems which are necessary
to accommodate such new land development. In order to assure that the
new land development bears an appropriate share of the capital costs
necessary to provide water treatment facilities, wells, pumping stations,
and storage systems within the City of Watertown and its service area,
required to serve the need for water supply services arising out of this new
land development, it is necessary to adopt an impact fee structure so that
the Water Utility can recover these additional capital costs from the owners/
developers of new land development within the City of Watertown, as they
are required to serve the needs arising out of this new land development
on an equitable basis. In order to establish the needs of the service area,
amount, implementation schedule and timing for imposition of an impact fee
for water supply services, the City conducted a study and needs assessment,
which has been summarized in the Facilities Needs Assessment Report
(August 2000), prepared by Engineering Consultants, and the Report on
Impact Fees (November 2000) prepared by Virchow, Krause & Company,
LLP, on file in the office of the Water Systems Manager.
§ 341-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPITAL COSTS — The capital costs to construct, expand or improve
water treatment facilities, wells, and distribution and storage systems,
including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design
costs to construct, expand or improve water treatment facilities, wells, and
distribution and storage systems, except that not more than 10% of capital
costs may consist of legal, engineering and design costs. "Capital costs"
does not include other non-capital costs or cost of equipment to construct,
expand or improve water treatment facilities, wells, and distribution and
storage systems.
CITY — The City of Watertown.
FULL BUILDING PERMIT — The written approval issued by the City
Building Inspector's office, in accordance with the provisions of § SPS
320.09(4), Wis. Adm. Code, and § 253-11 of the Watertown Code, for any
§ 341-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-2
1:371
construction, repair, enlargement, improvement or alteration of any
building or structure within the City. It does not include the "early start"
permit or preliminary permit issued at the time of excavation or installation
of footings for any such building or structure.
IMPACT FEE — A monetary fee collected from an owner of record or
assessed against a land development pursuant to § 66.0617, Wis. Stats.,
by the City to defray all or part of the requirements for construction,
reconstruction, improvement, extension and expansion of the Water Utility
of the City of Watertown or any indebtedness incurred for that purpose
in order to provide water supply services on a pro rata basis to the land
development upon which the impact fee is levied.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to real property that creates additional residential equivalent
units within the City or its service areas or that results in nonresidential
uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved public facilities
within the City or its service areas.
OWNER OF RECORD — A person or entity that owns, builds, constructs or
creates a land development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Facilities for collection, extraction and storage of
water, water treatment facilities, wells, and distribution systems for water
supply within the City or its service area.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT (REU) — A unit of measure for the
impact fee equivalent to one residential dwelling unit. For purposes of this
article, one residential equivalent unit is considered equal to the basic
residential water meter size of 5/8 inch or 3/4 inch. The residential
equivalent unit is used as a single unit of measurement for all residential,
nonresidential, commercial, industrial, and institutional land developments
because of the relationship between size of the water meter and the
proportionate amount of water supply services used by the land
development.
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area delineated by the Common Council,
within which the City provides public facilities.
SERVICE STANDARD — A certain quantity or quality of water supply
services relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or other
appropriate measure as specified by the Common Council.
§ 341-3. Impact fee levied.
A. An impact fee is levied against each residential equivalent unit
constructed, altered, or improved within the City after the effective
date of this article.
(1) For new construction, each residential equivalent unit constructed
or caused to be built by the owner of record/developer shall be
subject to the assessment of the impact fee.
§ 341-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 341-3
1:372
(2) For alterations or improvements to an existing residential
equivalent unit, where a change in water meter size is requested,
the owner of record shall be assessed an impact fee equal to the
difference between the new water meter size and the existing
water meter size on the residential equivalent unit.
(3) Any existing structure within the City of Watertown which is served
by a well which will be capped and then the structure connected to
the water system shall be subject to the impact fee.105
(4) In the event any structure is annexed to the City of Watertown and
connects to the municipal water system, such structure shall be
subject to the impact fee.106
(5) The residential equivalent unit is the unit of measurement for
assessment of the impact fee, regardless of whether or not the
proposed land development is residential, commercial, industrial,
or institutional in nature.
B. The amount of the impact fee is calculated as per the following table:
Meter Size
(inches) Equivalency 2003 Impact Fee 2007 Impact Fee
5/8 and 3/4 1 $1,010 $1,200
1 2.5 $2,526 $3,000
1 1/4 3.75 $3,789 $4,500
1 1/2 5 $5,052 $6,000
2 8 $8,084 $9,600
3 15 $15,157 $18,000
4 25 $25,262 $30,000
6 50 $50,524 $60,000
8 or larger 80 $80,839 $96,000
C. The impact fee shall be paid in full by the owner of record of the land
development, unless expressly exempted under § 341-4, within 14 days
of issuance of a full building permit by the office of the Building
Inspector for any new construction or within 14 days of issuance of a
permit by the office of the Building Inspector for change in water meter
size, whichever is applicable. The impact fee shall be payable to the
office of the Building Inspector within 14 days of issuance of any permit
under this subsection.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-3
1:373
§ 341-4. Exemptions.
§ 341-5. Fee revenue administration.
D. If the owner of record fails to make the entire payment when due, the
Building Inspector of the City shall issue a stop order, pursuant to
§ 253-9 of the City of Watertown Building Code, and shall refuse to
approve any plans or to perform any further inspections until the
impact fee is paid in full. The Building Inspector may also revoke the
entire building permit, pursuant to § 253-19 of the City of Watertown
Building Code, if such impact fee remains unpaid for longer than three
months after its due date. The unpaid balance of the impact fee shall
bear interest at the rate of 1.0% per month from the date of the full
building permit approval by the office of the Building Inspector through
the date of payment.
E. The impact fee shall be collected and levied against all land
development within the City until the capital costs associated with the
projects specified in the Facilities Needs Assessment Report and Report
on Impact Fees for public facilities have been incurred and satisfied, but
in no event shall such time period exceed seven years beyond the
projected commencement of the respective capital improvement
projects.
A. The following situations shall be exempted from assessment of the
impact fee:
(1) Alterations or improvements to an existing building or structure
where no additional or larger water meter connections are
requested.
(2) The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or
structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger
water meter connections are requested and where the use of the
building or structure has not changed.
(3) Alterations or expansions of an existing building or structure where
a change in water meter size results in a decrease in water meter
size.
(4) Any land development with an approved conditional use permit
issued by the City for multifamily residences as of the effective date
of this article.
B. Any claim for exemption must be made to the office of the Building
Inspector no later than the time of application for a full building permit
for new construction or issuance of a permit for a change in water
meter size, and any claim for exemption not so made shall be deemed
waived.
A. All monies collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the
purpose of paying the proportionate costs of providing public facilities
§ 341-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 341-5
1:374
§ 341-6. Appeals.107
The payment of an impact fee imposed under this article as a condition
of a permit for new construction or issuance of a permit for a change in
water meter size may be contested as to the amount, collection or use of
the impact fee to the Watertown Public Works Commission, provided that
the applicant files a written notice of appeal in the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer within 15 days of the approval of the full building permit by the
office of the Building Inspector for new construction or issuance of a permit
for a change in water meter size upon which the impact fee is imposed.
Such notice of appeal shall be titled "Notice of Appeal of Impact Fee" and
shall state the applicant's name, address, telephone number, address (if
available) and legal description of the land development upon which the
impact fee is imposed, and a statement of the nature of and reasons for
the appeal. Said "Notice of Appeal of Impact Fee" shall be immediately
forwarded by the Clerk/Treasurer of the City to the Water Systems Manager.
The Water Systems Manager shall schedule the appeal for consideration
that may become necessary due to increased land development within
the City. These costs may include the cost of debt service on bonds
or similar debt instruments when the debt has been incurred for the
purpose of proceeding with designated public facilities projects prior
to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project, to
reimburse the City for advances of other funds or reserves as from time
to time approved by the Common Council.
B. All monies collected from impact fees shall be placed in one or more
segregated, interest-bearing accounts and shall be accounted for
separately from the other City general and utility funds. These revenues
and interest earned thereon may be expended only for capital costs and
interest on debt related to those capital costs for which the impact fee
was imposed.
C. Revenues derived from funds collected from impact fees imposed and
collected but not used within a period of seven years after the time of
commencement of construction, expansion or improvement of a specific
public facility project for which the impact fees were imposed shall be
refunded on a prorated, proportional basis, as determined by the
Common Council, to the then-current owner of record of the property
with respect to which the impact fee was imposed.
D. Any funds subject to a refund may be obtained upon application of the
then-current owner of record, who shall be entitled to return of the
original impact fee paid, together with interest at the rate of 1.0% per
year from the date of said payment to the date of said refund. The
owner of record must submit a written application for a refund to the
City Clerk/Treasurer of the City of Watertown within 180 days after the
expiration of the seven-year time period outlined in this section.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-6
1:375
by the Watertown Public Works Commission at a regular meeting as soon
as reasonably practicable under the circumstances and shall notify the
applicant of the time, date and place of such meeting in writing by regular
mail, deposited in the mail no later than at least three days before the date
of such meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the Watertown Public Works
Commission may adjust the amount, collection or use of the impact fee upon
just and reasonable cause shown.
§ 341-7. Review.
The impact fee contained in this article shall be reviewed by the Watertown
Public Works Commission and approved by the Common Council of the City
every two years. Until changed by this process, the current fees shall stay
in full force and effect.
§ 341-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 341-7
1:376
Chapter 356
LANDSCAPING
§ 341-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-7
1:377

ARTICLE I
Natural Landscape Permit
[Adopted by Ord. No. 93-54 (§§ 9.09 and 9.20 of the former City
Code)]
§ 356-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NATURAL LANDSCAPE — Includes common species of grass and
wildflowers native to Wisconsin and/or ornamental plantings which are
designed and purposely cultivated to exceed eight inches in height.
Specifically excluded in natural landscapes are the noxious grasses and
weeds identified in this article.[Amended by Ord. No. 94-35]
NATURAL LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A written plan relating to
the management and maintenance of a landscape which meets the following
requirements:
§ 356-2. Plan and permit required; restrictions.
Street address or legal description of the property where the proposed
natural landscape is being requested.
A.
B. A statement of intent and purpose for the landscape.
A detailed description of the types of plants and plant succession
involved.
C.
D. Specific management and maintenance techniques to be employed.
A. The growth of natural landscapes in excess of eight inches in height
shall be prohibited within the City, unless a natural landscape
management plan is approved and a permit is issued by the City as set
forth in this article. [Amended by Ord. No. 94-35]
B. Proposed landscaping is to be confined to property owned by the
applicant according to current City Assessor's records.
C. Natural landscaping on any City-owned property within any street
right-of-way is strictly prohibited. This shall include the property
between the sidewalk and street and not less than 10 feet adjacent to
the street where there is no sidewalk.
D. Natural landscapes shall not be permitted within three feet of the
abutting property unless waived in writing by the abutting property
owner on the side or sides affected. Such waiver shall be affixed to the
landscape management plan.
E. The property owner shall submit to the Weed Commissioner a drawing,
plot plan and/or survey which will show the location of the natural
§ 356-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-2
1:379
§ 356-3. Noxious grasses or weeds.
The following noxious grasses or weeds will not be allowed in a natural
landscape area:
Common Name(s) Botanical Name(s)
Buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica
Rhamnus frangula
Burdock (yellowdock) Artium lappa
Field bindweed (wild morning glory) Convolvulus arvensis
Garlic mustard Alliaria petiolata
Goatsbeard (oyster plant, salsify) Tragopogon porrifolius
Leafy spurge Euphorbia esula
Marijuana Cannabis sativa
Nettle Urtica dioica
Oxeye daisy Chrysanthemum leucanthemu
Pigweed (lambs quarters) Chenopodium album
Pigweed (amaranth) Amaranthus retroflexus
Poison ivy Rhus radicans
Purple loosestrife Lythrum salicaria
Quackgrass Bromus brizaeformis
Ragweed (common) Ambrosia artemisifolia
Ragweed (great) Ambrosia trifida
Spotted knapweed Centaurea maculosa
Thistle bull Cirsium vulgare
Thistle canada Cirsium arbense
Thistle musk or nodding Carduus nutans
Thistle star (caltrops) Centaurea calicitrapa
landscape area on the applicant's property. [Amended by Ord. No.
05-29]
F. All property owners who currently have natural landscapes must file for
a permit and submit a plan to be covered by this article.
G. Natural landscapes may constitute a fire or safety hazard, due to
weather conditions or other conditions. The Street Department, the
Weed Commissioner may order natural landscapes cut due to such
conditions. As a condition of receiving approval of the natural
landscape permit, the property owner shall be required to cut the
natural landscape within three days upon receiving a written letter
from the City of Watertown's Weed Commissioner.
§ 356-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 356-3
1:380
Common Name(s) Botanical Name(s)
Thistle sow (field) Sonchus arvensis
Thistle sow (common) Sonchus oleraceus
Thistle sow (spiny leaved) Sonchus asper
Sweet clover (yellow) Melilotus officinalis
Sweet clover (white) Melilotus alba
Yellow mustard (yellow rocket
winter cress)
Barbarea vulgaris
Japanese bamboo
Wild mustard
§ 356-4. Application for natural landscape permit. [Amended by
Ord. No. 05-29]
Property owners interested in applying for a natural landscape permit shall
submit a natural landscape management plan to the Street Department,
attention Weed Commissioner. All plans received will be reviewed by the
Weed Commissioner and the Public Works Commission for permit approval.
The property owner will be notified in writing by the City of Watertown
of approval or denial. If no notification is received within 45 days of the
property owner's initial submittal, the plans shall be deemed approved.
The plan, permit and letter of notification will remain on file at the Street
Department, Weed Commissioner's office for future reference.
§ 356-5. Appeal. [Amended by Ord. No. 05-29108]
The property owner may appeal a decision to deny or revoke the natural
landscape permit to the Public Works Commission at an open meeting. All
applications for appeal shall be submitted within 15 calendar days of the
notice of denial or revocation of the natural landscape permit. The decision
rendered by the Public Works Commission shall be final and binding.
§ 356-6. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. No. 05-29]
Enforcement will be upon written complaint by at least one adjoining owner
and filed with the Watertown Weed Commissioner. Upon receipt of a written
complaint, the permitted property will be inspected by the Weed
Commissioner. If the permitted property is determined to be in violation
of this article, the property owner shall be notified by the Public Works
Commission and City of Watertown Weed Commissioner by written notice
to correct specific violations within 15 days upon receipt of letter. If the
property owner does not correct the violations described in the written
notice, the City of Watertown shall order the property mowed, and the
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 356-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-6
1:381
property owner will be billed at the current rate for every hour worked, and
the permit shall be revoked.
§ 356-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
§ 356-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 356-7
1:382
Chapter 362
LITTERING
§ 362-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall throw, place or deposit or cause to be thrown, placed or
deposited any dirt, fill, straw, ashes, manure, tin cans, rubbish, grass, hay,
litter, rags, dead animals or decaying vegetable or animal matter, brush,
branches or other refuse matter, any glass or other type of debris or waste
material in or upon any street, alley, highway, public park or other property
of the City or into any body of water within the City, and the occupants of
any lot or premises shall not suffer or permit any of the above-mentioned
articles or matter to be or remain in or upon any street or sidewalk abutting
the lot or premises occupied by them. Any item to be disposed of must be
disposed of in a safe and legal manner and place.
Chapter 377
MINING, NONMETALLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 356-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-1
1:383

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 377-1. Title.109
This chapter shall be known as the "Nonmetallic Mining Reclamation
Ordinance for the City of Watertown."
§ 377-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a local program to ensure
the effective reclamation of nonmetallic mining sites on which nonmetallic
mining takes place in the City of Watertown after the effective date of this
chapter, in compliance with Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code, and Subch. I of
Ch. 295, Wis. Stats.
§ 377-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under authority of § NR 135.32, Wis. Adm. Code,
and § 62.11(3), Wis. Stats.
§ 377-4. Restrictions adopted under other authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt and implement the uniform
statewide standards for nonmetallic mining required by § 295.12(1)(a), Wis.
Stats., and contained in Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code. It is not intended that
this chapter repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
rules, regulations, ordinances or permits not concerning nonmetallic mining
reclamation previously adopted pursuant to other Wisconsin law.
§ 377-5. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the applicable requirements for nonmetallic mining
reclamation and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes outside the reclamation
requirements for nonmetallic mining sites required by Subch. I of Ch.
295, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code. Where any terms or
requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more
restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision
of this chapter is required by Wisconsin Statutes or by a standard in Ch.
NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the provision is unclear, the provision
shall be interpreted to be consistent with the Wisconsin Statutes and the
provisions of Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 377-6. Applicability.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-6
1:385
§ 377-7. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the City of
Watertown.
§ 377-8. Definitions.
All definitions for the purposes of this chapter are those contained in § NR
135.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Overall applicability. The requirements of this chapter apply to all
operators of nonmetallic mining sites within the City of Watertown
operating on or commencing to operate after August 1, 2001, and as
provided in § NR 135.02(1) and (2), Wis. Adm. Code, except where
exempted in Subsection B.
B. Exemptions. This chapter does not apply to the exempt activities listed
in § NR 135.02(3), Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 377-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 377-8
1:386
ARTICLE II
Standards
§ 377-9. Standards.
All nonmetallic mining sites subject to this chapter shall be reclaimed in
conformance with the standards contained in Subch. II of Ch. NR 135, Wis.
Adm. Code.
§ 377-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-9
1:387

ARTICLE III
Permitting
§ 377-10. Nonmetallic mining reclamation permit application.
§ 377-11. Reclamation plan.
A. Required submittal. The operator of all nonmetallic mining sites that
operate on or after August 1, 2001, shall apply for a reclamation permit
from the City of Watertown. All reclamation permit applications under
this section shall be accompanied by the information required by § NR
135.18(2), Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Existing mines. The operator of any existing nonmetallic mine shall
apply for an automatic reclamation permit from the City of Watertown
by providing the information required by § NR 135.18(1), Wis. Adm.
Code, and the submittals required under Subsection A no later than the
effective date of this chapter to the City of Watertown.
C. New mines. The operator of any nonmetallic mine site that engages in
or plans to engage in nonmetallic mining that will begin operations
after August 1, 2001, or which has not applied for an automatic
reclamation permit pursuant to Subsection B, shall submit an
application that meets the requirements of § NR 135.18(1), Wis. Adm.
Code, and the submittals required under Subsection A to the City of
Watertown prior to beginning operations. This application shall be
accompanied by a plan review fee as specified in § 377-24.
A. Reclamation plan requirements. All operators of nonmetallic mining
sites subject to this chapter shall prepare and submit a reclamation
plan that meets the requirements of § NR 135.19, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Existing mines. The operator of any nonmetallic mining site that
submits an automatic permit application in conformance with
§ 377-10B shall submit the reclamation plan required by Subsection A
by 18 months after submittal of the application for an automatic permit.
The City of Watertown may extend this deadline for cause, at its sole
discretion.
C. New mines. The operator of any nonmetallic mining site that applies for
a permit in conformance with § 377-10C shall submit the reclamation
plan required by Subsection A with its application for a reclamation
permit.
D. Existing plans and approvals. To avoid duplication of effort, the
reclamation plan required by Subsection A may, by reference,
incorporate existing plans or materials that meet the requirements of
this chapter. Previous approvals for nonmetallic mining sites that apply
in accordance with § 377-10B shall satisfy the requirements of
Subsection A, if they meet the requirements of § NR 135.21, Wis. Adm.
Code.110
§ 377-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-11
1:389
§ 377-12. Financial assurance.
§ 377-13. Public notice and right of hearing.
E. Approval of reclamation plan. The City of Watertown shall approve,
conditionally approve or deny the reclamation plan submitted under
this section in writing as part of permit issuance pursuant to § 377-14B
for existing mines and § 377-14D for new mines. Conditional approvals
of reclamation plans shall be made according to § 377-14G and denials
of reclamation plans made according to § 377-15. The operator shall
keep a copy of the reclamation plan required by this section, once
approved by the City of Watertown under this chapter, at the mine site
or, if not practicable, at the operator's nearest office or place of
business.
A. Financial assurance requirements. All operators of nonmetallic mining
sites in the City of Watertown shall prepare and submit a proof of
financial assurance of successful reclamation that meets the
requirements of § NR 135.40, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Existing mines. The operator of any nonmetallic mining site that
submits an automatic permit application in conformance with
§ 377-10B shall submit the financial assurance required by Subsection
A by 18 months after submittal of the application for an automatic
permit. The City of Watertown may extend this deadline for cause, at its
sole discretion.
C. New mines. The operator of any nonmetallic mining site that applies for
a reclamation permit in conformance with § 377-10C shall submit the
proof of financial assurance required by Subsection A as specified in the
reclamation permit issued to it under this chapter.
D. Public nonmetallic mining. The financial assurance requirements of this
section do not apply to nonmetallic mining conducted by the State of
Wisconsin, a state agency, board, commission or department, or a
municipality.
A. New mines. The City of Watertown shall provide public notice and the
opportunity for a public informational hearing as set forth in § NR
135.20(1) and (2), Wis. Adm. Code, for any nonmetallic mining site for
which a complete reclamation permit application that satisfies
§ 377-10C is received.
B. Existing mines. No public notice or informational hearing is required on
an application for a reclamation permit for an existing mine that
satisfies § 377-10B, except as provided in § NR 135.20, Wis. Adm.
Code.111
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 377-13
1:390
§ 377-14. Issuance of a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit.
C. Local transportation-related mines. No public notice or informational
hearing is required for a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit issued
to a local transportation-related mine pursuant to § 377-14E.
A. Permit required. Every operator of a nonmetallic mining site in the City
of Watertown who engages in or plans to engage in nonmetallic mining
after September 1, 2001, shall obtain a reclamation permit issued
under this section, except nonmetallic mining sites exempt from this
chapter as provided in § 377-6B. No person may engage in nonmetallic
mining or nonmetallic mining reclamation after September 1, 2001,
without a reclamation permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. Automatic permit for existing mines. The City of Watertown shall issue
an automatic reclamation permit to the operator of any nonmetallic
mining that submits an application meeting the requirements of
§ 377-10B as set forth in § NR 135.21(1), Wis. Adm. Code. The
automatic permit shall be issued within 30 days of such application.
C. Evaluation of follow-up submittals for existing mines. Mines covered by
automatic permits issued under Subsection B shall submit a
reclamation plan in accordance with § 377-11B and proof of financial
assurance in accordance with § 377-12B by the deadlines established in
those subsections. Reasonable extensions to these deadlines may be
granted in writing by the City of Watertown where extenuating
circumstances exist. The follow-up submittals required by this
subsection shall be evaluated using the criteria and procedures in § NR
135.21(1), Wis. Adm. Code.112
D. Permit issuance for new mines. Applicants for reclamation permits for
nonmetallic mining sites not permitted under Subsection B that satisfy
§ 377-10C shall be issued a reclamation permit or otherwise acted on as
provided in § NR 135.21(2), Wis. Adm. Code. The permit shall require
compliance with a reclamation plan submitted by the applicant that
conforms with § 377-11C and provision by the applicant of financial
assurance that conforms with § 377-12C, payable to the City of
Watertown prior to beginning mining.
E. Automatic permit for local transportation-related mines.
(1) The City of Watertown shall issue an automatic permit under this
subsection for any borrow site operated to provide material for a
locally administered transportation project that meets the criteria
in § NR 135.23(1)(a), Wis. Adm. Code. This automatic permit shall
be issued according to the provisions of § NR 135.23(1)(b) through
(j), Wis. Adm. Code.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-14
1:391
§ 377-15. Permit denial.
An application for a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit shall be denied
if any of the factors specified in § NR 135.22, Wis. Adm. Code, exist.
§ 377-16. Alternative requirements.
(2) Wisconsin Department of Transportation exempted. A reclamation
permit is not required under this subsection for nonmetallic mine
sites that are operated to provide materials for construction,
maintenance and repair of transportation facilities that are subject
to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation concerning
restoration of the nonmetallic mining site, as provided by
§ 295.16(1)(c), Wis. Stats. Plan review fees may not be assessed for
local transportation-related mines permitted under this subsection,
and the county or municipality may not assess them an annual fee
under § 377-25 that is greater than allowed by § NR 135.23(1)(g),
Wis. Adm. Code.
F. Expedited review. Any operator of a nonmetallic mining site may obtain
an expedited review of a reclamation permit application by paying the
expedited review fee. The expedited review shall be carried out
according to the provisions of § NR 135.23(2), Wis. Adm. Code. Such
expedited review shall not waive, shorten or otherwise affect the public
notice and right of hearing pursuant to § 377-13.113
G. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions as provided in § NR 135.21(2), Wis. Adm. Code. One required
condition shall be that new mines shall obtain financial assurance prior
to beginning mining, pursuant to § NR 135.40, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Scope of alternative requirements approvable. An operator of a
nonmetallic mining site may request an alternative requirement to any
reclamation standard established in § 377-9. Such a request may be
made only on the basis of the criteria set forth in § NR 135.26(1), Wis.
Adm. Code.
B. Procedures. The operator of a nonmetallic mining site requesting an
alternate requirement in Subsection A shall demonstrate all the criteria
in § NR 135.26(1), Wis. Adm. Code. This shall be submitted in writing to
the City of Watertown Public Works Commission.
(1) Public Works Commission review. The Commission is to review this
alternate requirement request.
(2) Applicant to provide information. The applicant must provide
sufficient detail to allow the Commission to make a determination
on the request.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 377-16
1:392
§ 377-17. Permit duration.
A nonmetallic mining reclamation permit issued under this chapter shall
last through operation and reclamation of the nonmetallic mining site,
unless suspended or revoked pursuant to § 377-22, or as limited under § NR
135.27, Wis. Adm. Code, where the mine operator is not the landowner.
§ 377-18. Permit transfer.
A nonmetallic mining reclamation permit issued under this chapter may be
transferred to a new owner or operator upon satisfaction of the conditions
in § NR 135.28, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 377-19. Previously permitted sites.
For any nonmetallic mining site which had a reclamation permit previously
issued pursuant to Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code, that becomes subject to
the reclamation permitting authority of Dodge and Jefferson Counties, the
previously issued municipal reclamation permit's terms and conditions shall
remain in force until they can be modified by Dodge and Jefferson Counties
pursuant to § 377-21A.
§ 377-20. Review.
Any permitting decision or action made by the City of Watertown under this
chapter may be reviewed as set forth in § NR 135.30, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) Public Works Commission may hold a public hearing. If the
Commission decides to hold a public hearing, at least 10 days'
notice will be provided to the public and applicant.
(4) Public Works Commission to make recommendation. The
Commission will make a final recommendation to the City of
Watertown Common Council.
(5) Council to make final approval. The Common Council is the final
authority on the decision to amend, approve or disapprove an
alternate requirement request.
C. Transmittal of decision on request for alternate requirements. The
decision on a request for alternative reclamation requirements shall be
in writing to the applicant and shall include documentation of why the
alternative requirement was approved, not approved or amended.
D. Notice to Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. The City of
Watertown shall provide notice to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, as provided in § NR 135.26(3), Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 377-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-20
1:393

ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 377-21. Permit modification.
§ 377-22. Permit suspension or revocation.
§ 377-23. Annual operator reporting.
A. By the City of Watertown. A nonmetallic mining reclamation permit
issued under this chapter may be modified by the City of Watertown if it
finds that, due to changing conditions, the nonmetallic mining site is no
longer in compliance with this chapter. Such modification shall be by an
order conforming with the procedures in § 377-30 and as provided in
§ NR 135.24(1), Wis. Adm. Code.
B. At the operator's option. If the operator of any nonmetallic mine that
holds a reclamation permit issued under this chapter desires to modify
such permit or reclamation plan approved under this chapter, it may
request such modification by submitting a written application for such
modification to the City of Watertown, 106 Jones Street, Watertown, WI
53094. The application for permit or plan modification shall be acted on
using the standards and procedures of this chapter.
C. Required by the operator. The operator of any nonmetallic mine that
holds a reclamation permit issued under this chapter shall request a
modification of such permit if required under the circumstances set out
in § NR 135.27, Wis. Adm. Code. Such application for permit
modification shall be acted on using the standards and procedures of
this chapter.
D. Review. All actions on permit modifications requested or initiated under
this section are subject to review under § 377-20.
A. Grounds. The City of Watertown may suspend or revoke a nonmetallic
mining reclamation permit issued pursuant to this chapter if it finds any
of the grounds listed in § NR 135.25(1), Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Procedures. If the City of Watertown finds grounds for suspending or
revoking a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit set forth in
Subsection A, it may issue a special order suspending or revoking such
permit as set forth in § 377-30B.
C. Consequences. The consequences of a reclamation permit suspension
or revocation order under Subsection B shall be as set forth in § NR
135.25(2) and (3), Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Contents and deadline. Annual reports shall be submitted by the
operators of nonmetallic mining sites that satisfy the requirements of
§ NR 135.36, Wis. Adm. Code. These reports shall be for reclamation
during a calendar year and submitted in writing within 60 days of the
end of each calendar year to the City of Watertown. Annual reports shall
§ 377-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-23
1:395
§ 377-24. Plan review fees.
§ 377-25. Annual fees.
be submitted until reclamation at each nonmetallic mining site is
certified as complete under § 377-27C.
B. Inspection in lieu of report. The City of Watertown may, at its discretion,
obtain the information required in Subsection A by written
documentation of an inspection it completes during a calendar year, as
set forth in § NR 135.36(4), Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Retention of annual reports. Annual reports submitted under this
section or inspection records that replace them shall be retained by the
City of Watertown for at least 10 years after the calendar year to which
they apply. These records, or accurate copies of them, shall be made
available to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources upon
written request or during its inspection or audit activities carried out
pursuant to Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Amount and applicability. A person who intends to operate a
nonmetallic mining site for which a permit application has been
submitted under § 377-10C shall submit a nonrefundable plan review
fee as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule. No plan review fee may be assessed under this section for any
nonmetallic mine site for which an application for an automatic
reclamation permit is submitted that meets the requirements of
§ 377-10B or for any local transportation-related mine issued an
automatic permit under § 377-14E. A separate plan review fee shall be
paid under this section for any modification to an existing reclamation
plan submitted pursuant to § 377-21.114
B. Relation to annual fee. Any reclamation plan review fee collected under
this section shall be added to and collected as part of the first annual
fee collected under § 377-25.
A. Areas subject to fees; procedures and deadline. Operators of all
nonmetallic mining sites subject to reclamation permits issued under
this chapter shall pay annual fees to the City of Watertown. Fees paid
under this section shall include both a share for the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under Subsection B and a share for
the City of Watertown under Subsection C that equals as closely as
possible the costs of examination and approval of nonmetallic mining
reclamation plans and the inspection of nonmetallic mining reclamation
sites. These fees shall be calculated based on amount of unreclaimed
acres of each site, as defined in § NR 135.39(1), Wis. Adm. Code, and
according to its provisions. Such fees apply to a calendar year or any
part of a year in which nonmetallic mining takes place, until final
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 377-25
1:396
§ 377-26. Regulatory reporting and documentation.
§ 377-27. Completed reclamation; reporting, certification and
effect.
reclamation is certified as complete under § 377-27. Fees shall be paid
no later than December 31 before the year for which they apply.
B. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources share of fee. Fees paid
under this section shall include a share for the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources equal to the amount specified in § NR 135.39(3),
Wis. Adm. Code. For sites on which no nonmetallic mining has taken
place during a calendar year, fees to be paid under this section for the
following year shall be as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule.115
C. The City of Watertown share of fee. Fees paid under this section shall
also include an annual fee due to the City of Watertown, which shall be
as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule per acre to be established on an unreclaimed acre basis.116
D. Reduced fee for inactive mines. Any site on which no nonmetallic
mining activity has taken place in a calendar year shall be assessed a
fee per acre for the following calendar year as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule.117
A. Reporting. The City of Watertown shall send an annual report to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, including the information
required by § NR 135.37, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Documentation. The City of Watertown shall, to the best of its ability,
maintain the information set forth in § NR 135.47(3), Wis. Adm. Code,
and make it available to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources for that agency's audit of the City of Watertown's
reclamation program pursuant to § NR 135.47, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Reporting. The operator of a nonmetallic mining site may certify
completion of reclamation for a portion or all of the nonmetallic mining
site pursuant to a reclamation plan prepared and approved pursuant to
this chapter and Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Reporting of interim reclamation. The operator of a nonmetallic mining
site may report completion of interim reclamation as specified in the
reclamation plan for the site prepared and approved pursuant to this
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-27
1:397
§ 377-28. Permit termination.
When all final reclamation required by a reclamation plan conforming to
§ 377-11 and required by this chapter is certified as complete pursuant
to § 377-27, the City of Watertown shall issue a written statement to the
operator of the nonmetallic mining site, thereby terminating the
reclamation permit.
chapter and Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code. Reporting of interim
reclamation shall be done according to the procedures in Subsection A.
C. Certification of completed reclamation. The City of Watertown shall
inspect a nonmetallic mining site for which reporting of reclamation or
interim reclamation has been submitted pursuant to this section within
60 days of receipt and make a determination in writing in accordance
with § NR 135.40(7)(c), Wis. Adm. Code. If it is determined that interim
or final reclamation is complete, including revegetation as specified in a
plan that conforms with § 377-11, the City of Watertown shall issue the
mine operator a written certificate of completion.
D. Effect of completed reclamation. If reclamation is certified by the City
of Watertown as complete under Subsection C for part or all of a
nonmetallic mining site, then:
(1) No fee shall be assessed under § 377-25 for the area so certified.
(2) The financial assurance required by § 377-12 shall be released.
E. Effect of inaction following report of completed reclamation. If no
written response as required by Subsection C for an area of the mine
site reported as reclaimed or interim reclaimed is given within 60 days
of receiving such request, any annual fee paid to the City of Watertown
for it under § 377-25 shall be refunded.
§ 377-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 377-28
1:398
ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 377-29. Right of entry and inspection.
§ 377-30. Orders and citations.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of
Subch. I of Ch. 295, Wis. Stats., Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code, or this
chapter, any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of
the City of Watertown may inspect any nonmetallic mining site subject
to this chapter as provided in § 295.17(1), Wis. Stats., and § NR 135.42,
Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Under § NR 135.42(1), Wis. Adm. Code, persons entering nonmetallic
mine sites under this right of inspection shall obtain training and
provide their own safety equipment as needed to comply with
applicable federal, state and local laws or regulations.
A. Enforcement orders. The City of Watertown may issue orders as set
forth in § 295.19(1)(a), Wis. Stats., to enforce Subch. I of Ch. 295, Wis.
Stats., Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code, this chapter, a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter or a reclamation plan required by § 377-11 and
a permit issued under this chapter. A violation of this chapter, an order
or permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a reclamation plan required
by § 377-11 and a permit issued under this chapter shall be considered
a violation of Subch. I of Ch. 295, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 135, Wis.
Adm. Code.
B. Special orders. The City of Watertown may issue a special order as set
forth in § 295.19(1)(b) and (c), Wis. Stats., suspending or revoking a
nonmetallic mining reclamation permit pursuant to § 377-22 or
directing an operator to immediately cease an activity regulated under
Subch. I of Ch. 295, Wis. Stats., Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code, or this
chapter until the necessary plan approval is obtained.
C. Review of orders. An order issued under Subsection A or B may be
reviewed as provided in § NR 135.43(2), Wis. Adm. Code.
D. Citations. The City of Watertown may issue a citation under § 66.0119,
Wis. Stats., to collect forfeitures or require any action needed to
enforce Subch. I of Ch. 295, Wis. Stats., Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code,
this chapter, a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a reclamation
plan required by § 377-11 and a permit issued under this chapter. The
issuance of a citation under this subsection shall not preclude
proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or
any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating
to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a
citation under this subsection.
§ 377-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-30
1:399
§ 377-31. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of Subch. I of Ch. 295, Wis. Stats., Ch. NR 135, Wis. Adm.
Code, this chapter, a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a reclamation
plan required by § 377-11 and a permit issued under this chapter may result
in forfeitures as provided in § 295.19(3), Wis. Stats.
E. Enforcement. The City of Watertown may submit any order issued
under this section to the District Attorney, the Corporation Counsel, the
Municipal Attorney or the Attorney General for enforcement as
provided in § 295.19(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 377-30 WATERTOWN CODE § 377-31
1:400
Chapter 390
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal nuisances — See Ch. 228.
Housing standards violations — See Ch. 332.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 410.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
497.
§ 377-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-31
1:401

ARTICLE I
Public Nuisances
[Adopted as §§ 12.01 to 12.04 and 12.06 of the former City Code]
§ 390-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the City of Watertown.
§ 390-2. Public nuisance.
A public nuisance is a thing, act or occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
§ 390-3. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the
definition of § 390-1 of this article:
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public;
B. Render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way or the use of public property.
A. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold
or offered for sale to the public.
B. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human
consumption or food, which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a
sanitary manner within 24 hours after death in the months of April to
November or 48 hours after death during the months of December to
March.
C. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish,
rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material
whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or
other vermin may breed.
D. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply.
E. Any substance, activity or condition sufficient to create a human health
hazard as that term is defined in § 254.01(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 390-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:403
§ 390-4. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and
decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition
of § 390-1 of this article:
F. Any chemical and/or biological material that is stored, used or disposed
of in such quantity or manner that is, or has the potential to create, a
human health hazard.
G. The addition of any chemical and/or biological substance that would
cause groundwater to be unpalatable or unfit for human consumption.
The substances include but are not limited to the chemical and/or
biological substances listed in Ch. NR 809, Wis. Adm. Code, titled "Safe
Drinking Water."
H. Any private well that is constructed, abandoned or used in
noncompliance with Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, or any pump installed
in noncompliance with Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
I. The pollution of any public well, stream, lake, canal or other body of
water by sewage, noxious acids, or industrial wastes or other
substances.
J. Any use of property, substances or things within the City emitting or
causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable
odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons, which annoy, discomfort, injure or
inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within
the City.
K. Any hole or opening caused by an improperly abandoned cistern, septic
tank, dug well or any improperly abandoned, barricaded or covered up
excavation not securely covered or secured from public use.
L. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome
liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley,
sidewalk or public place within the City. [Amended by Ord. No.
06-07]
A. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose
of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse, or gambling.
B. All gambling devices and slot machines.
C. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are
sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified
without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the City.
§ 390-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 390-4
1:404
§ 390-5. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the provisions of § 390-1 of this article:
D. Any place or premises within the City where City ordinances or state
laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are
openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
E. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws
of the State of Wisconsin or ordinances of the City.
A. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or
near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the
public so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
B. All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the fire limits of the
City in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating
to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures
within said district.
C. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing
which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control
device, railroad sign or signal or which because of color, location,
brilliance or manner of operation interfere with the effectiveness of any
such device, sign or signal.
D. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk.
E. All limbs of trees which project over public sidewalks and are less than
eight feet above the surface of a public sidewalk, or which project over
public roadways and are less than 12 feet above the public roadway.
[Amended by Ord. No. 06-29]
F. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the
State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the City.
G. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out-of-repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
H. All abandoned and wrecked or dilapidated motor vehicles, buses,
railroad cars and house trailers.
I. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less
than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
§ 390-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-5
1:405
§ 390-6. Dutch elm disease.
J. All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind.
K. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent or
habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises
shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable
number of persons within the City.
L. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by ordinances of
the City or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances,
are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time
after the purpose thereof has been accomplished.
M. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
N. All fences, walls or barricades erected and maintained on residential
property which are designed to cause bodily injury, including but not
limited to barbed wire fences, electrified fences, razor fences, and
broken glass walls. [Added by Ord. No. 97-40]
A. Declared a public nuisance. The Common Council having determined
that the health of the elm trees within the City is threatened by a fatal
disease known as Dutch elm disease hereby declares the following to be
public nuisances:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the
Dutch elm disease fungus or which harbors any of the elm bark
beetles.
(2) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not
been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark
beetle-destroying insecticide.
B. Nuisances prohibited. No person shall permit any public nuisance as
defined in Subsection A to remain on any premises owned or controlled
by him within the City.
C. Inspection. The City Forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
premises and places within the City at least twice each year to
determine whether any public nuisance as defined in Subsection A
exists thereon and shall also inspect or cause to be inspected any elm
tree reported or suspected to be infected with the Dutch elm disease or
elm bark bearing material infested with the elm bark beetle.
D. Abatement.
(1) If the City Forester, upon inspection and examination, shall
determine that any public nuisance as herein defined exists in or
upon any public street, alley, boulevard, parkway, park or other
§ 390-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 390-6
1:406
§ 390-7. Abatement of public nuisances.
public place, including the terrace strip between curb and
sidewalk, within the City and that the danger to other trees within
the City is imminent, he shall immediately cause it to be removed
and burned or otherwise abate the same in such manner as to
prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease or the
insect pests or vectors known to carry such disease fungus.
(2) If the City Forester shall determine that any public nuisance as
herein defined exists in or upon private premises and that the
danger to other elm trees within the City is imminent, he shall
immediately serve upon the owner of such property, if he can be
found, or upon the occupant thereof a written notice to abate such
nuisance on or before April 15 of the following year. If such owner
or occupant does not abate said nuisance within the time limited,
the City Forester shall cause the same to be abated. No damage
shall be awarded to the owner for destruction of any elm tree, elm
wood or any part thereof pursuant to this section. [Amended by
Ord. No. 70-58]
E. Spraying of elm trees. Whenever it is determined that any elm tree or
part thereof is infected with Dutch elm disease fungus, the City
Forester may require that all elm trees within a one-thousand-foot
radius thereof be sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle-destroying
concentrate; such spraying shall be performed prior to July 31.
F. Transporting of elm wood prohibited. No person shall transport within
or bring into the City any bark bearing elm wood or material without
first securing the permission of the City Forester.
A. Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police,
Building Inspector, Health Officer, Fire Chief and City Forester to
enforce those provisions of this article that come within the jurisdiction
of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and
inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not
violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public
nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be
inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has
satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist.
B. Summary abatement.
(1) Notice. Except as provided in § 497-5 of the City's Code, if the
inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists and that
there is a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety,
peace, morals or decency, he shall cause notice to be served in the
manner provided for service of a summons in Circuit Court upon
the person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance or upon
the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is
caused, permitted or maintained and shall cause a copy of the
§ 390-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-7
1:407
§ 390-8. Cost of abatement.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
the cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
§ 390-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each day
on which a violation of any provision of this article occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude use of
any other remedy available to the City to prevent or remove an offending
condition.
notice to be posted on the premises. Such notice shall direct the
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or the
owner or occupant of the premises to abate or remove such
nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that, unless such nuisance
is so abated, the City will cause the same to be abated and will
charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
(2) Abatement by City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
cannot be found, the officer having the duty of enforcement shall
cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
C. Abatement by court action. Except as provided by § 497-5 of the City's
Code, if the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance
exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not
such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his
findings with the Mayor, who, upon direction of the Common Council,
shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the
name of the City in Circuit Court in accordance with the provisions of
Ch. 823, Wis. Stats.
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the City or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 390-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 390-9
1:408
ARTICLE II
Chronic Nuisance Premises
[Adopted as § 12.08 of the former City Code]
§ 390-10. Findings.
This article is intended to allow the City of Watertown an opportunity to
work with neighbors and landlords to reduce problems, prevent crime and
improve the quality of life in our community's neighborhoods. The Common
Council finds that any premises whose owner(s), resident(s), tenant(s),
invitee(s) or guest(s) have generated three or more calls for service from
the City's Police Department, Building Inspection Division or Street
Department for nuisance activities, as defined below, within a twelve-month
period of time, and subject to the restrictions of § 390-12 herein, has
received more than the level of general and adequate municipal services
and has placed an undue and inappropriate burden on the taxpayers of the
City. The Common Council, therefore, authorizes the Chief of Police, the
head of the Building Inspection Division, the head of the Street Department
and the Weed Commissioner, as provided in this article, to charge the
owners of such premises the costs associated with abating the violations at
premises at which nuisance activities chronically occur.
§ 390-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — A law enforcement officer or authorized City
official has investigated a possible nuisance activity and has elected to issue
a citation, make an arrest or issue a written warning for a nuisance activity.
NUISANCE ACTIVITY — Any of the following activities, behaviors or
conduct, whenever engaged in by premises owners, operators, occupants or
persons associated with a premises:
An act of harassment, as defined in § 947.013, Wis. Stats., and § 410-9
of the City Code.
A.
Disorderly conduct, as defined in § 947.01, Wis. Stats., and § 410-7 of
the City Code.
B.
Battery, substantial battery, or aggravated battery, as defined in
§ 940.19, Wis. Stats.
C.
D. Lewd and lascivious behavior, as defined in § 944.20, Wis. Stats.
Keeping a place of prostitution, as defined in § 944.34, Wis. Stats., or
leasing a building for the purposes of prostitution.
E.
F. Receiving stolen property, as defined in § 943.34, Wis. Stats.
Possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance or
related offenses, as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
G.
§ 390-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-11
1:409
PERSONS ASSOCIATED WITH — Any person who, whenever engaged in a
nuisance activity, enters, patronizes, visits or attempts to enter, patronize
or visit or waits to enter, patronize or visit a premises or person present
on a premises, including any officer, director, customer, agent, employee or
independent contractor of a premises owner.
PREMISES — An individual or multifamily dwelling unit and associated
common areas; this includes, but is not limited to, apartments, hotel rooms,
rooming houses, tax parcels and buildings.
§ 390-12. Notice.
Whenever the Chief of Police or other department head whose department
is responsible for the enforcement action taken determines that three or
more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred at a
premises on separate occasions during a twelve-month period commencing
with the date of the first violation, the Chief of Police or other department
head whose department is responsible for the enforcement action taken
may notify the premises owner or management agent in writing that the
premises is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance. In reaching this
H. Gambling, as defined in § 945.01, Wis. Stats.
Animal violations, as defined in Chapter 228, Article III, of the City's
Code and other violations of Chapter 410, Article VIII, regarding
animals. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-28]
I.
Trespassing, as defined in §§ 943.13 and 943.14, Wis. Stats., and
§ 410-23B of the City's Code.
J.
Discharge of a firearm or any other related firearm or dangerous
weapons offense, state or municipal, including carrying a concealed
weapon, air gun, pellet gun or paint ball gun.
K.
Underage consumption, possession or procurement of alcohol, as
defined in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
L.
Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in § 939.31, Wis. Stats., or
attempt to commit, as defined in § 939.32, Wis. Stats., any of the
activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated herein.
M.
N. Harboring a runaway as prohibited by this Code (see § 410-10).
The production or creation of excessive noise, as prohibited by § 410-40
or 410-41 of the City of Watertown Code.
O.
Violations of environmental requirements, as prohibited by § 332-3 of
the City of Watertown Code.
P.
Violations of exterior storage standards, as prohibited by § 550-109 of
the City of Watertown Code.
Q.
Two or more violations of dogs running at large, contrary to § 410-44A,
within any twelve-month period of time. [Added by Ord. No. 10-44]
R.
§ 390-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 390-12
1:410
determination, the Chief of Police or other department head whose
department is responsible for the enforcement action taken shall not count
nuisance activities that were reported by the owner or manager of the
premises or incidents in which the tenant or occupant is the victim of
a crime. The notice shall contain the street address or legal description
sufficient to identify the premises, a description of the nuisance activities
that have occurred at the premises, including the dates that the nuisance
activities are alleged to have occurred, and a statement indicating that the
cost of future enforcement may be assessed as a special charge against the
premises.
§ 390-13. Service of notice.
The notice shall be properly delivered by any one of the following methods:
§ 390-14. Abatement plan.
Any owner or agent receiving notice pursuant to the provision above shall
contact the Police Department to set up a meeting with the Chief of Police
or other department head whose department is responsible for the
enforcement action taken and meet with that department head, or his/
her designee, within 10 business days of receipt or publication of such
notice. The parties shall review the problems occurring at the property.
Within 10 calendar days of this meeting, the owner or agent shall submit
to the Chief, or other department head whose department is responsible for
the enforcement action taken, or his/her designee, an agreed-upon written
abatement plan to end the nuisance activity on the property. The plan shall
also specify a name, address and telephone number of a person living within
60 miles of the property who can be contacted in the event of the need
for further contact by the Chief of Police or other department head whose
department is responsible for the enforcement action taken.
A. By personally delivering the notice in person to the premises owner.
B. If the premises owner cannot be located, by delivering a copy of the
notice at the premises owner's usual place of abode, or principal place
of doing business, to a competent member of the family at least 14
years of age or a competent adult currently residing or working at that
location.
C. By registered mail or by certified mail return receipt requested.
D. By publication as a Class 1 notice together with mailing the notice to
the owner's last known residential or business address; the mailing may
be omitted if the post office address cannot be ascertained with
reasonable diligence.
§ 390-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-15
1:411
§ 390-15. Additional public nuisance activity during
implementation of agreed-upon abatement plan.
If additional nuisance activity occurs on a premises subject to an abatement
plan during the timely implementation of the agreed-upon abatement plan,
the premises owner shall not be subject to penalties described in this article
if the premises owner takes any of the following actions:
§ 390-16. Premises owner's failure to comply.
The premises owner shall become subject to imposition of costs as set forth
in § 390-17 below in the event that:
§ 390-17. Costs imposed for nuisance activity.118
The Chief of Police or other department head whose department is
responsible for the enforcement action taken may calculate the cost of
police response and enforcement for this and any subsequent nuisance
activities as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
A. Undertakes the remedies provided by Chapter 704 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as may be amended from time to time, to remove the source or
cause of the public nuisance in a timely manner.
B. Takes one or more legal steps as identified in the abatement plan to
remove the source or cause of the public nuisance allowable under the
Wisconsin Statutes when notified by the Chief of Police or other
department head whose department is responsible for the enforcement
action taken that an additional nuisance activity has occurred at the
premises.
C. Otherwise remains in full compliance with the abatement plan.
A. A premises owner fails to comply with any of the requirements of
§ 390-14 herein;
B. A premises owner enters into an agreed-upon abatement plan but fails
to make reasonable efforts to implement the terms or conditions of the
abatement plan; or
C. A premises owner implements an abatement plan and an additional
nuisance activity or activities have occurred not less than 15 days nor
more than 180 days after activation of the abatement plan, and
reasonable efforts are not made to abate the nuisance activity.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 390-18
1:412
§ 390-18. Notice of costs.119
The Chief of Police or other department head whose department is
responsible for the enforcement action shall provide a notice of costs to the
premises owner, indicating that the costs set forth in the notice are a special
charge and listing the costs which form the basis for the special charge and
a warning that any unpaid costs will be allocated to the premises owner's
property tax roll as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627. Delivery of the
notice shall be made as set forth in § 390-13 herein. The notice shall also
contain the following information:
§ 390-19. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalty provided in this Code, every person
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall, for
each offense, be punished by the forfeitures as set forth below. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
A. The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the
premises.
B. A description of the nuisance activities, the relevant sections of the
municipal code or state statute, dates of prior notices, copies of such
notices, the amount the Chief or other department head whose
department is responsible for the enforcement action taken has
determined as the cost of enforcement to be assessed, and any further
relevant comments.
C. That all costs set forth in the notice are due and payable to the City of
Watertown within 30 days of mailing of the notice required in this
section, except, if a hearing is requested in a timely manner, the
assessment is due within 10 days after an adverse decision is rendered
at such hearing.
D. The right of the premises owner to a hearing before the Chief of Police
or other department head whose department is responsible for the
enforcement action, if a request therefor is made before the date
payment is due, and a warning that any unpaid response fee will be
allocated to the premises owner's tax roll as a special charge pursuant
to § 66.0703(1), Wis. Stats.
A. First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder, including the
obligation to timely attend an abatement meeting or to timely submit an
abatement plan pursuant to § 390-14 above, shall forfeit not less than
$200 nor more than $500, plus costs.
B. Subsequent offenses. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
article or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder within six
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 390-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-19
1:413
§ 390-20. No limitation of authority.
This article shall in no way limit the authority of the City of Watertown or
any citizen to otherwise abate a public or private nuisance according to law.
§ 390-21. Department head designee.
Wherever in this article reference is made to the "Chief of Police or other
department head whose department is responsible for the enforcement
action taken," the Chief of Police or department head may designate any
officer within the department to perform such services.
§ 390-22. Administrative review.
The determinations reached by the Chief of Police or other department head
whose department is responsible for the enforcement action taken shall be
reviewable pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10 of the Watertown Code.
months after committing a previous violation of this article shall forfeit
not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, plus costs.
§ 390-19 WATERTOWN CODE § 390-22
1:414
Chapter 398
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 220.
Domestic animals — See Ch., 228, Art. III.
Littering — See Ch. 362.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 410.
Music in public places; special events
license — See Ch. 428, Arts. I and II.
Annual Riverfest Celebration — See Ch. 428,
Art. IV.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 480.
§ 390-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-22
1:415

ARTICLE I
Park Regulations
[Adopted by Ord. No. 97-59 (Title 11, Part G, of the former City
Code)]
§ 398-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these park regulations is to provide rules and regulations
for the use of and conduct in the parks and recreation areas of the City;
to protect parks and recreation areas of the City from fire, abuse and
desecration and to provide for the recreational use of these areas; to control
and regulate traffic and maintain general order therein; and to further the
safety, health, comfort, morals and welfare of all persons while within the
limits of the parks and recreation areas.
§ 398-2. Applicability.
These park regulations shall apply in all parks and recreation areas under
the jurisdiction of the City, unless expressly exempted. For the issuance of
permits, temporary designations, authorizations, granting of approval and
other actions, authority shall be vested in the approving governing agency,
the Director or their designee.
§ 398-3. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-30]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRGUN — A weapon which expels a missile by the expansion of
compressed air or other gas.
ANIMALS — Includes cats, dogs, horses, any fowl or birds and any living
creatures within the jurisdiction of the park or recreation area.
APPROVING GOVERNING AGENCY — The City of Watertown Park,
Recreation and Forestry Commission or its designee.
CROSSING — Any crossing, whether marked by a pavement or otherwise;
the extension to any sidewalk space across any intersecting drive, street or
highway.
CURB — Any boundary of any street, road, avenue, boulevard or drive,
whether or not marked by a curb.
DANGEROUS WEAPON — Any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; any
device designed as a weapon and capable of producing death or great bodily
harm; or any other device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used
or intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great
bodily harm.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Watertown Park, Recreation and Forestry
Department.
§ 398-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-3
1:417
DIRECTOR — The Director of the City of Watertown Park, Recreation and
Forestry Department. In the absence of said employee or a vacancy in the
position, the Assistant Director shall serve as Director.
FIREARM — Any instrument used in the propulsion of a bullet, shot, slug or
other projectile by the force or action of gunpowder exploded or burned in
it, except a weapon as defined below.
GREAT BODILY HARM — Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes
a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ or other serious bodily injury.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person employed by the State of
Wisconsin or any political subdivision of this state for the purpose of
detecting and preventing crime and enforcing laws or ordinances and who
is authorized to make arrests for violations of the laws or ordinances he or
she is employed to enforce.
MERCHANDISE — Personal property of any kind, including food,
beverages, merchandise, goods or materials provided incidental to services
offered or sold. This sale of merchandise includes donations required by
the seller for the retention of goods or services by a donor or prospective
customer.
PARK ATTENDANT — Any person employed by the Department as a park
attendant to perform duties or tasks within the parks and recreation areas.
PARK EVENT — Celebrations, special events, company or church picnics,
gatherings of organizations or associations, family reunions and other
similar activities requiring additional personnel, equipment or services of
the Department or police protection/crowd control.
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS — Those areas within the jurisdiction
of the approving governing agency and owned or leased by the City of
Watertown, whether or not such areas are located within the corporate
limits of the City of Watertown. Such areas shall be designated on the
official map of the approving governing agency.
PATH — Any footpath, walk or any path maintained for pedestrians.
PEDESTRIAN — A person afoot.
PERMIT — Any written license issued by or under the authority of the
approving governing agency permitting a special event or activity on park
facilities.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, company, association, jointstock
association, firm, partnership, limited liability company or limited
liability partnership.
ROADWAY — That portion of all public ways and thoroughfares and bridges
on the same between the regularly established curblines or that portion
which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
excluding the berm or shoulder.
§ 398-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-3
1:418
SOLICITING — Persons selling goods or services by sample or taking orders
for future delivery with or without accepting advance payment for the
goods. Persons seeking any form of contributions.
SPRING GUN — A weapon which expels a missile by the action of a spring.
STOPPING OR STANDING WHEN PROHIBITED — Any cessation of
movement of a vehicle, occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with pedestrians or other traffic, including horses and bicycles.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals and vehicles, either
singly or together.
VEHICLE — Any conveyance (except baby carriages), including motor
vehicles, trailers of all types, campers, tricycles, bicycles (motorized or not),
sleds, sleighs, pushcarts, vehicles propelled by other than muscular power,
or any horse or horse-drawn conveyance.
VENDING — Selling or trading any item or service.
WEAPON — A handgun; an electric weapon, as defined in § 941.295(1c)(a),
Wis. Stats.; a knife with a blade longer than six inches, other than a
switchblade knife as defined in § 941.24, Wis. Stats.; or a billy club.
§ 398-4. Rules of conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to:
A. Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any
buildings, playground equipment, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
railings, pavings or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities
or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary
markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the
restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
C. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or
other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting or other means, unless specifically authorized by the approving
governing agency.
D. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across such lands, unless specifically authorized by the
approving governing agency.
E. Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or injure the
bark or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise
disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or
usefulness of any park or recreation area.
§ 398-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-4
1:419
F. Climb any tree or walk, climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purpose.
G. Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing,
bridge, bench or other structure.
H. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountains, pond, lake, stream, river or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or recreation area or any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
I. Take into, carry through, or put into any park or recreation area any
rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material. Such refuse and rubbish
generated from the use of the parks by any person shall not be
scattered, dropped or left within the parks or recreation areas except in
receptacles provided for that purpose. Where receptacles are not
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park
or recreation area by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
J. Bring any glass beverage container into any park or recreation area.
K. Cause or permit any animal to run loose.
L. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
M. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or
throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall a person
remove or have in one's possession the young of any wild animal or the
eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird.
N. Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails; horses shall be
thoroughly broken and properly restrained and ridden with due care
and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended.
O. Allow any domestic animal under that person's control to be present
within any public park or recreation area, other than those areas which
the Director or his designee has designated for the purpose of walking
animals. Any such animals shall be required to be on a leash and may
not run at large. Owners of dogs within the secured confines of the
public parks property generally known as the "Boomer Street Dog Park"
shall be exempt from this subsection. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-21]
P. Play live, recorded or transcribed music on radios, compact discs, audio
tapes, or by any other means, at a volume high enough as to interfere
with the enjoyment of the park by other persons or groups.
Q. Interfere with or in any manner hinder any park attendant or employee
of the Department in the performance of his or her duties.
§ 398-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-5
1:420
§ 398-5. Vehicles. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-30]
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to:
A. Drive motor vehicle on park grounds. Drive or operate or park any
motor vehicle on any area except the paved streets or paved parking
areas within any park or recreation area and in such other areas as may
on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas with
appropriate signage, unless a permit has been issued by the Director.
(1) The Director may issue a permit to allow a person to drive or
operate any motor vehicle in any area of a park or recreation area
other than the public roadways for the purpose of loading or
unloading personal property or passengers.
(2) Any motor vehicle issued a permit under this section while
traveling on any such areas other than public streets or roadways
shall be accompanied by a walking escort leading the vehicle to its
destination and shall have the permit prominently displayed on said
vehicle at all times while on park or recreation area grounds.
B. Parking motor vehicle on park grounds. Park a motor vehicle anywhere
in any public park or recreation area except in a designated parking
area, unless a permit has been issued therefor by the Director.
(1) The Director may issue a permit to allow a person to park or leave
standing any motor vehicle in any area of a park or recreation area,
other than the public roadways, for the purpose of providing event
support, a source of electrical current or refrigeration facilities for
special events or activities.
(2) Any motor vehicle issued a permit under this section while
traveling on any such areas other than public streets or roadways
shall be accompanied by a walking escort leading the vehicle to its
destination and shall have the permit prominently displayed on said
vehicle at all times while on park or recreation area grounds.
C. Discharging motor oil prohibited. Intentionally discard or discharge
motor oil or any other vehicle fluid in a park or recreation area.
D. Vehicle washing prohibited. Wash the exterior of a vehicle or any
holding tanks for sanitary waste, or to empty sanitary waste from a
vehicle, motor home or camper within a park or recreation area.
E. Vehicle maintenance prohibited. Perform any type of vehicle
maintenance activity which would involve changing of fluids, opening
an engine access panel, removing or elevating one or more tires or a
portion of the vehicle, or crawling beneath a vehicle within a park or
recreation area, except in an emergency situation.
F. Exceptions. Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply during
the period of the Riverfest Celebration as regulated by Chapter 428,
Article IV, of the City's Code.
§ 398-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-6
1:421
§ 398-6. Firearms and weapons. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-30]
§ 398-7. Advertising, assemblages and entertainment. [Amended by
Ord. No. 12-30]
A. No person may go armed with a concealed and dangerous weapon in
any public park or public recreation area within the City unless such
person qualifies under the exceptions below:
(1) A person who is employed in this state by a public agency as a law
enforcement officer to carry a concealed weapon, if § 941.23(1)(g)2
through 5 and (2)(b)1 to 3, Wis. Stats., apply.
(2) A qualified out-of-state law enforcement officer, as defined in
§ 941.23(1)(g), Wis. Stats., to carry a concealed weapon, if
§ 941.23(2)(b)1 to 3, Wis. Stats., apply.
(3) A former law enforcement officer, as defined in § 941.23(1)(c), Wis.
Stats., to carry a concealed weapon, if § 941.23(2)(c)1 to 7, Wis.
Stats., apply.
(4) A licensee, as defined in § 175.60(1)(d), Wis. Stats., or an out-ofstate
licensee, as defined in § 175.60(1)(g), Wis. Stats., to carry a
concealed weapon as permitted under § 175.60, Wis. Stats.
B. No person, except in the exercise of lawful authority, shall fire or
discharge any weapon, firearm, spring gun or airgun, slingshot, bow or
crossbow of any description in any public park or public recreation area
within the City.
C. Exception. Official starter guns, which are loaded with blank cartridges,
are allowed at authorized track and field events and are excepted from
the restrictions of this section.
A. No person shall post, paint, affix, place, cast or leave about any bill,
billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular or advertisement.
B. No person shall do any of the following without a permit, provided that
no permit shall be required for any action or event sponsored by the
City or the approving governing agency:
(1) Display any advertising signs or other advertising matter, provided
that a sign attached to a vehicle to identify the vehicle or a sign
lawfully on a taxi or bus is not prohibited.
(2) Operate for advertising purposes any musical instrument,
soundtrack or drum.
(3) Hold unlawful public assemblies.
(4) Conduct exhibitions.
(5) Hold a parade.
§ 398-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-7
1:422
C. Amplified music permit. No public address systems or soundamplification
devices shall be used in any public park or public
recreation area within the City of Watertown except as permitted by
this section. The Director may issue permits in accordance with this
section. A permit shall not exempt the holder from the provisions of
§ 410-40 regulating loud and unnecessary noise.
(1) Application for permission to use such systems or devices shall be
made to the Director on forms supplied by the Park, Recreation and
Forestry Department. Such application forms shall include the
name of the organization seeking such permission, the name and
address of the person responsible for the activity, and the date or
dates of the proposed activity. A permit fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule shall accompany
the application.120
(2) The Director shall establish the hours of operation and location
within any given park within the City of any such system or devices
so as to ensure the benefit of such system or devices to the group
seeking its use and to minimize any unreasonable interference with
the peace and enjoyment of other uses of the park or recreation
area and those residing adjacent to such park. Only the hours of
operation and location of such system or equipment may be
regulated by this section. The hours of amplified sound shall be
between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., with the express provision that
private parties shall be designated closer to 10:00 p.m. as a
termination time, whereas more community-oriented events
sponsored by fraternal or nonprofit organizations or religious or
veterans organizations that have a wider community-based appeal
shall be designated closer to 11:00 p.m. as a termination time. The
Director shall consider the applications in the order they are
received on a "first-come, first-issued" basis.
(3) The decision of the Director may be appealed to the Park,
Recreation and Forestry Commission of the City. Any aggrieved
applicant shall, in writing, notify the Director of the appeal within
five days of the Director's decision, stating in such notice the
decision appealed from and the reasons why such decision should
be changed or modified. Within two working days thereafter, the
Director shall file such appeal notice with the Chairperson of the
Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission, who shall schedule a
time for the matter to be heard. The applicant shall be given at
least five business days' notice of the hearing time and date and
may be represented by counsel, may cross-examine the witnesses,
and may present witnesses. The proceeding shall be recorded.
Within five days after the date of the hearing, the Park, Recreation
and Forestry Commission shall file a written decision in this matter
with the City Clerk/Treasurer and shall cause a copy of the same to
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:423
§ 398-8. Sales prohibited.
No person shall expose or offer for sale or give away any article of
merchandise, food, food product or beverage in any park or recreation area
without a concessions permit under Article II of this chapter.
be mailed to the applicant by regular mail at the applicant's
address listed in the application.
(4) The decision of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission may
be appealed to the Watertown Common Council, whose decision
shall be final. The appeal to the Common Council shall be upon the
record of the hearing made before the Park, Recreation and
Forestry Commission. The applicant shall, in writing, notify the City
Clerk/Treasurer of such appeal within five days of the decision of
the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission and shall, within 20
days thereafter file with the City Clerk/Treasurer the original and
five copies of the transcript of the record made before the Park,
Recreation and Forestry Commission at the hearing. The City
Clerk/Treasurer shall then cause the matter of the appeal to be
placed on the agenda of the Common Council at its next regular
meeting and shall notify the applicant of the time and place when
and wherein such appeal shall be heard. The matter shall be heard
by the Common Council solely on the record of the hearing, and no
additional testimony shall be permitted before the Common
Council. The Chairperson of the Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission or his or her designee and the appellant may present
arguments to the Common Council in support of their respective
positions. Within five days after the hearing, the Common Council
shall file a written decision in the matter with the City Clerk/
Treasurer, who shall cause a copy of the same to be mailed to the
appellant by regular mail at the appellant's address listed in the
application.
(5) The Police Department is authorized to require the discontinuance
of any such system or devices operating without a permit or outside
the prescribed hours of operation or prescribed location within any
public park or recreation area within the City. Any person violating
the provisions of this Subsection C shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $20 nor more than $50.
(6) Exemption. The use of personal stereo systems, CD players,
iPod®/MP3/iPad® devices, and other personal sound
nonamplification equipment is exempt from the provisions of this
Subsection C regarding a permit as long as such devices are
maintained at a low volume and restricted to the immediate picnic
area in the public park or recreation area occupied by the
operators of such devices.
§ 398-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-9
1:424
§ 398-9. Ignitable and combustible materials.
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places
provided for such purposes. Any fire shall be continuously under the care
and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is
extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match,
cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper or other material within or against any
building, boat or vehicle or under any tree or in underbrush.
§ 398-10. Miscellaneous conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to:
A. Camp or stay overnight anywhere without prior permission of the
Director, except in areas designated for camping or staying overnight in
vehicles or trailers.
B. Take part in the playing of any games involving horseshoes, weighted
darts, bows and arrows, spears, stones or other propelled objects
except in those areas designated for such forms of recreation.
C. Use roller skates, skateboards, bicycles or in-line skates on any park
structures, picnic tables, playground equipment or retaining walls.
D. Enter an area posted as "closed to the public."
E. Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the
public peace or cause a disturbance.
F. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit a person claims to have upon
request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same
for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule,
including park attendants, law enforcement officials or firefighters.
G. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity whether or not under the
authority of a permit.
H. Erect or occupy any tent, stand or other structure requiring ground
stakes longer than 12 inches in length in any park or recreation areas
without permission of the Director.
I. Operate or ride any bicycle, roller skates, skateboards, in-line skates or
any other rideable or wearable recreational wheeled object or device on
any portion of the sidewalk or any impervious surface within or
adjacent to any shelter, pavilion or band shell at Riverside Park and all
riverwalks and adjacent plazas within the City of Watertown Downtown
Riverfront. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 14-35; 1-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-2]
J. Fly or launch any model airplanes, radio-controlled airplanes or model
rockets other than in areas designated for such activities.
§ 398-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-10
1:425
§ 398-11. Swimming pools.
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to use the public
swimming pools in any park after the same are closed.
§ 398-12. Boating. [Added by Ord. No. 98-59]
Any person desiring to use any kind of a boat in parks shall abide by the
ordinances relating to boating in public places. No boats with motors shall
be permitted, except in areas specifically designated for them.
§ 398-13. Closing hours.
Except for designated camping areas, no person shall be in any park during
the hours the park or recreation area is closed, unless specifically
authorized by the approving governing agency.
§ 398-14. Emergency measures.121
The Director or the approving governing agency may from time to time, in
the case of an emergency, order any portion of the parks or recreation areas
closed to the public, or post closing hour limitations, or control the use of
intoxicating beverages, or for safety reasons regulate certain activities as
to limitations on designated areas or specific hours of use, if the public
interest so requires. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or
be present in or to use contrary to such regulations any parks or recreation
areas after the same have been posted accordingly.
§ 398-15. Park use suspension. [Added 5-5-2015 by Ord. No. 15-8]
Separately from any penalties prescribed within this article or the Code,
Wisconsin Statutes, or any other applicable rule or regulation, the Chief
K. Play or practice golf except in areas designated for such activities.
L. Ride or operate snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) except in
areas designated for such activities.
M. Play or practice basketball at the Riverside Park basketball courts
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. [Added by Ord. No.
03-24]
A. All parks are closed from 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., with the exception of
the Skate Park located east of Carriage Hill Drive, which shall be closed
from 10:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m., and with the exception of special events
or activities authorized and approved by the City Council. [Amended
by Ord. No. 01-21; Ord. No. 05-47]
B. Closing hours will be posted at all parks.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-15
1:426
of Police or any designee thereof may suspend the park privileges of any
person found to be, or reasonably believed to be, in violation of City
ordinances, state statutes or other applicable rules and regulations within
City parks. Any such suspension shall be immediately effective for not less
than four days and not more than 14 days and shall be in writing and
personally served upon the individual whose privileges are suspended or
delivered by First Class Mail to such individual's last known or reasonably
ascertainable address. If said individual is a juvenile, notice shall be in
writing and personally served upon the juvenile and the juvenile's parent
and/or guardian or delivered by First Class Mail to such juvenile's and the
juvenile's parent and/or guardian's last known or reasonable ascertainable
address. After such service, any reentry into or upon City parks shall
constitute a separately citable offense hereunder with penalty pursuant to
§ 398-17 or 410-23B. Citation for reentry shall also cause the initial term
of suspension to be reset and reimposed as of the date of any subsequent
reentries.
A. Appeal. Any person considering him or herself aggrieved by all or any
part of a park use suspension may appeal such action in writing within
72 hours of issuance of written notice of park use suspension. Any such
written appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer along with an
administrative filing fee as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall
immediately thereafter transmit notice of the appeal and copies of the
written appeal submittal to the Director of the Park, Recreation and
Forestry Department, Police Chief and City Attorney. The Director of
the Park, Recreation and Forestry Department shall convene with the
appellant to hear such appeal as soon as practicable following receipt of
written notice of appeal. Following consideration, the Director of the
Park, Recreation and Forestry Department shall either reverse or affirm
the park use suspension action, setting forth the grounds for any such
decision in writing. If the park use suspension action is reversed, the
administrative filing fee shall be refunded to the payer. The Park,
Recreation and Forestry Department shall, by certified First Class Mail,
notify the appealing party of its decision within five calendar days
following conclusion of any hearing hereunder and file the written
decision with the City Clerk/Treasurer and issue copies of same to the
Police Chief and City Attorney.122
B. Form and effect of notice. Any notice of suspension shall include a
reasonably informative description of the foregoing appeal procedure
as well as exact time of effective issuance and duration of the term of
suspension. The suspension notice shall have no force or effect during
the pendency of any appeal timely and satisfactorily perfected under
this section.
C. The City elects not to be bound by the provisions of Chapter 68, Wis.
Stats., with respect to administrative procedure set forth in this section.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-16
1:427
§ 398-16. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-30]
§ 398-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of these park
regulations shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. The City Police Department or approving governing agency shall, in
connection with its duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of these park regulations.
B. The City Police Department, Director and any park attendant shall have
the authority to order any person or persons acting in violation of these
park regulations to leave the park or recreation area.
C. Any law enforcement officer may issue a municipal citation in the form
and manner prescribed in Chapter 33 of this Code for a violation of any
of these park regulations and assess a penalty, except for a violation of
§ 398-5B, which shall require a parking violation citation, enforced
pursuant to § 500-14D of this Code.
§ 398-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-17
1:428
ARTICLE II
Park Permits
[Adopted by Ord. No. 97-59 (§§ 9.05 to 9.07 and 9.20 of the former
City Code)]
§ 398-18. Park event permits.
Permits for events in parks and recreation areas shall be obtained by
application to the Director of the Park, Recreation and Forestry
Department, in accordance with the following procedure:
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Park, Recreation and Forestry Department, stating:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired.
(5) Any other information reasonably necessary to make a
determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
(6) Variances required from park rules and regulations.
(7) Description of all concessions to be sold.
B. Standards for issuance of a use permit shall include the following
findings:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the
park or recreation area.
(2) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on
the date and hour requested in the application.
C. Within 10 days after the receipt of an application, the Director shall tell
an applicant in writing of his decision to grant or deny a permit; in the
event of a denial the notification shall include the reason for the denial.
Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the approving
§ 398-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-18
1:429
§ 398-19. Reservation permits in parks.
The Director of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Department, hereinafter
known as the "Director," or any employee designated by him or her, may
make reservations of specific areas in public parks in accordance with the
following regulations:
§ 398-20. Concession permits in parks. [Amended by Ord. No.
10-26]
governing agency by written notice thereof to the Director within five
working days of said refusal. The Director shall immediately notify
members of the approving governing agency. The approving governing
agency shall decide within 10 days from the receipt of the appeal by the
Director or at its first meeting after the appeal, whichever is later. The
decision of the approving governing agency shall be final.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
E. An applicant for a permit may be required to submit evidence of liability
insurance covering injuries to members of the general public arising
out of such permitted activities in such amounts as may be from time to
time determined prior to the commencement of any activity or issuance
of any permit.
F. The Director of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Department shall
have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any
rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown.
A. The times of reservation of each area shall be divided among the
organizations applying to use them. In scheduling the times under this
subsection, the Director will take into account the hours at which there
is demand for the use of the area and divide the hours of greatest
demand among various organizations and among persons not involved
in organizations.
B. Written public records shall be kept of all reservations. Public notices
shall be posted of the scheduling policy and of the telephone number to
call to make a reservation for any area.
C. The charge for the facilities/shelter reservation under this section shall
be determined for each individual facility/shelter by the approving
governing agency as published by the Department from time to time.
D. The Director of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Department shall
have the authority to revoke a permit upon a violation of any rule or
ordinance or upon good cause shown.
A. Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all public parks and
recreation areas owned and controlled by the City of Watertown.
§ 398-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-20
1:430
B. Sale of merchandise without a concession permit prohibited. No
person, firm, corporation or association shall sell or give away any
merchandise of any kind in any park or playground without a
concession permit, as provided in this section. This section shall not
apply to the following situations:
(1) The person, club, organization, group or corporation has obtained a
temporary retail Class "B" fermented malted beverage ("picnic")
license, temporary retail Class "B" wine cooler license or special
events license pursuant to § 220-3B(2) or F or Chapter 428, Article
II.
(2) The person, club, organization, group or corporation has obtained a
Park Event Permit pursuant to § 398-18.
(3) A person, firm, corporation or association that has the permission
of the group that holds a license or permit as listed above in
Subsection B(1) or (2). (Note: A transient merchant license may
still be needed.)
C. Application for permit. Each person, firm or corporation desiring to
apply for a permit as a concessionaire to sell or give away merchandise
in any park or playground shall file an application with the Director of
the Park, Recreation and Forestry Department on a form approved and
provided by the Director. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location where the applicant proposes to sell or give away
merchandise.
(3) The articles of merchandise proposed to be sold or given away.
(4) The place and time of event or length or duration of the permit.
(5) A description of any buildings or equipment owned by the City
desired to be used by the concessionaire.
(6) The equipment which the concessionaire plans to use, including not
only food-preparation and food-serving equipment but also any cart
or building proposed to be used in the operation.
(7) The prices proposed to be charged for the various items of
merchandise, food or beverages.
D. Operation not to be changed. Any person receiving a concession permit
under this section shall not change any part of the operation described
in the application, including equipment, food, beverages or
merchandise to be served or prices, without applying for approval of
the change and receiving approval of the change from the Director of
the Park, Recreation and Forestry Department.
§ 398-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-20
1:431
§ 398-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
E. Fees. Each concessionaire shall pay fees based on a percentage of the
total gross sales of the concessionaire. The concessionaire shall report
all sales figures for each calendar month not later than the 10th day of
the following month. The report shall be accompanied by payment of
the fee required by this section. The report and payments shall be made
to the Clerk/Treasurer of the City. The concessionaire's fee for any
concessionaire not using any building or equipment furnished by the
City shall be 5% of the gross receipts and the fees for all other
concessionaires shall be 15% of the gross receipts.
F. Issuance of concession permits. Permits to concessionaires shall be
issued by vote of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission,
subject to approval by the Common Council. All actions on concession
permits shall be taken at a public meeting.
G. Duration of concession permit. Each permit to each concessionaire
shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications for new
concession permits may be made at any time after November 1.
Consideration in renewals will be given to persons having existing
concessions, if all other factors are equal.
H. Temporary concession permit. A temporary concession permit may be
issued for special events. The provisions of this section will be followed
in all matters, including the requirement of the payment of fees,
provided that the report of the total receipts and the payment of the
fees due will be due not more than 10 days after the close of the event
for which the temporary concession permit was issued.
I. Revocation of concession permit. The Director of the Park, Recreation
and Forestry Department shall have the authority to revoke a
concession permit upon a violation of any rule or ordinance or upon
good cause shown.
J. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than
$500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 398-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 398-21
1:432
Chapter 403
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 403-1. State law adopted.
Section 134.71 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted by reference.
§ 403-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTICLE — Any of the following articles except jewelry:
A. Audiovisual equipment.
B. Bicycles.
C. China.
D. Computers, laptops, printers, software and computer supplies.
E. Computer toys, gaming systems and games.
F. Crystal.
G. Electronic equipment.
H. Fur coats and other fur clothing.
I. Ammunition and knives.
J. Microwave ovens.
K. Office equipment.
L. Pianos, organs, guitars and other musical instruments.
M. Silverware and flatware.
N. Small electrical appliances.
O. Telephones.
Compact discs, audiotapes, videotapes, DVDs, GPS units, and other
optical media and optical media recording or replaying devices.
P.
Q. Power tools and pneumatic tools.
R. Firearms.
S. Paper currency.
T. Sports equipment.
§ 398-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 403-2
1:433
AUCTIONEER — An individual who is registered as an auctioneer under Ch.
480, Wis. Stats., and who sells secondhand articles or secondhand jewelry
at an auction, as defined in § 480.01(1), Wis. Stats.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — A corporation, trust or community chest,
fund or foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures
to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
CUSTOMER — A person with whom a pawnbroker, secondhand article
dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer or an agent thereof engages in a
transaction of purchase, sale, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry.
JEWELRY — Any tangible personal property ordinarily wearable on the
person and consisting in whole or in part of any metal, mineral or gem
customarily regarded as precious or semiprecious.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Watertown.
PAWNBROKER — Any person who engages in the business of lending money
on the deposit or pledge of any article or jewelry or purchasing any article
or jewelry with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell
it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price.
SECONDHAND — Owned by any person, except a wholesaler, retailer or
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer licensed under this
chapter, immediately before the transaction at hand.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE DEALER — Any person, other than an auctioneer,
who engages in the business of purchasing or selling secondhand articles,
except when engaging in any of the following:
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, an estate sale, a
gun, knife, gem or antique show or a convention.
A.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business
for which the person is licensed under § 403-3 or 403-5 or while
engaged in the business of junk collector, junk dealer or scrap
processor as described in § 70.995(2)(x), Wis. Stats.
B.
Any transaction while operating as a charitable organization or
conducting a sale the proceeds of which are donated to a charitable
organization.
C.
Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the person who
sold the article when new which involves any of the following:
(1) The return of the article.
(2) The exchange of the article for a different, new article.
D.
§ 403-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 403-2
1:434
SECONDHAND JEWELRY DEALER — Any person, other than an auctioneer,
who engages in the business of any transaction consisting of purchasing,
selling, receiving or exchanging secondhand jewelry, except for the
following:
§ 403-3. License for pawnbroker.
No person may operate as a pawnbroker within the municipality unless the
person first obtains a pawnbroker's license under this chapter. A license
issued to a pawnbroker by the City Clerk/Treasurer authorizes the licensee
to operate as a pawnbroker within the municipality.
§ 403-4. License for secondhand article dealer.
No person may operate as a secondhand article dealer within the
municipality unless the person first obtains a secondhand article dealer's
license under this chapter. A license issued to a secondhand article dealer
by the City Clerk/Treasurer authorizes the licensee to operate as a
secondhand article dealer within the municipality.
Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a
charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the
charitable organization.
E.
Any transaction as a seller of a secondhand article which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a
gift to the charitable organization.
F.
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, an estate sale, a
gun, knife, gem or antique show or a convention.
A.
B. Any transaction with a licensed secondhand jewelry dealer.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business of
smelting, refining, assaying or manufacturing precious metals, gems or
valuable articles if the person has no retail operation open to the public.
C.
Any transaction between a buyer of new jewelry and the person who
sold the jewelry when new which involves any of the following:
(1) The return of the jewelry.
(2) The exchange of the jewelry for different, new jewelry.
D.
Any transaction as a purchaser of secondhand jewelry from a charitable
organization if the secondhand jewelry was a gift to the charitable
organization.
E.
Any transaction as a seller of secondhand jewelry which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand jewelry was a
gift to the charitable organization.
F.
§ 403-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 403-5
1:435
§ 403-5. License for secondhand jewelry dealer.
No person may operate as a secondhand jewelry dealer within the
municipality unless the person first obtains a secondhand jewelry dealer's
license under this chapter. A license issued to a secondhand jewelry dealer
by the City Clerk/Treasurer authorizes the licensee to operate as a
secondhand jewelry dealer within the municipality.
§ 403-6. License application.
A person wishing to operate as a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or
a secondhand jewelry dealer within the municipality shall apply for a license
to the City Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/Treasurer shall furnish application
forms that shall require all of the following:
§ 403-7. Investigation of license applicant.
The Chief of Police of the municipality shall investigate each applicant
for a pawnbroker's, secondhand article dealer's or secondhand jewelry
dealer's license to determine whether the applicant has been arrested for or
convicted within the preceding 10 years of a felony or within the preceding
five years of a misdemeanor, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture, or
ordinance violation described under § 403-6C and, if so, the nature and date
A. The applicant's name, place and date of birth, telephone number and
residence address.
B. The names and addresses of the business and of the owner of the
business premises.
C. A statement as to whether the applicant has been arrested for or
convicted within the preceding 10 years of a felony or within the
preceding five years of a misdemeanor, statutory violation punishable
by forfeiture, or ordinance violation in which the circumstances of the
felony, misdemeanor or other offense substantially related to the
circumstances of the licensed activity and, if so, the nature and date of
the offense and the penalty assessed.
D. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, limited liability
company or partnership, and:
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the state where incorporated and
the names and addresses of all officers and directors.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners.
(3) If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and
addresses of all members.
E. The name of the manager or proprietor of the business.
F. Any other information that the Clerk/Treasurer may reasonably require.
§ 403-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 403-7
1:436
of the offense and the penalty assessed. The Chief of Police shall furnish
the information derived from that investigation in writing to the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
§ 403-8. License issuance.
§ 403-9. Pawnbroker and dealer requirements.
A. The Common Council, after reviewing the recommendation of the
Licensing Board, shall grant the license if all of the following apply:
(1) The applicant, including an individual, a partner, a member of a
limited liability company or an officer, director or agent of any
corporate applicant, has not been arrested for or convicted within
the preceding 10 years of a felony or within the preceding five
years of a misdemeanor, statutory violation punishable by
forfeiture, or ordinance violation in which the circumstances of the
felony, misdemeanor or other offense substantially relate to the
circumstances of being a pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand article dealer mall or flea
market owner.
(2) With respect to an applicant for a pawnbroker's license, the
applicant provides to the governing body a surety bond of $500 for
the observation of all municipal ordinances relating to
pawnbrokers.
B. No license issued under this section may be transferred.
C. Each license issued under this section for a pawnbroker, secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer is valid from July 1 until the
following June 30.
A. Identification. No pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer may engage in a transaction of purchase,
receipt or exchange of any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry
from a customer without first securing adequate identification from the
customer. At the time of the transaction, the pawnbroker, secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall require the customer
to present one of the following types of identification:
(1) A state identification card.
(2) A valid Wisconsin motor vehicle operator's license.
(3) A valid motor vehicle operator's license, containing a picture,
issued by another state.
(4) A military identification card.
(5) A valid passport.
(6) A senior citizen's identification card containing a photograph.
§ 403-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 403-9
1:437
(7) Any identification document issued by a state or federal
government, whether or not containing a picture, if the
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer obtains a clear imprint of the customer's right index finger.
B. Transactions with persons under 18 years of age:
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), no pawnbroker, secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer may engage in a
transaction of purchase, receipt or exchange of any secondhand
article or secondhand jewelry with any person under 18 years of
age.
(2) A pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer may engage in a transaction described under Subsection
B(1) if the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal
guardian at the time of the transaction.
C. Records to be maintained.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection C(2), for each transaction of
purchase, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article or
secondhand jewelry from a customer, a pawnbroker, secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall require the
customer to complete and sign, in ink, the appropriate form
provided by the City Clerk/Treasurer. No entry on such a form may
be erased, mutilated or changed. The pawnbroker, secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall retain an original
of each form for not less than one year after the date of the
transaction, except as provided in Subsection F, and during that
period shall make the duplicate available to any law enforcement
officer for inspection at any reasonable time upon the request of
the law enforcement officer.
(2) For every secondhand article purchased, received or exchanged by
a secondhand article dealer from a customer off the secondhand
article dealer's premises or consigned to the secondhand article
dealer for sale on the secondhand article dealer's premises, the
secondhand article dealer shall keep a written inventory on the
appropriate form provided by the City Clerk/Treasurer. In this
inventory the secondhand article dealer shall record the name and
address of each customer, telephone number, the date, time and
place of the transaction and a detailed description of the article
which is the subject of the transaction. The customer shall sign his
or her name on a declaration of ownership of the secondhand
article identified in the inventory and shall state that he or she
owns the secondhand article. The secondhand article dealer shall
retain an original and a duplicate of each entry and declaration of
ownership relating to the purchase, receipt or exchange of any
secondhand article for not less than one year after the date of the
transaction, except as provided in Subsection F, and shall make
§ 403-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 403-9
1:438
duplicates of the inventory and declarations of ownership available
to any law enforcement officer for inspection at any reasonable
time upon request of the law enforcement officer.
(3) For each transaction described in Subsection C(1) and (2) above in
which the retail price of the secondhand article or secondhand
jewelry exceeds $100, a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer shall require the customer to provide a
clear imprint of the customer's right index finger, which record
shall be retained and provided to the Watertown Police Department
upon request. [Amended 3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
(4) For each transaction described in Subsection C(1) and (2) above in
which the retail price of the secondhand article or secondhand
jewelry exceeds $100, a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer, or
secondhand jewelry dealer shall take and retain a clear,
unobstructed digital photograph of the article, which photograph
shall be retained and provided to the Watertown Police Department
upon request. This requirement shall not apply to any articles that
have a clear, unaltered serial number or identification number.
[Amended 3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
D. Electronic recording.
(1) All secondhand dealers, secondhand jewelry dealers or
pawnbrokers shall electronically report each article purchased or
received after June 30, 2010, using a computer program approved
by the City of Watertown Police Department. Such report shall
occur no more than 24 hours after the article is purchased or
received and shall contain a complete description as required in
Subsection C(1) and (2).
(2) If a secondhand article dealer, secondhand jewelry dealer, or
pawnbroker is unable to successfully transfer the required reports
by computer, the secondhand article dealer, secondhand jewelry
dealer or pawnbroker must provide the Watertown Police
Department with printed copies of all reportable transactions by
12:00 noon the next business day.
(3) If a computer problem is determined to be in the computer system
of the secondhand article dealer, secondhand jewelry dealer, or
pawnbroker and is not corrected by the close of the first business
day following the failure, the secondhand article dealer,
secondhand jewelry dealer, or pawnbroker must provide the
required reports manually as set forth in the previous subsection or
be charged a daily reporting failure fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule until the error is
corrected, or if the problem is determined to be outside the
secondhand article dealer's, secondhand jewelry dealer's, or
pawnbroker's computer system, the secondhand article dealer,
secondhand jewelry dealer, or pawnbroker must provide the
§ 403-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 403-9
1:439
required reports manually and then submit all such transactions via
computer when the error is corrected.123
(4) Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problem(s) that
prevented the secondhand article dealer, secondhand jewelry
dealer, or pawnbroker from uploading the reportable transactions,
upon correction of the problem, the secondhand article dealer,
secondhand jewelry dealer, or pawnbroker shall upload every
reportable transaction from every business day the problem has
existed.
E. Holding period.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection F, any secondhand article or
secondhand jewelry purchased or received by a pawnbroker shall
be kept on the pawnbroker's premises or other place for
safekeeping for not less than 30 days after the date of purchase or
receipt, unless the person known by the pawnbroker to be the
lawful owner of the secondhand article or secondhand jewelry
recovers it.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection F, any secondhand article
purchased or received by a secondhand article dealer shall be kept
on the secondhand article dealer's premises or other place for
safekeeping for not less than 10 days after the date of purchase or
receipt.
(3) Except as provided in Subsection F, any secondhand jewelry
purchased or received by a secondhand jewelry dealer shall be kept
on the secondhand jewelry dealer's premises or other place for
safekeeping for not less than 15 days after the date of purchase or
receipt.
(4) During the period set forth in Subsection E(1), (2) or (3), the
secondhand article or secondhand jewelry shall be held separate
and apart and may not be altered in any manner. The pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall
permit any law enforcement officer to inspect the secondhand
article or secondhand jewelry during this period. Within 24 hours
after a written request of a law enforcement officer during this
period, a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand
jewelry dealer shall make available for inspection any secondhand
article or secondhand jewelry which is kept off the premises for
safekeeping. Any law enforcement officer who has reason to
believe any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry was not sold
or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct a pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer to hold
that secondhand article or secondhand jewelry for a reasonable
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 403-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 403-9
1:440
§ 403-10. License revocation.
The Licensing Board of the Common Council may revoke any license issued
by the Common Council under this chapter for fraud, misrepresentation or
false statement contained in the application for a license or for any violation
of this chapter or § 943.34, 948.62 or 948.63, Wis. Stats.
§ 403-11. Fees.124
The license fees under this chapter are as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule.
§ 403-12. Violations and penalties.
length of time which the law enforcement officer considers
necessary to identify it.
(5) Subsection E(1) to (4) do not apply to any of the following:
(a) A coin of the United States, any gold or silver coin or gold or
silver bullion.
(b) A secondhand article or secondhand jewelry consigned to a
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer.
F. Report to law enforcement agency. Within seven days after purchasing
or receiving a secondhand article or secondhand jewelry, a pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall forward
by first-class mail, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery to the Chief
of Police of the City of Watertown, a duplicate of the original form
completed under Subsection C(1) or the inventory under Subsection
C(2), whichever is appropriate. Notwithstanding § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.,
a law enforcement agency receiving the original form or inventory or a
declaration of ownership may disclose it only to another law
enforcement agency. [Amended 3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
G. Exception for customer return or exchange. Nothing in this section
applies to the return or exchange, from a customer to a secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer, of any secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry purchased from the secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer. [Amended 3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
A. Upon conviction for a first offense under this chapter, a person shall
forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $1,000, together with the court
costs, fees, assessments and surcharges required by law.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 403-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 403-12
1:441
Chapter 410
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-4.
Citations — See Ch. 33.
Emergency government — See Ch. 56.
Adult entertainment establishments — See
Ch. 205.
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 220.
Animals — See Ch. 228.
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Parks and recreation regulations — See Ch.
398.
Public events — See Ch. 428.
B. Upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense under this chapter,
a person shall forfeit not less than $500 nor more than $2,000, together
with the court costs, fees, assessments and surcharges required by law.
§ 403-12 WATERTOWN CODE § 403-12
1:442
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 410-1. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture.125
The following chapters and their subchapters of the Wisconsin Statutes
defining offenses against the peace and good order of the State of Wisconsin
are hereby adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and
good order of the City of Watertown, provided that the penalty for
commission of such offenses hereunder shall be in strict conformity with
the state statutes as they relate to adoption by a municipality and limited
to a forfeiture imposed under the general penalty provisions of § 1-4 of this
Code if not expressly provided for in the statute. In order to remain in strict
conformity with these state statutes, all future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended
to be made part of this Code.
Chapter 29 Wild Animals and Plants
§ 101.123 Smoking prohibited
Chapter 114 Aeronautics and Astronautics
§ 118.07 Health and safety requirements
§ 118.08 School zones; crossings
§ 118.09 Safety zones
§ 118.10 School safety patrols
§ 118.105 Control of traffic on school premises
§ 118.11 School fences
§ 118.123 Reports and records; forfeitures
§ 118.15 Compulsory school attendance
§ 118.16 School attendance enforcement
§ 118.163 Municipal truancy and school dropout ordinances
§ 134.65 Cigarette and tobacco products retailer license
§ 134.66 Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or nicotine or
tobacco products
Chapter 125 Alcohol Beverages
Chapter 139 Beverage, Controlled Substances and Tobacco Taxes
Chapter 167 Safeguards of Persons and Property
Chapter 175 Miscellaneous Police Provisions
§ 254.76 Causing fires by tobacco smoking
§ 254.92 Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products
by person under 18 prohibited
Chapter 939 Crimes – General Provisions
125. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-1
1:443
Chapter 940 Crimes Against Life and Bodily Security
Chapter 941 Crimes Against Public Health and Safety
Chapter 942 Crimes Against Reputation, Privacy and Civil Liberties
Chapter 943 Crimes Against Property
Chapter 944 Crimes Against Sexual Morality, except § 944.21
Chapter 945 Gambling
Chapter 946 Crimes Against Government and Its Administration
Chapter 947 Crimes Against Public Peace, Order and Other Interests
Chapter 948 Crimes Against Children
Chapter 951 Crimes Against Animals
Chapter 961 Uniformed Controlled Substances Act
§ 410-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the designated
meaning unless the context of a specific section manifestly requires a
different construal:
AIRGUN — A weapon which expels a missile by the expansion of
compressed air or other gas.[Added by Ord. No. 94-55]
BODILY HARM — Physical pain or injury, illness or any impairment of
physical condition.
DANGEROUS WEAPON — Any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; any
device designed as a weapon and capable of producing death or great bodily
harm; or any other device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used
or intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great
bodily harm.
FIREARM — Any instrument used in the propulsion of a bullet, shot, slug or
other projectile by the force or action of gunpowder exploded or burned in
it.[Added by Ord. No. 94-55]
GREAT BODILY HARM — Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes
a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ or other serious bodily injury.
HOUSEHOLD MEMBER — A person currently or formerly residing in a
place of abode with another person.
HUNTING — Shooting, shooting at, pursuing, taking, catching or killing any
mammal, bird, fish or other creature of a wild nature.[Added by Ord. No.
94-55]
PEDESTRIAN — Any person on foot.
ROADWAY — That portion of all public ways and thoroughfares and bridges
on the same between the regularly established curblines or that portion
§ 410-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-2
1:444
which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
excluding the berm or shoulder.
SPRING GUN — A weapon which expels a missile by the action of a
spring.[Added by Ord. No. 94-55]
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY — An assembly which consists of three or more
persons and which causes such a disturbance of public order that it is
reasonable to believe that the assembly will cause injury to persons or
damage to property unless it is immediately dispersed, and includes, but
is not limited to, an assembly of persons who assemble for the purpose of
blocking or obstructing the lawful use by any other person or persons of
any private or public thoroughfares, property or of any positions of access
or exit to or from any private or public building, dwelling or other place.
VALUE — In reference to property, means the market value at the time of
the incident or the replacement cost within a reasonable time thereafter,
whichever is less, except that the value of property held for resale by a
merchant shall mean the stated price or, in the case of altering, transferring
or removing a price marking or causing a cash register or other sales device
to reflect less than the merchant's stated price, the difference between the
stated price and the altered price.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn.
§ 410-3. Attempt.
Any person who attempts a violation of this chapter shall be subject to 1/2
of the penalty provided for a completed violation. An attempt to commit a
violation requires that the person have an intent to perform acts and attain
a result which, if accomplished, would constitute such violation and that
he does acts toward the commission of the violation which demonstrate
unequivocally under all the circumstances that he formed that intent and
would commit the violation except for the intervention of another person or
some other extraneous factor.
§ 410-4. Parties to offense.
Whoever is concerned in the commission of a violation of this chapter
is a principal and may be charged with and convicted of such violation
although he did not directly commit it and although the person who directly
committed it has not been convicted or has been convicted of some other
violation based on the same act and shall be subject to the penalties
contained in § 1-4 of this Code. A person is concerned in the commission of
the violation if it is demonstrated unequivocally under all the circumstances
that he intentionally aided and abetted the commission of it or, with intent
that a violation be committed, agrees or combines with another or others
for the purpose of committing that violation, and an act is done to effect the
violation.
§ 410-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-5
1:445
§ 410-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be penalized as provided in § 1-4 of this Code, unless otherwise indicated
herein.
§ 410-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-5
1:446
ARTICLE II
Bodily Security
§ 410-6. Battery.
No person shall cause bodily harm to another by an act done with intent
to cause bodily harm to that person or another without the consent of the
person so harmed.
§ 410-7. Disorderly conduct.
A. No person shall:
(1) In any public or private place engage in violent, abusive, indecent,
profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly
conduct which tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance
of public order or tends to disturb or annoy any other person or
persons.
(2) Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or
noisy altercation other than a bona fide athletic event.
(3) Disturb any lawful meeting, assemblage or gathering, or fail or
refuse to withdraw from an unlawful assembly which the person
knows has been ordered to disperse.
B. Disorderly conduct in school. [Added by Ord. No. 98-39]
(1) Purpose. The City of Watertown finds that public education must
prepare students for citizenship and, thus, must inculcate habits
and manners of civility as fundamental values to the practice of
self-government in the community. These values must include
tolerance of divergent political and religious views. Furthermore,
these values must also take into account the sensibilities of fellow
students and school staff. The lessons of civil, mature conduct
cannot be conveyed in a school that tolerates lewd, indecent or
offensive speech and conduct. Thus, the City of Watertown finds
that it is a highly appropriate function of the public schools within
the City of Watertown to prevent the use of lewd, indecent or
offensive speech and conduct in public discourse within the school
environment. The City of Watertown recognizes that ordinances
which apply to student behavior in the school environment must
preserve both the informal nature of the student-staff relationship
and the discretion of staff members to identify and prohibit a wide
range of unanticipated and disruptive student speech and conduct.
(2) Disorderly conduct at school. No juvenile or student shall, in any
public school environment within the corporate limits of the City of
Watertown, engage in any speech or conduct, including the use of
obscene, profane, lewd, indecent or offensive language or gestures,
which materially and substantially interferes with the educational
mission of the school.
§ 410-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-7
1:447
§ 410-8. Unlawful use of computerized communication systems.
[Added by Ord. No. 11-12]
(3) The following are examples of acts that may, under the
circumstances, materially and substantially interfere with the
educational mission of the school: the use of obscene, profane,
lewd, indecent or offensive language or gestures directed at any
teacher, administrator and other school staff member; the use of
obscene, profane, lewd, indecent or offensive language or gestures
directed at any student. This list is not intended to encompass
every act that may be prohibited by this section.126
A. In this section, "message" means any transfer of signs, signals, writing,
images, sounds, data or intelligence of any nature, or any transfer of a
computer program, as defined in § 943.70(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
B. Whoever does any of the following is subject to a penalty as set forth in
the Watertown Bond Schedule:
(1) With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass
another person, sends a message to the person through an
electronic mail or other computerized communication system and
in that message threatens to inflict injury or physical harm to any
person or the property of any person.
(2) With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass
another person, sends a message on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system with the reasonable
expectation that the person will receive the message and in that
message threatens to inflict injury or physical harm to any person
or the property of any person.
(3) With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten or abuse another
person, sends a message to the person on an electronic mail or
other computerized communication system and in that message
uses any obscene, lewd or profane language or suggests any lewd
or lascivious act.
(4) With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten or abuse another
person, sends a message on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system with the reasonable
expectation that the person will receive the message and in that
message uses any obscene, lewd or profane language or suggests
any lewd or lascivious act.
(5) With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten or abuse another
person, sends a message to the person on an electronic mail or
other computerized communication system while intentionally
126. Editor's Note: Original § 11.14, which immediately followed this section, was repealed by
Ord. No. 98-53.
§ 410-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-8
1:448
§ 410-9. Harassment.
preventing or attempting to prevent the disclosure of his or her
own identity.
(6) While intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent the
disclosure of his or her identity and with intent to frighten,
intimidate, threaten or abuse another person, sends a message on
an electronic mail or other computerized communication system
with the reasonable expectation that the person will receive the
message.
C. Whoever does any of the following is subject to a penalty as set forth in
the Watertown Bond Schedule:
(1) With intent to harass, annoy or offend another person, sends a
message to the person on an electronic mail or other computerized
communication system and in that message uses any obscene, lewd
or profane language or suggests any lewd or lascivious act.
(2) With intent to harass, annoy or offend another person, sends a
message on an electronic mail or other computerized
communication system with the reasonable expectation that the
person will receive the message and in that message uses any
obscene, lewd or profane language or suggests any lewd or
lascivious act.
(3) With intent solely to harass another person, sends repeated
messages to the person on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system.
(4) With intent solely to harass another person, sends repeated
messages on an electronic mail or other computerized
communication system with the reasonable expectation that the
person will receive the messages.
(5) With intent to harass or annoy another person, sends a message to
the person on an electronic mail or other computerized
communication system while intentionally preventing or
attempting to prevent the disclosure of his or her own identity.
(6) While intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent the
disclosure of his or her identity and with intent to harass or annoy
another person, sends a message on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system with the reasonable
expectation that the person will receive the message.
(7) Knowingly permits or directs another person to send a message
prohibited by this section from any computer terminal or other
device that is used to send messages on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system and that is under his or her
control.
§ 410-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-9
1:449
§ 410-10. Harboring runaways. [Added by Ord. No. 89-9]
Whoever knowingly allows, permits or boards any minor child at his or her
residence, property or place of business, where the person knows or should
have known the child to be a runaway from his or her parent, guardian or
legal custodian, shall be guilty of harboring a runaway and shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
A. No person, with intent to harass or intimidate another person, shall do
any of the following:
(1) Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject the person to physical
contact or attempt or threaten to do the same.
(2) Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts which
harass or intimidate the person and which serve no legitimate
purpose.
B. This section does not prohibit any person from participating in lawful
conduct in labor disputes under § 103.53, Wis. Stats.
§ 410-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-10
1:450
ARTICLE III
Public Health and Safety
§ 410-11. Vehicles.
A. Off-road operation of vehicles. [Amended by Ord. No. 02-04]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of vehicle
powered by an internal combustion engine or battery-powered
motor while in any of the following places without first obtaining
the written permission or authorization hereinafter required:
(a) On any property owned by the City of Watertown, except public
rights-of-way and municipal parking lots, unless such operation
is specifically permitted by written order of the Mayor or his
designated representative, or unless such property is
specifically posted for such operation.
(b) On any property owned by a school district or any public school
grounds or campus, except public rights-of-way and designated
parking lots when used for that purpose, unless such operation
is specifically permitted by written order of the district
superintendent of schools or his designated representative.
(c) On any private property, except private parking lots open to
the public, unless by specific written order of the owner or
designated representative of the owner of such property to the
individual operating the vehicle.
(2) All written orders specified herein must be in the possession of the
person operating a vehicle in prohibited areas during the time of
such operation.
B. Driving or walking upon barricaded areas. No person shall walk, ride or
drive upon, over or across any sidewalk, bridge, pavement or other
surface while it is barricaded by a traffic control device as defined
below, which is so placed as to indicate that the sidewalk, bridge,
pavement or other surface is closed to traffic. [Amended by Ord. No.
99-43]
(1) Traffic control devices shall be placed only by the authority of the
City of Watertown. The following traffic control devices shall be
deemed appropriate for use within the City of Watertown:
[Amended by Ord. No. 12-22]
(a) Traffic drums. Traffic drums shall be a minimum of 36 inches in
height and a minimum of 18 inches in diameter. The markings
on the drums shall be horizontal, circumferential, orange-andwhite
reflectorized stripes four to eight inches wide.
(b) Type I, II and III barricades. Type I, II and III barricades shall
comply with the definitions as set forth at Section 6F.5(f) of the
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11
1:451
United States Department of Labor Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, and any subsequent amendments to the same.
(c) Cones. Cones shall be a minimum of 18 inches high, of orange
color.
(d) Reflective safety tape. Any reflective safety tape stretched
between traffic control drums or Type I, II or III barricades.
(e) Orange plastic fencing at a minimum of four feet high
stretched between traffic control drums or Type I, II or III
barricades.
(2) The Chief of Police, upon written application from any public or
private school, may grant written permission to the school to erect
temporary street barricades on those public streets adjacent to
school playground areas during such regular times when children
are present outside of the school building. The written permission
shall specify the portions of streets to be barricaded, the hours
during which barricades may be erected, and the type of barricade
to be used.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the public or private school granted
the permission in Subsection B(2) above to place, remove and store
the barricades in conformity with this Subsection B and to supply a
barricade which complies with standards set forth in Subsection
B(1) above.
(4) No person shall remove, take down, change the position of, deface
or otherwise damage any traffic control device listed in Subsection
B(1) above or any light which has been placed by an authorized City
official for the warning, instruction or information of the public,
surrounding or protecting any material, work or improvement on
any street, sidewalk, alley, bridge or public ground or any holes cut
through the ice within the City.
(5) Vehicle owner's liability for violation of this subsection.
(a) "Owner" shall be defined pursuant to § 346.01(2), Wis. Stats.
(b) The owner of a vehicle involved in a violation of this Subsection
B shall be presumed liable for the violation as provided in this
subsection.
(c) No owner of a vehicle involved in a violation of this Subsection
B may be convicted under this subsection if the person
operating the vehicle or having the vehicle under his or her
control at the time of the violation has been convicted for a
violation under this subsection.
(6) Public recording. Any member of the public who observes a
violation of this Subsection B may prepare a written report
indicating that a violation has occurred.
§ 410-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-11
1:452
(a) If possible, the report shall contain the following information:
[1] The time and the approximate location at which the
violation occurred.
[2] The license number and color of the motor vehicle involved
in the violation.
[3] Identification of the motor vehicle as an automobile,
station wagon, motor truck, motor bus, motorcycle or
other type of vehicle.
(b) Within 24 hours after observing the violation, a member of the
public may deliver a report containing all of the information
contained hereinabove to an officer of the City of Watertown.
(c) Within 48 hours after receiving a report containing all of the
information contained herein, the officer shall investigate the
violation and may prepare a municipal traffic violation within
72 hours after receiving such report and may personally serve
it upon the owner of the vehicle. If with reasonable diligence
the owner cannot be served under this subsection, service may
be made by leaving a copy of the citation at the owner's usual
place of abode within this state in the presence of a competent
member of his or her family at least 14 years of age, who shall
be informed of the contents thereof. Service under this
subsection may be made by any traffic officer employed by the
City and shall be performed within 72 hours after a report
containing all of the information set forth hereinabove was
delivered to a traffic officer under this subsection. If with
reasonable diligence the owner cannot be served as set forth
herein, or if the owner lives outside of the City of Watertown,
service may be made by certified mail addressed to the owner's
last known address within 72 hours after a report containing
the information set forth hereinabove was delivered to a traffic
officer.
(d) Defenses to the imposition of liability under this Subsection B
include:
[1] That a report that the vehicle was stolen was given to a
traffic officer before the violation occurred or within a
reasonable time after the violation occurred.
[2] If the owner of the vehicle provides a traffic officer
employed by the City issuing the citation with the name
and address of the person operating the vehicle or having
the vehicle under his or her control at the time of the
violation and sufficient information for the officer to
determine that probable cause does not exist to believe
that the owner of the vehicle was operating the vehicle at
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11
1:453
the time or having the vehicle under his or her control at
the time of the violation.
[3] If the vehicle is owned by a lessor of vehicles and at the
time of the violation the vehicle was in the possession of a
lessee, and the lessor provides a traffic officer employed
by the City of Watertown with the information required
under § 343.46(3), Wis. Stats., then the lessee and not the
lessor shall be liable under this Subsection B.
[4] If the vehicle is owned by a dealer, as defined in
§ 340.01(11), Wis. Stats., but including the persons
specified in § 340.01(11)(a) to (d), Wis. Stats., and at the
time of the violation the vehicle was being operated by or
was under the control of any person on a trial run, and if
the dealer provides a traffic officer employed by the City of
Watertown with the name, address and operator's license
number of the person operating the vehicle, then that
person, and not the dealer, shall be liable under this
Subsection B.
C. Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks. [Added by Ord. No.
02-17]
(1) Definitions.
(a) "Motorized vehicle" shall mean a vehicle which is used for the
transportation of persons and/or property, including but not
limited to the following, irrespective of size, weight, number of
wheels, and whether or not having a seat: moped, motor
bicycle, motorbus, motorcycle, motor home, motor truck,
motor vehicle, snowmobile, and all-terrain vehicle, and also
means motorized skates, motorized scooter and motorized
skateboards. Motorized wheelchairs and similar medical
assisting devices are specifically excluded from this definition.
(b) All other words and phrases shall be given their meaning
provided in the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(a) Operate a motorized vehicle on a public sidewalk, except for
crossing a sidewalk to reach an area where operation is lawful.
This prohibition does not apply to motorized vehicles used for
construction or maintenance purposes or used to access the
site of construction or maintenance work.
(b) Operate any type of motorized skates, motorized scooter or
motorized skateboard, whether gas- or electric-powered, on a
public street or highway.
§ 410-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-11
1:454
D. Prevent deposits on public roadways. No person, in person or by his
agent, employee or servant, shall:
(1) Use any vehicle to haul any kind of rubbish, waste articles or solid
or liquid substance upon any public roadways unless such vehicle is
covered at all times to prevent any part of its load from spilling or
dropping while in motion.
(2) This Subsection D shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush
cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs and similar waste material
if such matter is securely lashed or placed in such vehicle to
prevent spilling or dropping.
E. Cruising prohibited on Main Street. [Added by Ord. No. 92-58]
(1) Findings and purpose. It is hereby found that a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare arises from the congestion created by
the repetitive unnecessary driving of motor vehicles, also known as
cruising, at certain times on certain highways within the City of
Watertown. The purpose of this Subsection E is to reduce the
dangerous traffic congestion, as well as the noise, air pollution,
obstruction of streets, sidewalks and parking lots, impediment of
access to shopping centers or other buildings open to the public,
and interference with use of property or conduct of business
resulting from cruising, and to ensure access for emergency
vehicles to and through said highways.
(2) Definitions. As used in this Subsection E, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
CRUISING — Driving a motor vehicle past a traffic control point on
a highway in the designated area four or more times in the same
direction of travel in any two-hour period between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
DESIGNATED AREA — Main Street between the intersection of
College Avenue and the intersection of Church Street in the City of
Watertown, Wisconsin.
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT — A reference point within or adjacent
to a designated area selected by a police officer for the purpose of
enforcing this Subsection E.
(3) Cruising prohibited. It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in
cruising in the designated area. For the purposes of this Subsection
E, the person having control or ownership of a motor vehicle shall
be considered the person cruising, without regard as to whether
that person was actually driving the motor vehicle each time it
passed the traffic control point. Having control or ownership of a
motor vehicle shall mean either the owner of said vehicle, if present
in the vehicle at the time of the violation or, if the owner is not
present, the person operating the vehicle at the time of violation.
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11
1:455
§ 410-12. Weapons.
(4) Exclusions. This Subsection E shall not apply to:
(a) Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, state, federal or
other governmental unit while such vehicle is being used for
the official purposes of said governmental unit.
(b) Any authorized emergency vehicle.
(c) Any taxicabs for hire, buses or other vehicles being driven for
business purposes.
F. Racetracks. No person shall cause to be operated or assist in the
operation of any racetrack. "Racetrack" means any area in the City
where any midget auto, motorcycle, stock car, go-cart or other type of
vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine is operated in
competition with one or more other such vehicles on the basis of speed,
endurance or otherwise.
A. Firearms prohibited in municipal buildings. [Amended by Ord. No.
11-26]
(1) Definitions. As used in this Subsection A, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
FIREARM — A weapon or any instrument used in the propulsion
of a bullet, shot, slug or other projectile by the force or action of
gunpowder exploded or burned in it.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person employed by the
State of Wisconsin or any political subdivision of this state for the
purpose of detecting and preventing crime and enforcing laws or
ordinances and who is authorized to make arrests for violations of
the laws or ordinances he or she is employed to enforce.
WEAPON — A handgun; an electric weapon, as defined in
§ 941.295(1c)(a), Wis. Stats.; a knife with a blade longer than six
inches, other than a switchblade knife as defined in § 941.24, Wis.
Stats.; or a billy club.
(2) In addition to the provisions of § 175.60, Wis. Stats., enumerating
places where the carrying of a weapon or a firearm is prohibited,
including exceptions thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person
other than a law enforcement officer to enter the following City of
Watertown municipal buildings while carrying a weapon or a
firearm:
(a) Watertown Municipal Building.
(b) Watertown Fire Station.
(c) Watertown Police Department.
§ 410-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-12
1:456
(d) Watertown Public Library.
(e) Watertown Senior Citizen Center/Park Department Offices.
(f) Watertown Public Health Department.
(g) Watertown Public Works Facility.
(h) Watertown Water Department Buildings.
(i) Watertown Wastewater Treatment Plant.
(j) Watertown City Attorney's Office.
(k) All City of Watertown well/pump stations.
(l) Watertown Aquatic Center at Riverside Park.
(m) Riverside Park Pavilion.
(n) Watertown Park Maintenance Shop.
(o) All polling stations on official election days, including the
polling station at Marquardt Memorial Manor.
(3) Signs meeting the requirements of § 943.13(2)(bm)(1), Wis. Stats.,
shall be posted in prominent places near all entrances of such
buildings regarding such restrictions.
(4) Exceptions. The following City of Watertown municipal buildings
shall not be subject to the prohibition against carrying a weapon or
a firearm on the premises: the Watertown Airport Terminal and the
adjacent hanger/repair facility. [Added by Ord. No. 12-15]
(5) Issuance of exemption. The Chief of Police, at his discretion, may
issue a written exemption allowing an applicant to have temporary
possession of a firearm within a City-owned building upon written
application providing a legitimate educational purpose as a basis
for the exemption. [Added by Ord. No. 12-23]
B. Discharging and carrying weapons. [Amended by Ord. No. 09-32;
Ord. No. 09-38; Ord. No. 11-26]
(1) No person may go armed with a concealed and dangerous weapon
or firearm unless such person qualifies under the exceptions below:
(a) A person who is employed in this state by a public agency as a
law enforcement officer to carry a concealed firearm if
§ 941.23(1)(g)(2) through (5) and (2)(b)(1) to (3), Wis. Stats.,
apply.
(b) A qualified out-of-state law enforcement officer, as defined in
§ 941.23(1)(g), Wis. Stats., to carry a concealed firearm if
§ 941.23(2)(b)(1) to (3), Wis. Stats., apply.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:457
(c) A former law enforcement officer, as defined in § 941.23(1)(c),
Wis. Stats., to carry a concealed firearm if § 941.23(2)(c)(1) to
(7), Wis. Stats., apply.
(d) A licensee, as defined in § 175.60(1)(d), Wis. Stats., or an outof-
state licensee, as defined in § 175.60(1)(g), Wis. Stats., to
carry a concealed weapon as permitted under § 175.60, Wis.
Stats.
(2) No person except in the exercise of lawful authority shall fire or
discharge any firearm within the City. This subsection shall not
prevent the firing or discharging of airguns with a caliber of .177 or
smaller upon private property within the City by persons over the
age of 16 years without supervision or by persons 16 years of age
or younger while under the direct, personal supervision of a parent
or guardian. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-19]
(3) Any person may openly possess, carry or bear any firearm or
facsimile firearm or have under his or her control any firearm or
facsimile firearm on any public street, sidewalk, boulevard,
boardwalk, alley or public parking lot within the City, except in the
areas of the City and under the circumstances outlined below and
as reflected in the Wisconsin Statutes and Administrative Code
sections specifically adopted under this Subsection B, and subject
to the exceptions noted under Subsection B(5) below for those
licensees holding a valid license to carry a concealed weapon under
§ 175.60, Wis. Stats., or similar out-of-state licensees, as defined in
§ 175.60(1)(f) and (g), Wis. Stats.: [Amended by Ord. No. 12-15]
(a) Within any public building owned by the City of Watertown or
the Watertown Unified School District, unless any such public
building is exempt from such possession under Subsection A(4)
of this section, which is similar to § 941.235, Wis. Stats.
(b) Within any building, athletic field, auditorium, arena, concert
hall or other similar facility where sporting events, concerts or
other special events are held, provided that the organizer of
the special event has notified the persons seeking to attend the
special event not to enter into or remain at the special event
while carrying or bearing a firearm or weapon and what type of
weapon is prohibited. This subsection does not apply if the
firearm or weapon is in a vehicle driven to or parked at the
special event grounds. "Special event" means an event that is
open to the public, that has a duration of not more than three
weeks, and either has designated entrances to and from the
event that are locked when the event is closed or that requires
an admission to be paid.
(c) Within any premises for which a Class "B" or "Class B" license
or permit has been issued by the City pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., which is similar to § 941.237, Wis. Stats.
§ 410-12 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-12
1:458
(d) In or on school grounds or within 1,000 feet from the grounds
of a school, which is similar to § 948.605, Wis. Stats.
(e) Placed on, possessed in or transported in any motorboat with
the motor running or any motor vehicle unless the firearm is
unloaded or encased within a carrying case, unless the firearm
is a handgun, as defined in § 175.60(1)(bm), Wis. Stats., which
is similar to § 167.31(2)(b), Wis. Stats.
(f) While any such person is under the influence of an intoxicant
or a detectable amount of a restricted controlled substance,
which is similar to § 941.20(1)(b) and (bm), Wis. Stats.
(g) Giving or providing a firearm to a person under the age of 18
unless for target practice under adult supervision, which is
similar to § 948.60, Wis. Stats.
(h) If the firearm is a facsimile firearm, no person shall openly
possess, carry or bear any facsimile firearm or have under his
or her control any facsimile firearm under circumstances that
could reasonably be expected to alarm, intimidate, threaten or
terrify another person, which is similar to § 941.2965, Wis.
Stats.
(4) The City adopts those provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes or
Wisconsin Administrative Code enumerated under Subsection B(3)
above, as from time to time amended by the Wisconsin Legislature,
together with all definitions of relevant terms and all exceptions
contained in such provisions, as if fully set forth at length in this
section.
(5) Any person may carry a concealed weapon, as that term is defined
in § 175.60(1)(j), Wis. Stats., provided he or she has in his or her
possession a valid license to carry a concealed weapon under
§ 175.60, Wis. Stats., or similar out-of-state license, as defined in
§ 175.60(1)(f), Wis. Stats., and possess, carry or bear any weapon
or have under his or her control any weapon on any public street,
sidewalk, boulevard, boardwalk, alley or public parking lot within
the City, except in the areas of the City and under the
circumstances outlined below:
(a) Within any public building owned by the City of Watertown
under Subsection A of this section, subject to the exceptions
noted in Subsection A(4) thereof. [Amended by Ord. No.
12-15]
(b) Within any public school building, grounds, recreation area,
athletic field or any other property owned, used or operated for
school administration by the Watertown Unified School
District, which is defined in § 948.61(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:459
§ 410-13. Other dangerous practices.
(c) Within any premises for which a Class "B" or "Class B" license
or permit has been issued by the City pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., subject to the limitations found in § 941.237, Wis. Stats.
(d) Within any place of employment, subject to the limitations
found in § 175.60(15m), Wis. Stats.
(e) Within any place or building enumerated in § 175.60(16), Wis.
Stats.
(f) While any such person is under the influence of an intoxicant
or a detectable amount of a restricted controlled substance,
which is similar to § 941.20(1)(b) and (bm), Wis. Stats.
(6) Any person who violates the provisions of this Subsection B, other
than a law enforcement officer, shall be subject to a penalty of a
forfeiture under § 1-4 of the City's Code, together with the costs of
prosecution and any assessments mandated by Wisconsin law as
prescribed under the Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Throwing or shooting arrows, stones and other missiles. No person
shall throw or shoot any object, arrow, stone, projectile or other missile,
by hand or by other means, at or over any other person or at or into any
automobile, building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground
or other public place within the City, in such a manner so as to
negligently endanger the safety of another, to cause property damage,
or to cause bodily harm to another.
A. Cutting holes in ice on river. No person shall cut any ice or any holes
through the ice having a diameter of greater than 13 inches in the Rock
River or in any basin, stream or slip of the Rock River without first
enclosing that portion intended to be cut with a suitable fence that shall
include, from dusk to dawn, a sufficient number of lamps to identify the
enclosure until the hazard created by such cutting no longer exists.
B. Wheeled devices in Central Business District. [Added by Ord. No.
90-49A; amended by Ord. No. 95-42; Ord. No. 96-44; Ord. No.
07-35]
(1) No person shall operate, ride or use for transportation or
recreation any wheeled device on any public or private property
within the Central Business District of the City of Watertown, as
defined by § 500-9C(2)(a) of the Municipal Code. A "wheeled
device" shall include the following: roller skates, in-line skates,
skateboards, scooters and/or roller skis.
(2) No person shall operate, ride or use for transportation or
recreation any bicycle within the sidewalk right-of-way within the
Central Business District of the City of Watertown, as defined by
§ 500-9C(2)(a) of the Municipal Code.
§ 410-12 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-13
1:460
C. Climbing on railroad cars. No person shall jump or climb upon or crawl
under or through any railroad car, engine or train, whether or not in
motion, except for authorized persons and employees of the railway.
D. Diving or jumping from bridges. No person shall dive or jump from or
sit upon the top railing or portion of any bridge.
E. Jaywalking prohibited. On Main Street between the intersections of
Church Street and College Avenue no pedestrian shall cross the
roadway at any point other than a marked crosswalk. [Added by Ord.
No. 92-60]
F. Sale and discharge of fireworks.
(1) State law adopted. Section 167.10, Wis. Stats., regulating the sale,
possession and use of fireworks, including the definitions contained
therein, and including the penalties enumerated in § 167.10(9)(b)
and (c) thereof, is adopted by reference as part of this chapter.
(2) Permits for use of fireworks. Permits for the possession and use of
fireworks may be granted by the Mayor pursuant to § 167.10(3),
Wis. Stats., for specified occasions at a fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule for each permit.
The Mayor may require an indemnity bond of not more than
$50,000 from each person to whom a permit is issued.127
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-13
1:461

ARTICLE IV
Property
§ 410-14. Tampering with water system.
No person shall turn on, damage or otherwise tamper with any part of
the water system of the City without authority from the Watertown Water
Department, except temporarily at the meter for the purpose of protecting
plumbing or for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to any
plumbing system.
§ 410-15. Tampering with traffic signs.
§ 410-16. Damage to property.
No person shall intentionally deface or otherwise damage any property of
another, public or private, without the consent of the owner.
§ 410-17. Damage to public facilities. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-87]
No person shall tear up, deface or destroy any public building or part
thereof, pavement, roadway, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb and gutter, water
main, sewer, bridge, culvert, walkway or park facilities, or any part thereof,
nor dig any hole, ditch or drain in any street, alley or public ground except
under § 419-10 of this Code. The penalty for violation of this section shall be
the imposition of a forfeiture of not less than $250 nor more than $500, plus
all applicable court costs and assessments as required by law.
§ 410-18. Deposits in sewers.
No person shall deposit in any sewer or drain any gas, oil, grease,
flammable or explosive material or any other substance which by reason of
A. No person shall tamper with any traffic or highway direction or street
name sign or traffic light erected by any authorized governmental
agency for the warning, instruction or information of the public.
"Tamper" includes changing the wording, obstructing the visibility,
removing, covering, damaging, defacing, turning or any other act with
respect to such sign or light that renders it more difficult for such sign
or light to accomplish its intended purpose.
B. No person shall possess any traffic or highway direction or street name
sign or traffic light unless the person can evidence that it was obtained
in a lawful manner. "Possession" includes the presence of such device
on premises owned, controlled or occupied by the person.
C. This section shall not prohibit any person authorized by a governmental
agency having authority over a sign or light to take any action in
connection with maintenance, repair or replacement.128
128. Editor's Note: Original § 11.54, which immediately followed this section, was repealed by
Ord. No. 99-43.
§ 410-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-18
1:463
its quantity, composition or nature is likely to obstruct such sewer or drain,
cause a nuisance or create a hazard in any portion of the City sewer or
water drainage systems.
§ 410-19. Hindering or obstructing repairs to public facilities.
No person shall hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any public
pavement, roadway, sidewalk or crosswalk, water main, sewer, bridge or
culvert.
§ 410-20. Littering.129
See Chapter 362, Littering.
§ 410-21. Dumping on private property.
No person shall place or dump or cause to be placed or dumped any
rubbish, garbage, ashes, boxes, offal or any castoff material of any kind
upon the private property of another without consent of the owner of the
premises.
§ 410-22. Damage to property by graffiti. [Added by Ord. No. 97-45;
amended by Ord. No. 07-19]
A. "Graffiti" is defined as the intentional marking, drawing, or writing with
paint, ink or another substance on, or the intentional etching into, the
physical property of another and is hereby specifically declared to be a
public nuisance, as defined in § 390-2 of this Code.
B. Whoever places graffiti on the property of another, including private
property or public property, without the owner's consent, is guilty of an
offense under this section.
C. If more than one item of real or personal property is defaced by graffiti,
all the property may be prosecuted as a single offense.
D. In any case under this section involving more than one act of graffiti but
prosecuted as a single offense, it is sufficient to allege generally that
the graffiti was committed between certain dates. At the trial, evidence
may be given of any such unlawful marking, drawing, writing or etching
graffiti that was committed on or between the dates alleged.
E. Any person who shall place graffiti on the property of another, including
private property or public property, without the owner's consent shall
be liable for the costs of removing or covering such graffiti in addition
to any fines imposed for violating this section. The parents of any
unemancipated minor child who affixes graffiti may be held liable for
the cost of removing or covering said graffiti in accordance with
§ 895.035, Wis. Stats.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-22
1:464
§ 410-23. Trespass.
F. Every owner or occupant of a structure or property defaced by graffiti
shall notify the Police Department of the graffiti before removing or
covering such graffiti.
G. Duty to remove or cover. Every owner of a structure or property
defaced by graffiti shall comply with the terms of a written notice
served upon him by the Police Department to remove or cover such
graffiti within 72 hours of such notice. Failure to remove or cover such
graffiti as specified herein will subject the owner, occupant or person in
charge of it to the forfeitures provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
H. Street Superintendent to cause removal. If the owner of a structure or
property defaced by graffiti does not remove or cover such graffiti as
specified herein and continues to refuse to remove or cover such graffiti
after written notice has been served in accordance with Subsection G
above, then the Street Superintendent shall cause all graffiti to be
removed or covered, in his discretion, immediately upon default of the
owner. He shall annually render to the City Clerk/Treasurer an itemized
report of all sums disbursed by him for such removal or covering of
graffiti, the description of the premises affected thereby and the names
of the owners thereof, and the sum so disbursed shall annually be levied
and collected as a special tax upon said premises unless paid.
A. Trespassing on municipal parking facilities. [Added by Ord. No.
99-44]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person not engaged in the parking or
operation of a motor vehicle or the parking of a bicycle in a
designated bicycle rack, or not having business to attend to in
connection with the parking of a motor vehicle or bicycle, to
trespass on any municipal parking facility owned and operated by
the City of Watertown.
(2) No person shall enter or remain upon the premises of a parking
facility except while actually parking a motor vehicle or parking a
bicycle in a designated bicycle rack or while proceeding directly to
or from a parked vehicle or bicycle. No person shall utilize the
premises of a parking facility except for the purpose of proceeding
to or from an available parking stall. No person shall enter or
remain within or on a motor vehicle except for the period of time
reasonably necessary to park said vehicle or to prepare said vehicle
to leave the parking facility. No person shall ride a bicycle in any
parking facility except for the period of time reasonably necessary
to park said bicycle in designated bicycle racks.
(3) Subsection A(1) and (2) shall not apply during special events or
activities authorized and approved by the Common Council.
§ 410-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-23
1:465
(4) Notice of this Subsection A shall be prominently posted at each
point of ingress and egress in each municipal parking lot.
(5) Violations and penalties. A violation of this Subsection A shall
conform with the bond schedule as modified.
B. Trespass. [Amended by Ord. No. 93-32; Ord. No. 89-99; Ord. No.
95-64]
(1) A person commits a trespass when he or she unlawfully enters or
remains in or upon the premises identified below. It shall be
unlawful for any person:
(a) To trespass intentionally on the land or buildings of another
and intentionally and without regard for the rights of the
owner or lawful occupant to use or occupy such premises
without authority to do so from the owner or lawful occupant
thereof.
(b) To trespass intentionally on the land or buildings of another,
when a sign or other device forbidding entry has been posted
upon such premises or when written notice forbidding entry
has been given to one forbidden from such entry, and
intentionally and without regard for the rights of the owner or
lawful occupant to use, occupy or cross such premises without
authority to do so from the owner or lawful occupant thereof.
Wherever feasible, notice shall be posted at the main entrance
to said premises or at any other point of approach or entry.
[Amended 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
(c) To enter into or upon any vehicle, mobile home, aircraft or
watercraft without the consent of the person having the right
to possession or control thereof, or fail or refuse to leave any
such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to
leave by the person having such right.
(d) Being lawfully upon the land or buildings of another,
intentionally or willfully and without regard for the rights of
the owner or lawful occupant, to remain upon or refuse to
leave such premises within a reasonable time after being
requested to leave by the person having such right.
(2) A sign forbidding entry, for the purposes of this Subsection B, shall
be sufficient when the same is legible, contains the words "no
trespassing" or other express statement forbidding entry, and is
posted in a place where it is plainly visible, as set forth in
Subsection B(1)(b) hereinabove.
C. Trespass on business parking lots.
(1) No person shall enter, stay upon, or leave any vehicle upon any
business parking lot at any time that the entering, staying or
§ 410-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-23
1:466
leaving is prohibited by notice given orally or in writing by the
owner or person in charge of the premises or is prohibited by a
sign at the parking lot that is erected in conformity with Subsection
C(2)(b). [Amended by Ord. No. 88-66]
(2) In this section:
(a) Business parking lot shall mean any privately owned parking
lot providing free parking during business hours adjacent to
any store, office building, commercial building, or industrial
building for the convenience of employees, customers or
patrons.
(b) Sign at the parking lot shall mean a sign or signs posted by the
owner or person lawfully in charge of the business parking lot,
clearly stating the prohibition so that said signs can be seen
either at all entrances to the lot or at prominent locations
therein.
(3) The following uses of a parking lot shall not be violations of this
Subsection C:
(a) Temporary entrance to a business parking lot in an emergency
or to avoid an accident.
(b) Entrance by police, fire, ambulance and other emergency
personnel and equipment in the course of duty.
(c) Entrance by an owner, tenant or employee of any owner or
tenant of any establishment served by the parking lot.
(d) Entrance to the parking lot for special events during specified
hours when parking or trespassing is normally prohibited with
the consent of the owner or person in charge of any parking lot
and by the posting of temporary signs or posters to that effect.
D. Residential picketing.
(1) Declaration. It is hereby declared that the protection and
preservation of the home is the keystone of democratic
government; that the public health and welfare and the good order
of the community require that members of the community enjoy in
their homes and dwellings a feeling of well-being, tranquility and
privacy, and when absent from their homes and dwellings, carry
with them the sense of security inherent in the assurance that they
may return to the enjoyment of their homes and dwellings; that the
practice of picketing before or about residences and dwellings
causes emotional disturbances and distress to the occupants and
obstructs and interferes with the free use of public sidewalks and
public ways of travel; that such practice has as its object the
harassing of such occupants; and without resort to such practice
full opportunity exists, and under the terms and provisions of this
§ 410-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-23
1:467
§ 410-24. Theft.
Subsection D will continue to exist, for the exercise of freedom
of speech and other constitutional rights; and that the provisions
hereinafter enacted are necessary for the public interest to avoid
the detrimental results herein set forth and are enacted by the
Common Council pursuant to § 62.11(5), Wis. Stats.
(2) No person shall engage in picketing before or about the residence
or dwelling of any individual. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
prohibit:
(a) Picketing in any lawful manner during a labor dispute of the
place of employment involved in such labor dispute; or
(b) The holding of a meeting or assembly on any premises
commonly used for the discussion of subjects of general public
interest.
A. Theft. [Added by Ord. No. 95-46]
(1) Acts. Whoever does any of the following, and the value of the
property is $750 or less, may be penalized as provided in
Subsection A(4): [Amended by Ord. No. 96-13]
(a) Intentionally takes and carries away, uses, transfers, conceals
or retains possession of moveable property of another without
that person's consent and with intent to deprive the owner
permanently of possession of such property.
(b) Intentionally fails to return any personal property which is in
his possession or under his control by virtue of a written lease
or written rental agreement within 10 days after the lease or
rental agreement has expired.
(2) Definitions. As used in this Subsection A, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
MOVEABLE PROPERTY — Property whose physical location can
be changed, without limitation and including electricity and gas,
documents which represent or embody intangible rights, and
things growing on, affixed to or found on land.
PROPERTY — All forms of tangible property, whether real or
personal, without limitation and including electricity, gas and
documents which represent or embody a chose in action or other
intangible rights.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Includes property in which the actor
is a co-owner and property of a partnership of which the actor is a
member, unless the actor and victim are husband and wife.
VALUE — The market value at the time of the theft or the cost
to the victim of replacing the property within a reasonable time
§ 410-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-24
1:468
after the theft, whichever is less, but if the property stolen is a
document evidencing a chose in action or other intangible right,
"value" means either the market value of the chose in action or
other right or the intrinsic value of the document, whichever is
greater. If the thief gave consideration for, or had a legal interest
in, the stolen property, the amount of consideration or value of such
interest shall be deducted from the total value of the property.
(3) Use of photographs as evidence. In any action or proceeding for a
violation of Subsection A(1), a party may use duly identified and
authenticated photographs of the property which was the subject of
the violation in lieu of producing the property.
(4) Violations and penalties. Whoever violates Subsection A(1) of this
section is subject to the penalties provided under § 410-5.130
B. Retail theft. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-13; Ord. No. 98-42]
(1) Definitions. As used in this Subsection B, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
MERCHANT — Includes any "merchant" as defined in § 402.104(3),
Wis. Stats., or any innkeeper, motel keeper or hotel keeper.
THEFT DETECTION DEVICE — Any tag or other device that is used
to prevent or detect theft and that is attached to the merchandise
held for resale by a merchant or property of a merchant.
THEFT DETECTION DEVICE REMOVER — Any tool or device used,
designed for use or primarily intended for use in removing a theft
detection device from merchandise held for resale by a merchant
or property of a merchant.
THEFT DETECTION SHIELDING DEVICE — Any laminated or
coded bag or device designed to shield merchandise held for resale
by a merchant or property of a merchant from being detected by an
electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
VALUE OF MERCHANDISE —
(a) For property of the merchant, the value of the property; or
For merchandise held for resale, the merchant's stated price
of the merchandise or, in the event of altering, transferring
or removing a price marking or causing a cash register or
other sales device to reflect less than the merchant's stated
price, the difference between the merchant's stated price of
the merchandise and the altered price.
(b)
(2) A person shall be penalized if he or she does any of the following
without the merchant's consent and with intent to deprive the
130. Editor's Note: Former § 11.91, added by Ord. No. 88-5 and which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed by Ord. No. 95-45.
§ 410-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-24
1:469
merchant permanently of possession or the full purchase price of
the merchandise or property:
(a) Intentionally alters indicia of price or value of merchandise
held for resale by a merchant or property of a merchant.
(b) Intentionally takes and carries away merchandise held for
resale by a merchant or property of a merchant.
(c) Intentionally transfers merchandise held for resale by a
merchant or property of a merchant.
(d) Intentionally conceals merchandise held for resale by a
merchant or property of a merchant.
(e) Intentionally retains possession of merchandise held for resale
by a merchant or property of a merchant.
(f) While anywhere in the merchant's store, intentionally removes
a theft detection device from merchandise held for resale by a
merchant or property of a merchant.
(g) Uses, or possesses with intent to use, a theft detection
shielding device to shield merchandise held for resale by a
merchant or property of a merchant from being detected by an
electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
(h) Uses, or possesses with intent to use, a theft detection device
remover to remove a theft detection device from merchandise
held for resale by a merchant or property of a merchant.
(i) Whoever returns merchandise to a merchant for the purpose of
claiming a cash refund or credit by intentionally deceiving the
merchant with a representation that such merchandise was
purchased by such person from such merchant at the price
claimed, where such merchandise was, in fact, not purchased
by such person or was not purchased from such merchant or
was purchased at a price lower than the price claimed, shall be
guilty of a violation of this Subsection B. The intentional giving
of a false name or address to a merchant during the return of
merchandise is prima facie evidence of intent to defraud a
merchant.
(3) In any action or proceeding for violation of this Subsection B, a duly
identified and authenticated photograph of merchandise which was
the subject of the violation may be used as evidence in lieu of
producing the actual merchandise.
(4) Pursuant to § 943.50(5)(a), Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court Judge
may order a violator to pay restitution as provided in § 800.093,
Wis. Stats.
§ 410-24 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-24
1:470
(5) A merchant, a merchant's adult employee or a merchant's security
agent who has reasonable cause for believing that a person has
violated this Subsection B in his or her presence may detain the
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to
deliver the person to a police officer, or to his or her parent or
guardian in the case of a minor. The detained person must be
promptly informed of the purpose for the detention and be
permitted to make phone calls, but he or she shall not be
interrogated or searched against his or her will before the arrival of
a police officer, who may conduct a lawful interrogation of the
accused person. The merchant, merchant's adult employee or
merchant's security agent may release the detained person before
the arrival of a police officer or parent or guardian. Any merchant,
merchant's adult employee or merchant's security agent who acts
in good faith in any act authorized under this subsection is immune
from civil or criminal liability for those acts.
C. Refusal to pay for taxicab ride. [Added by Ord. No. 94-16]
(1) In this section "taxicab" means any motor vehicle used to transport
passengers for hire between fixed end points upon the public
highways of the City and which has a passenger-carrying capacity
of fewer than 16 persons.
(2) No person shall intentionally enter a taxicab and refuse to pay,
without delay, upon demand of the operator or other person in
charge of the taxicab, the prescribed transportation fare prior to
exiting the taxicab.
D. Failure to return library materials.
(1) "Library materials" include any book, plate, pictures, photograph,
engraving, painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine,
pamphlet, broadside, manuscript, document, letter, public record,
microfilm, sound recording, audiovisual materials in any format,
magnetic or other tapes, electronic data, processing records,
artifacts or other documentary, written or printed materials,
regardless of physical form or characteristics, belonging to, on loan
to, or otherwise in the custody of a municipal library situated or
based within the City of Watertown.
(2) No person may take and carry away any library material with the
consent of a library official, agent or employee and fail, after the
notice required by Subsection D(3), to timely return the library
materials.
(3) No person shall be charged with a violation of this Subsection D
unless such person is provided written notice signed by a library
official, agent or employee, setting forth the following: a reasonable
description of the library materials; the date that the library
materials were removed from the library; the date that the library
§ 410-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-24
1:471
materials were due to be returned; the final date by which either
the library materials are to be returned or a written explanation
made to the library that the library materials are incapable of being
returned because they are lost or destroyed; and the statement
that "Your failure to comply with the demands of this notice will
subject you to being prosecuted for a violation of the Watertown
City Ordinances, § 410-24D, Failure to return library materials,
and, upon conviction, a penalty of not less than $10 nor more than
$200, together with the costs of prosecution." Said notice shall be
served by regular, first-class mail sent to the person's last known
address or by personal service upon such person.
E. Issue of worthless checks. No person shall issue any check or other
order for payment of money in the sum of $750 or less which, at the
time of issuance, he or she intends shall not be paid. [Amended by
Ord. No. 96-13]
(1) Any of the following is prima facie evidence that the person, at the
time he or she issued the check or other order for the payment of
money, intended it should not be paid:
(a) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have an
account with the drawee;
(b) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have
sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that the person
failed within five days after receiving notice of nonpayment or
dishonor to pay the check or other order; or
(c) Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable
time, the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the
drawee and the person failed within five days after receiving
notice of nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check or other
order.
(2) Refusal to accept or failure to receive notice of nonpayment or
dishonor mailed by registered mail to such person's last known
address, or the address shown on the face of the check or other
order, shall not be a defense to the charge of issuance of worthless
check.
(3) This Subsection E does not apply to post-dated checks or to a check
given for past consideration except a payroll check.
(4) Reference to Wisconsin Statutes. The provisions of §§ 755.045 and
943.24, Wis. Stats., are adopted except for the penalty sections.
Whenever the underlying statute §§ 755.045 and 943.24 in effect
on the date of the adoption of this Subsection E are amended,
repealed or modified by the Wisconsin Legislature, the provisions
of this Subsection E shall be amended in accordance with those
changes. [Added by Ord. No. 87-5]
§ 410-24 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-24
1:472
ARTICLE V
Government and Law Enforcement
§ 410-25. Resisting or obstructing officer.
No person may knowingly resist or obstruct an officer while such officer is
doing any act in an official capacity and with lawful authority. "Obstruct"
includes, without limitation, knowingly giving false information to the
officer with intent to mislead him in the performance of his duty, or
knowingly concealing his identity or falsely identifying himself in response
to any inquiry by an officer. "Officer" means a peace officer or other public
officer or public employee having the authority by virtue of his office or
employment to take another into custody.
§ 410-26. Harassment of police officer. [Added by Ord. No. 94-15]
No person shall do any of the following, with intent to harass, annoy, alarm
or intimidate a police officer, as defined in § 410-25 of this chapter, while
acting in his official capacity: repeatedly insult, taunt or challenge a police
officer in a violent, abusive, profane or boisterous manner, which could tend
to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order. Expressly
included in the prohibited acts is making an obscene gesture to or at a
police officer and/or directing obscene language to or at a police officer.
§ 410-27. Assisting escape of prisoner.
No person shall intentionally aid any prisoner or person to escape from the
lawful custody of a police officer or peace officer of the City.
§ 410-28. False swearing. [Added by Ord. No. 11-13]
No person shall make or subscribe a false statement which he or she does
not believe is true, while under oath or affirmation, when such oath or
affirmation is authorized or required by law or is required by any public
officer or governmental agency as a prerequisite to such officer or agency
taking some official action.
§ 410-29. False alarms. [Amended by Ord. No. 94-22]
No person shall give or send or cause to be given or sent in any manner any
alarm of fire, explosion or other emergency to the Fire or Police Department
in the City, when such person knows the report to be false.
§ 410-30. False reports. [Added by Ord. No. 94-23]
No person shall report or cause to be reported to the Police Department or
Fire Department any information concerning the commission of any offense
or other incident which would require Police or Fire Department response,
when such person knows the information is false.
§ 410-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31
1:473
§ 410-31. Impersonating police officer.
No person shall impersonate a police officer or peace officer within the City
with intent to mislead others into believing that the person is actually a
police officer or peace officer.
§ 410-32. Civil emergencies.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CIVIL EMERGENCY —
CURFEW — A prohibition against any person or persons walking,
running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway,
public property or vacant premises within the City during the hours
in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons officially
designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency.
A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute such force by three or more persons
acting together without authority by law.
(1)
Any natural disaster or man-made calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, blizzard, tornado, earthquake or explosion,
within the City resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary
measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(2)
B. Proclamation by Mayor.
(1) When in the judgment of the Mayor a civil emergency as defined
herein is deemed to exist, he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the
existence of same pursuant to § 323.11, Wis. Stats.
(2) In the event the Mayor is absent from the City during the time of
any civil emergency, the Director of Emergency Government is
delegated to exercise all authority under this section and § 323.11,
Wis. Stats.
(3) In the event the Mayor and Director of Emergency Management
are absent from the City during the time of any civil emergency, the
Chief of Police is delegated to exercise all authority under this
section and § 323.11, Wis. Stats.
C. Imposition of curfew. After proclamation of a civil emergency by the
Mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the City or to the City as a whole as he deems advisable and
applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary
in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
§ 410-31 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-32
1:474
D. Additional regulations. After proclamation of a civil emergency, the
Mayor may, in the interest of the public safety and welfare, make any or
all of the following orders:
(1) Order the closing of all retail liquor stores.
(2) Order the closing of all taverns.
(3) Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein
the consumption of alcohol beverages is permitted.
(4) Order the discontinuance of the sale of all alcohol beverages.
(5) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor
vehicle.
(6) Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of
liquid, flammable or combustible products.
(7) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever.
(8) Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof,
the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or
giving away of firearms and/or ammunition.
(9) Issue such other orders as are necessary for the protection of life
and property.
E. Emergency powers. During the period of a declared state of emergency,
the Mayor shall have the power to invoke any or all of the following
provisions:
(1) Alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume any alcoholic
beverages in a public street or place which is publicly owned or in
any motor vehicle driven or parked thereon which is in a duly
designated restricted area.
(2) Weapons. No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club,
brick or weapon, who uses or intends to use the same unlawfully
against the persons or property of another.
(3) Incendiary missiles. No person shall make, carry, possess or use
any type of "Molotov cocktail," gasoline- or petroleum-based fire
bomb or other incendiary missile.
(4) Restricted areas. No person shall enter any area designated by the
Mayor as a restricted area unless in the performance of official
duties or with written permission from the Mayor or his duly
§ 410-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-32
1:475
designated representative, or such person shall prove residence
therein.
§ 410-32 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-32
1:476
ARTICLE VI
Public Peace, Order and Other Interests
§ 410-33. Loitering.
A. Policy and purpose. The Common Council declares it to be the policy
and purpose of this enactment to promote and preserve the public
peace, order, safety, comfort and welfare of the citizens of the City by
the regulation of the conduct of individuals to loiter, prowl, assemble or
congregate on private or public property without the consent of the
owner or person in possession of such property.
B. Loitering or prowling prohibited generally. No person shall loiter or
prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may
be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the
fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace
officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal
himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances make it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall,
prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the
person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted by requesting him to identify himself and explain his
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under
this subsection if the police or peace officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by
the person was true and, if believed by the police or peace officer at the
time, would have dispelled the alarm.
C. Obstruction of traffic by loitering. No person shall loiter upon the public
streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in any other
public place within the City in such manner as to prevent or obstruct
the ordinary free use of such public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street
crossings or bridges or other public places by persons passing along
and over the same. [Amended by Ord. No. 92-59]
D. Obstruction of entryways by loitering. No person shall loiter upon the
public streets, private driveways or sidewalks or in adjacent doorways
or entrances so as to obstruct the free entry of persons to the adjacent
property, driveways or other entrances to such property. [Amended by
Ord. No. 92-59]
E. Loitering in vicinity of school premises. [Added by Ord. No. 89-15;
amended by Ord. No. 94-14]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
PROPERTY ADJACENT TO SCHOOL OR SCHOOL PREMISES —
Any public or private property which is within 500 feet of any
school or school premises.
§ 410-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-33
1:477
SCHOOL — A public, parochial or private school which provides an
educational program for one or more grades between the grades
K and 12 and which is commonly known as an elementary school,
middle school, junior high school, senior high school or high school.
SCHOOL PREMISES — Any school building, grounds, recreation
area or athletic field and any other property owned or operated by
the school for school activities.
(2) No person shall enter upon or loiter in a school building, on school
premises, or on public or private property located adjacent thereto,
not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or
responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific, legitimate reason
for being in such a place at such a time, after having been
suspended or expelled from a school or asked to leave a school,
school premises, private property or public property by a school
administrator, teacher or his or her representative, by a private
property owner, tenant or agent, or by a police officer. A student
enrolled within the Watertown Unified School District shall be in
violation of this subsection if he or she is on any school premises
while suspended or expelled from school. A non-student shall be in
violation of this subsection if he or she refuses to leave the area
after being so notified by the persons indicated above. [Amended
by Ord. No. 95-24; Ord. No. 97-68]
F. Loitering on roadways in Central Business District. [Added by Ord.
No. 92-59]
(1) Purpose. It is hereby found and determined by the Common Council
that loitering on the roadway on and around vehicles parked on the
roadway on Main Street, between the intersections of Church
Street and College Avenue, creates hazardous traffic conditions
between vehicles and pedestrians, which may result in death or
personal injury, hinders and obstructs safe traffic movement, and
may result in property damage to parked vehicles; and that there is
a need to prohibit such loitering during specific hours to promote
safe traffic movement on Main Street and otherwise protect and
preserve the public health, safety and welfare.
(2) Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to congregate around,
loiter by, stand beside or sit on or lean upon a motor vehicle, or to
sit, stand or lie upon any portion of a motor vehicle not designed or
intended for the use of passengers or within truck bodies in spaces
intended for merchandise, while parked on the roadway on Main
Street between the intersections of Church Street and College
Avenue between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. [Amended
by Ord. No. 93-31]
(3) Exceptions. It shall not be an offense under this Subsection F:
(a) If said person is on the sidewalk;
§ 410-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-33
1:478
§ 410-34. Curfew hours for minors. [Amended by Ord. No. 92-56;
Ord. No. 02-08; Ord. No. 07-34]
(b) If said person is on the sidewalk and leaning upon a motor
vehicle with permission of the operator or owner of such motor
vehicle; or
(c) If said person is entering, exiting or loading any such motor
vehicle while it is legally parked on the roadway.
G. Loitering on Main Street Bridge. No person shall loiter, congregate,
stand on or sit on the Main Street Bridge over the Rock River in the City
other than to walk across the bridge on the sidewalk or in the
crosswalk. [Added by Ord. No. 92-59]
A. Curfew hours imposed. No person under 17 years of age shall be upon
the public streets, public parking lots, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots,
or any public places in the City, either on foot or in or upon any
conveyance being driven or parked thereon, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:59 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. Friday and Saturday.
B. Work travel. This section shall not apply to any person under 17 years of
age who is required to use the streets, alleys or public places of the City
during the imposed curfew hours for the purpose of going to or
returning from his/her place of employment, but no more than
reasonable time shall be allowed for going to and returning from such
employment.
C. Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian.
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop.
(3) A nonresident en route through the City without stopping except to
discharge a passenger or purchase gasoline or food.
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop.
(5) Involved in an emergency.
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence.
(7) Attending, or going to or returning from, an official school or
religious event or a recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the City of Watertown.
§ 410-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34
1:479
§ 410-35. Distribution of commercial advertising material.
§ 410-36. Unlawful use of telephone.
No person shall use a telephone or cause a telephone to be used in the
following manner:
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right to assembly.
D. Enforcement. Before taking enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being
in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response or other
circumstances, no defense in Subsection C(7) is present.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person under the age of 17 years cited for
a violation of Subsection A, upon conviction, shall be advised by the
court of the penalty for second and subsequent violations. Any such
person found guilty of a second or subsequent violation shall be subject
to the penalties provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
F. Adult custodian permitting violation of curfew. Any adult person having
the legal custody of a person under the age of 17 years suffering or
permitting a minor to violate Subsection A shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall distribute commercial advertising
material upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public
place within the City or cause such material to be posted or otherwise
displayed within such public places without the written authority of the
Mayor or his designee.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall post any bill or commercial
advertising material, except legal notices, service of process, or other
similar notices posted according to law, on any private property within
the City without the consent of the owner thereof.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall distribute handbills, circulars,
pamphlets, cards, pictures or any advertising material of any kind
whatsoever by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicle standing
or parked in the public streets or public parking lots of the City.131
A. With the intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass, makes
a telephone call and threatens to inflict injury or physical harm to any
person or property of any person.
131. Editor's Note: Former § 11.115 of the City Code, Annual Riverfest Celebration, which
immediately followed this section, was moved to Ch. 428, Public Events, Art. IV, at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 410-34 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-36
1:480
§ 410-37. Habitual truancy and truancy. [Added by Ord. No. 91-91;
amended by Ord. No. 98-40; Ord. No. 98-70]
B. With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse, harass or offend,
telephones another and uses any obscene, lewd or profane language or
suggests any lewd or lascivious act.
C. Makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with
intent to harass any person at the called number.
D. Makes repeated telephone calls, whether or not conversation ensues,
with intent solely to harass any person at the called number. [Added by
Ord. No. 87-6]
E. Makes telephone calls to the City's police, fire or emergency telephone
numbers, including 911, when such person makes the call for no
legitimate reason or purpose. This subsection shall apply regardless of
whether the person who makes an emergency telephone call speaks to
or in any way communicates with the person answering the call.
[Added by Ord. No. 94-24]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE — As defined in §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis.
Stats.
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part
or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school
semester.
TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable
excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part or all of any
day on which school is held during a school semester.
B. Prohibition of habitual truancy. No child shall be a habitual truant.
C. Prohibition of truancy. No child shall be truant.
D. Violations and penalties. The court shall enter dispositional orders,
including one or more of the following:
(1) Habitual truancy.
(a) Suspension of the child's driving privileges for not less than 30
days nor more than one year. The Court may take possession of
any suspended license. If the Court takes possession of a
license, it shall destroy the license. The Court shall forward to
the Department of Transportation a notice stating the reason
for and the duration of the suspension.132
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-37
1:481
(b) An order for the child to remain at home except during hours in
which the child is attending religious worship or a school
program, including the travel time required to and from the
school program or place of worship. The order may permit a
child to leave his or her home if the child is accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
(c) An order for the person to participate in counselling or a
supervised work program or other community service work as
described in § 938.34(5g), Wis. Stats. The costs of any such
counselling, supervised work program, or other community
service work may be assessed against the person, the parents
or guardian of the person, or both. Any county department of
human services or social services, community agency, public
agency or nonprofit charitable organization administering a
supervised work program or other community service work to
which a person is assigned pursuant to an order under this
subsection acting in good faith has immunity from any civil
liability in excess of $25,000 for any act or omission by or
impacting on that person.
(d) An order for the person to attend an educational program as
described in § 938.34(7d), Wis. Stats.
(e) An order for the person to be placed in a teen court program as
described in § 938.342(1g)(f), Wis. Stats.
(f) An order for the person to attend school.
(g) A forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs, subject to
§ 938.37, Wis. Stats. All or part of the forfeiture, plus costs,
may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of
the person, or both.
(h) Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this
subsection, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or
remaining on specified premises, and restrictions on
associating with other children or adults.
(i) An order for the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to
participate in counselling at the parent's, guardian's or legal
custodian's own expense, or to attend school with the person,
or both.
(2) Truancy.
(a) An order for the person to attend school.
(b) A forfeiture of not more than $50 plus costs for a first violation,
or a forfeiture of not more than $100 plus costs for any second
or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a
previous violation, subject to § 938.37, Wis. Stats., and subject
§ 410-37 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-37
1:482
§ 410-38. Contributing to truancy. [Added by Ord. No. 96-12;
amended by Ord. No. 96-45; Ord. No. 98-41]
§ 410-39. Regulation of sexually-oriented conduct. [Added by Ord.
No. 00-31; amended by Ord. No. 03-32]
to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than
$500 for all violations committed during a school semester. All
or part of the forfeiture, plus costs, may be assessed against
the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both.
A. Definition. Truancy means any absence from school by a pupil without
an acceptable excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for
part or all of any days on which school is held during a school semester.
B. Contributing to truancy prohibited.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), no person shall, by any act
or omission, knowingly encourage or contribute to the truancy of a
child.
(2) Subsection B(1) does not apply to a person who has under his or
her control a child who has been sanctioned under § 49.26(1)(h),
Wis. Stats.
(3) An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or
not the child is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if
the natural and probable consequences of the act or omission
would be to cause the child to be truant.
(4) A parent, legal custodian or guardian contributes to the truancy of
a child if the parent, legal custodian or guardian fails to make a
reasonable effort to assure that the child arrives at school in a
timely manner. [Added by Ord. No. 02-30]
A. Findings.
(1) The Common Council has authority under its general police powers
set forth in § 62.11(5), Wis. Stats., to act for the good order of the
municipality and for the health, safety and welfare of the public and
may carry out its powers by regulation and suppression.
(2) The Common Council recognizes it lacks authority to regulate
obscenity in light of § 66.0107(3), Wis. Stats., and does not intend
by adopting this section to regulate obscenity, since nudity in and of
itself is not obscene. It declares its intent to enact an ordinance
addressing the secondary effects of live, totally nude, nonobscene,
erotic dancing in bars and taverns.
(3) Exhibitions in public places featuring totally nude, nonobscene,
erotic dancing or motion picture or video presentations thereof
have in other communities tended to further the increase of
§ 410-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:483
criminal and other offensive activity, to be offensive to some
members of the general public or to children, to disrupt the peace
and order of the communities, to depreciate the value of real
property, to harm the economic welfare of the communities and to
negatively affect the quality of life of the communities, and such
secondary effects are detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of citizens.
(4) The Common Council recognizes that the United States Supreme
Court has held that nude dancing is expressive conduct within the
outer perimeters of the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution and, therefore, entitled to some protection under the
First Amendment, and the Common Council further recognizes that
freedom of speech is among our most precious and highly
protected rights and wishes to act consistently with full protection
of those rights.
(5) However, the Common Council is aware, based on the experiences
of other communities, that exhibitions in public places in which
live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing or video or motion
picture presentation thereof occurs may and do generate
secondary effects which the Common Council believes are
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City of Watertown.
(6) Among these secondary effects are: the potential increase in
prostitution and other sex-related offenses, as well as other crimes
and offenses; the potential depreciation of property values in
neighborhoods where these exhibitions featuring nude dancing
exist; health risks associated with the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases; the probability that children would be
exposed to these exhibitions in a public place; and the potential for
infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of unlawful conduct.
(7) The Common Council desires to minimize, prevent and control
these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Watertown; protect the
citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve
the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods;
and deter the spread of urban blight.
(8) The Common Council has determined that enactment of an
ordinance prohibiting live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic
dancing, or the video or motion picture presentation thereof, in
public places promotes the goal of minimizing, preventing and
controlling the negative secondary effects associated with such
activity.
B. No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a public place, do any of
the following:
§ 410-39 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-39
1:484
(1) Perform or engage in the display or exposure of any specified
anatomical areas.
(2) Engage in any specified sexual activity.
(3) Simulate, perform or depict, with or without artificial devices or
inanimate objects, any specified sexual activity with any other
person.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any street, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare
or parking lot; any lobby, corridor, elevator, stairway, recreation room
or common room in a hotel, motel, office building, apartment building
or condominium; any public or municipal building or premises; any
vacant lot, park or public recreation facility; any church, school, library,
theater, auditorium or other building frequented by members of the
public; and any business or industrial premises, including buildings
and grounds, except that the term "public place" shall not include any
building or part of a building occupied as a temporary or permanent
dwelling, hotel or motel room, or private office.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, vulva,
anus and cleavage of the buttocks.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
Less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple of
the female breast.
(3)
Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
(1)
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus or
excretory functions.
(2)
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks or female breasts.
(3)
D. Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following
activities conducted in a public place or in the following specific public
places:
(1) Theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, exhibition halls,
restaurants and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and
dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered to the
general public, with or without paid admission, or movie theaters
§ 410-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:485
and video arcades where video or motion picture presentations of
dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic
merit are offered to the general public, with or without paid
admission. In order to fall within the application of this exemption,
the predominant business or attraction in the licensed
establishment may not consist of the offering to customers of
entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification to such customers and where the establishment
is distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion
of, employees or independent contractors associated with the
licensed establishment engaging in nude erotic dancing.
(2) Lavatories, restrooms and bathrooms on the licensed premises
where there is unintentional exposure of genitals by individuals
performing excretory functions.
(3) The private areas or guest rooms not accessible to the general
public of those hotels, motels, rooming houses, or bed-andbreakfast
businesses in the City.
(4) The rental or sale of videocassettes, DVD videodiscs, or other
electronic media for private viewing by individuals not in a public
place.
(5) Exposure of any portion of the female breast while a person is
engaged in breast-feeding a child.
§ 410-39 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-39
1:486
ARTICLE VII
Noise
§ 410-40. Loud and unnecessary noise. [Amended by Ord. No.
86-53]
No person shall make or cause to be made any noise disturbance within the
City of such volume or nature as to annoy or disturb any other reasonable
person of normal sensitivities. This section prohibits, but is not limited to,
the following noise disturbances:
A. No vehicle designed to be equipped with a muffler shall be operated
unless the muffler and the exhaust pipes connecting it to the engine are
intact and operating as they were intended to at the time of
manufacture, except for the following purposes:
(1) To remove the vehicle to the residence or normal storage place of
the operator; or
(2) To remove the vehicle to a repair shop for the purpose of obtaining
the needed repairs.
B. No person shall intentionally cause a vehicle to accelerate, brake or
make a turn at such rate or in such manner as to cause its tires to
squeal, except in reaction to a situation which a reasonably prudent
operator would perceive to be necessary to protect against harm to a
person or property.
C. No person shall operate construction equipment between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except as may be necessary to protect against
harm to a person or property.
D. No person other than a duly authorized law enforcement officer shall
operate a snowmobile on the Rock River between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
E. No person shall operate or play any radio, television, phonograph,
drum, musical instrument or similar noise-making device between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance of such volume or nature as to annoy or disturb a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
F. No person shall operate a loudspeaker, public address system, mobile
sound vehicle or similar device from any vehicle within the City unless a
written permit has been issued by the Chief of Police upon such terms
and conditions as will ensure that the public peace will not be
disturbed.
G. No person shall operate a power lawn mower, chain saw, mulcher,
garden tiller, edger or other similar domestic power maintenance
equipment, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Snow
§ 410-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-40
1:487
§ 410-41. Sound from motor vehicle. [Added by Ord. No. 92-57;
amended by Ord. No. 96-38; Ord. No. 98-56]
removal equipment is exempt from this provision. [Amended by Ord.
No. 90-41]
H. No person shall cause excessive noise to be made in the loading,
unloading or unpacking of any vehicle or container between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added by Ord. No. 90-42A]
I. Use of dynamic braking devices prohibited. [Added by Ord. No.
00-28]
(1) Definition. A dynamic braking device (commonly referred to as Jake
brakes®, Jacobs brake, engine brake or compression brake) means
a device primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from
an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose
of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
(2) Use prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged within the City
limits, except for emergency situations for the purpose of avoiding
a collision with another object or vehicle.
A. Sound from motor vehicle. Pursuant to §§ 66.0411(1m)(a), 349.135 and
346.945, Wis. Stats., the Common Council of the City of Watertown does
ordain as follows: except as provided in § 347.38(1), Wis. Stats., no
person may operate or park, stop or leave standing a motor vehicle
while using a radio or other electric sound-amplification device emitting
sound from the vehicle that is clearly audible under normal conditions
from a distance of 50 or more feet, unless the electric soundamplification
device is being used to request assistance or warn against
an unsafe condition. Any person violating this section may be required
to forfeit not less than $40 nor more that $80 for the first violation, not
less than $100 nor more than $200 for the second or subsequent
violation within a year. [Amended by Ord. No. 01-41133]
B. Subsection A above shall not apply to any of the following:
(1) The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator of the law or when responding to, but not upon
returning from, a fire alarm.
(2) The operator of a vehicle of a public utility, as defined in
§ 11.40(1)(a), Wis. Stats.
(3) The operator of a vehicle that is being used for advertising
purposes.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-41
1:488
(4) The operator of a vehicle that is being used in a community event or
celebration, procession or assemblage.
(5) The activation of a theft alarm signal device.
(6) The operator of a motorcycle being operated outside of a business
or residence district.
C. Owner's liability. The owner of a vehicle involved in a violation of this
section shall be presumed liable for the violation as provided in this
section. However, no owner of a vehicle involved in a violation of this
section may be convicted under this section if the person operating the
vehicle or having the vehicle under his or her control at the time of the
violation has been convicted for the violation of this section.
D. Public reporting. Any member of the public who observes a violation of
this section may prepare a written report indicating that a violation has
occurred.
(1) If possible, the report shall contain the following information:
(a) The time and the approximate location at which the violation
occurred.
(b) The license number and color of the motor vehicle involved in
the violation.
(c) Identification of the motor vehicle as an automobile, station
wagon, motor truck, motor bus, motorcycle or other type of
vehicle.
(2) Within 24 hours after observing the violation, a member of the
public may deliver a report containing all of the information
contained hereinabove to an officer of the City of Watertown.
(3) Within 48 hours after receiving a report containing all of the
information contained herein, the officer shall investigate the
violation and may prepare a uniform traffic citation within 72 hours
after receiving such report and may personally serve it upon the
owner of the vehicle. If with reasonable diligence the owner cannot
be served under this subsection, service may be made by leaving a
copy of the citation at the owner's usual place of abode within this
state in the presence of a competent member of the family who is at
least 14 years of age and who shall be informed of the contents
thereof. Service under this subsection may be made by any traffic
officer employed by the City and shall be performed within 72
hours after a report containing all of the information set forth
hereinabove was delivered to a traffic officer under this subsection.
If within reasonable diligence the owner cannot be served as set
forth herein, or if the owner lives outside of the City of Watertown,
service may be made by certified mail addressed to the owner's last
§ 410-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-41
1:489
known address within 72 hours after a report containing all of the
information set forth hereinabove was delivered to a traffic officer.
(4) Defenses to the imposition of liability under this section include:
(a) That a report that the vehicle was stolen was given to a traffic
officer before the violation occurred or within a reasonable
time after the violation occurred.
(b) If the owner of the vehicle provides a traffic officer employed
by the City issuing the citation with the name and address of
the person operating the vehicle or having the vehicle under
his or her control at the time of the violation and sufficient
information for the officer to determine that probable cause
does not exist to believe that the owner of the vehicle was
operating the vehicle or having the vehicle under his or her
control at the time of the violation.
(c) If the vehicle is owned by a lessor of vehicles and at the time of
the violation the vehicle was in the possession of a lessee, and
the lessor provides the traffic officer employed by the City with
the information required under § 343.46(3), Wis. Stats., then
the lessee and not the lessor shall be liable under this section.
(d) If the vehicle is owned by a dealer as defined in § 340.01(11),
Wis. Stats., but including the persons specified in
§ 340.01(11)(a) to (d), Wis. Stats., and at the time of the
violation the vehicle was being operated by or was under the
control of any person on a trial run, and if the dealer provides a
traffic officer employed by the City with the name, address and
operator's license number of the person operating the vehicle,
or having the vehicle under his or her control on a trial run,
then that person and not the dealer shall be liable under this
section.
(5) If any owner of a motor vehicle has been convicted of violating this
section three or more times within a three-year period, the City
may impound the vehicle for not more than five working days to
permit the City or its authorized agent to remove the radio, electric
sound-amplification device or other sound-producing device if the
vehicle is owned by the person charged with the violation and the
sound-producing device may not be easily removed from the
vehicle. Upon removal of the sound-producing device, an
impounded vehicle shall be returned to its rightful owner. The cost
of the impounding of the sound-producing device and, if a vehicle is
impounded, the cost of impounding the vehicle and removing the
sound-producing device shall be paid by the owner, in addition to
the forfeitures provided hereinabove. Upon payment of said
forfeitures and costs, the sound-producing device shall be returned
to the owner. The City may dispose of any impounded soundproducing
device or, following the procedure for an abandoned
§ 410-41 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-41
1:490
§ 410-42. Electrical interference with signal reception.
No person shall operate any mechanical or electrical appliance which
unnecessarily interferes with radio and television reception where such
interference can be prevented by reasonable repairs, adjustments or the
installation of corrective appliances.
§ 410-43. Unnecessary blowing of railroad whistles and horns.
[Added by Ord. No. 95-6; amended by Ord. No. 95-33]
vehicle under § 342.40, Wis. Stats., any impounded vehicle which
has remained unclaimed for a period of 90 days after the
disposition of the forfeiture action. This section does not apply
to a radio, electric sound-amplification device, or other soundproducing
device on a motorcycle.
A. No railroad company or any of its agents, servants or employees shall
blow or cause to be blown any whistle or horn within the limits of the
City of Watertown, except in those cases prescribed and designated by
the laws of the State of Wisconsin, but nothing in this section shall be
construed as forbidding or prohibiting the blowing of any whistle or
horn as a signal or warning in case of peril, fire, collision or other
imminent danger to life and/or property.
B. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be punished by a forfeiture of not more than $200.
§ 410-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-43
1:491

ARTICLE VIII
Animals
§ 410-44. Animals not to run at large. [Amended by Ord. No. 01-23]
§ 410-45. Dangerous and vicious dogs. [Amended by Ord. No. 01-23;
Ord. No. 13-17; Ord. No. 13-28]
A. No person shall allow any animal under his possession or control to run
at large within the City. "Running at large" means the presence of an
animal at any place, except upon the premises of the owner, without
being secured with a leash, rope, chain or other tethering device, and
under the control of a person physically able to control the animal.
B. Owners of dogs within the secured confines of the public parks property
generally known as the "Boomer Street Dog Park" shall be exempt from
this section and all applicable subsections hereunder. [Added
9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 14-22]
A. Definitions. The terms used in this section shall be defined as follows:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of an owner or on any public street,
sidewalk, alley or any other public right-of-way, school grounds, public
park or other public grounds or on private property without the specific
permission or express invitation of such property's owner or legal
possessor or other person in lawful control of the property, and not on
a leash that is held or controlled by a human being. For the purposes of
this section, the "premises" of an owner shall only mean that property
that is owned in title or, if leased or otherwise legally possessed, only
if leased or legally possessed exclusive of any other shared or common
use by any other lessee, legal possessor or legal occupant other than a
cotenant, cosigner or co-legal occupant to or under any lease pertaining
to the premises.
DOG — A domesticated member of the Canis familiaris or Canis lupis
familiaris species.
OWN — Owning, possessing, harboring, maintaining charge of,
sheltering or keeping, no matter the duration of owning, possessing,
harboring, maintaining charge of, sheltering or keeping.
PERSON — Any individual human being, firm, corporation, organization
or other legal entity.
PROHIBITED DANGEROUS DOG —
Any dog that has inflicted substantial bodily harm upon or caused
or contributed to the death of any person on public or private
property, whose owner, at the time of such infliction or involvement
in fatal attack, failed to demonstrate sufficient provocation
consistent with Subsection (2)(a) to (g) of the definition of "vicious
dog" below to an investigating law enforcement officer or a court
of competent jurisdiction;
(1)
§ 410-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-45
1:493
SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM — Bodily injury that causes a laceration
that requires stitches, staples or a tissue adhesive; any fracture of a
bone; a broken nose; a burn; a petechia; a puncture of the skin; a
temporary loss of consciousness, sight or hearing; a concussion; or a
loss or fracture of a tooth.
VICIOUS DOG —
Any dog, caused to be present in this City, from another city, village,
town, county or state, which has been declared or found to be
dangerous, vicious or otherwise given a similar designation by that
or any other jurisdiction via a judicial or quasi-judicial process,
irrespective of whether or not such declaration or finding is in an
appealable, final form;
(2)
Any dog that is, or has been, subject to being destroyed under
§ 174.02(3), Wis. Stats., irrespective of whether such petition or
action was disposed of in a manner ordering or otherwise requiring
destruction of the dog;
(3)
(4) Any rabid dog;
Any wild animal hybrid, including but not limited to wolf hybrids;
or
(5)
Any dog trained, owned, sold, purchased or transferred for the
purpose of dogfighting or similar activity.
(6)
Any dog with a propensity, tendency and/or disposition to attempt
to attack, cause injury, contribute to the destruction of public or
private property, or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or other domestic animals, which may be evidenced by habitual
or repeated chasing, scratching, snapping or barking, snarling or
growling in a reasonably perceived threatening manner.
(1)
Any dog that attacks, bites, attempts to attack or bite, or has
attacked or bitten a human being or another domestic animal;
however, a dog shall not be a "vicious dog" under this subsection or
Subsection (1) above by sole reason of having engaged in any of the
behavior described under this subsection or Subsection (1) above
toward, or in relation to:
Any person who attacked, attempted to attack or otherwise
accosted such dog or who engaged in conduct that should be
reasonably calculated to provoke such dog to attack or bite
such person or another person or otherwise engage in behavior
reasonably perceived as threatening, including but not limited
to directing such behavior towards the dog's owner or an
acquaintance thereof;
(a)
Any person who engaged in provoking or inciting a dogfight or
any form of altercation between such dog and another dog or
other domestic animal;
(b)
(2)
§ 410-45 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-45
1:494
Any person who engaged in stopping or dispersing an actual
or reasonably believed to be imminent dogfight or any form of
altercation involving the dog, so long as such dog, in response
to any such intervention, was not the aggressing dog in the
dogfight or other form of altercation;
(c)
Any person engaged in attacking or accosting or attempting to
attack or accost any other person or domestic animal;
(d)
Any person engaged in unlawful entry into or upon the fenced
or substantially or completely enclosed portion of the premises
upon which such dog is kept or into or upon any automobile or
other vehicle parked or stored in or upon the street adjacent to
such premises;
(e)
Any dog or other domestic animal engaged in unauthorized
entry into or upon the fenced or substantially or completely
enclosed portion of the premises upon which such dog is kept;
or
(f)
Any person engaged in unlawful or unauthorized entry into
any automobile or other vehicle in which such dog is kept or
confined.
(g)
B. Impoundment; vicious dog determination; status. Any law enforcement
officer employed by the City may impound any dog found to be at large
or reasonably believed, upon personal observation and/or thorough
investigation, to have committed or involved itself in one or more of the
acts or otherwise having a presence within the City in failed conformity
with any provisions or requirements under this section and that poses a
substantial risk to human health or safety. Any such dog may be
conveyed to the custody of the Watertown Humane Society or other
similar and suitable facility as designated by the Chief of Police. Any
dog so impounded may be held for a period of not less than five days
and, at the end of such period, become the property of the custodial
facility unless the owner thereof shall reclaim such dog and pay the
custodial facility the reasonable costs of keeping such dog and an
impounding fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule. Whenever acting under this subsection, a law
enforcement officer may determine whether the dog is a "vicious dog"
pursuant to Subsection A. In the event that the law enforcement officer
determines that a dog is a vicious dog, the owner shall be advised of the
same in writing by the law enforcement officer making such
determination and provided a copy of this section and Subsection B(1)
and (2) below. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 14-22134]
(1) Appeal of vicious dog determination. Any owner aggrieved by a
determination of viciousness, as provided in Subsection B above,
may appeal such determination within 15 calendar days following
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-45
1:495
the law enforcement officer's personal service or first class mail
issuance of the written determination of viciousness to the owner's
last known address. Such appeal may only be taken by the owner's
personal hand delivery to the City Clerk/Treasurer, with a copy
to the City Attorney, of a written objection to the determination
of viciousness, setting forth the specific reasons for contesting
the determination. Upon receipt of a timely written objection, the
matter shall be considered at the next available meeting of the
Public Safety and Welfare Committee that is no less than five days
from receipt of the written objection. The Public Safety and Welfare
Committee shall act as a quasi-judicial body affording the owner
reasonable opportunity to present evidence and argument as to
why the investigating law enforcement officer's determination as to
viciousness should not be affirmed. A nonrefundable administrative
fee as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule shall be tendered with an owner's timely written objection
under this subsection.
(2) Compliance. After 15 calendar days following personal service or
first class mail issuance of the written determination of viciousness
to the owner's last known address, or within 10 days of the Public
Safety and Welfare Committee's affirmation of the investigating law
enforcement officer's determination of viciousness, if any, the
owner of a vicious dog shall, in addition to all other requirements of
this section, comply with all provisions under Subsection D(2) for
the balance of such dog's life. Alternatively, the owner shall, within
10 days of the Public Safety and Welfare Committee's affirmation of
the investigating law enforcement officer's determination of
viciousness, dispose or cause the disposal of the dog in such
manner that humanely euthanizes the dog.
C. Owner's duty with respect to any dog.
(1) An owner shall see to it that his or her dog does not go at large.
(2) No person may own a dog that does any of the following:
(a) Damages or attempts to damage any public or private property,
except the exclusive private property of the dog's owner.
"Damage" shall include, but not be limited to, defacing,
scratching, marring or any type of behavior that contributes to
a diminution of value.
(b) Barks, whines or howls in excessive or continuous fashion to
the annoyance of any reasonable complainant; this subsection
shall not apply to any veterinary facility, humane society or
similar entity.
(c) Bites or attempts to bite a person or domestic animal.
§ 410-45 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-45
1:496
(d) Attempts to scratch or otherwise promote harm or engage in
any other form of accostment to a human being or domestic
animal.
(e) Puts any person in reasonable fear of attack or accostment.
(3) Any dog shall be rebuttably presumed to have engaged in any
behavior described in Subsection C(2)(a) to (e) above without
provocation. It shall be upon the owner to demonstrate sufficient
provocation to preclude conviction under these subsections.
Sufficient provocation shall be demonstrated consistent with
Subsection (2)(a) to (g) of the definition of "vicious dog" in
Subsection A.
D. Restrictions on keeping of certain dogs.
(1) No person may own a prohibited dangerous dog. Any person
present with, by any reasonably observed physical association or
means of control whatsoever, or causing the presence of a
prohibited dangerous dog within the City limits shall be irrefutably
considered to own such prohibited dangerous dog.
(2) No person may own a vicious dog except in conformity with the
following requirements:
(a) Leash.
[1] No owner of a vicious dog may permit such a dog to go
outside its premises or a form of secure confinement
unless the dog is securely restrained with a chain, rope or
other type of leash no longer than six feet in length. For
the purposes of this subsection, the "premises" of an
owner shall only mean that property that is owned in title,
or, if leased or otherwise legally possessed, only if leased
or legally possessed exclusive of any other shared or
common use by any other lessee, legal possessor or legal
occupant other than a cotenant, cosigner or co-legal
occupant to or under any lease pertaining to the premises.
[2] No person may permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain,
rope or other type of leash outside its premises or a form of
secure confinement, unless a person who is 16 years of age
or older, competent to govern the dog's behavior and
capable of physically controlling and restraining the dog,
is in physical control of the leash. For the purposes of this
subsection, the "premises" of an owner shall only mean
that property that is owned in title or, if leased or
otherwise legally possessed, only if leased or legally
possessed exclusive of any other shared or common use by
any other lessee, legal possessor or legal occupant other
than a cotenant, cosigner or co-legal occupant to or under
any lease pertaining to the premises.
§ 410-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-45
1:497
(b) Confinement.
[1] Except when an owner is in conformity with Subsection
D(2)(a)[1] and [2] above, all vicious dogs shall be securely
confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen,
kennel or other structure that is located on the exclusive
premises of the owner and constructed in a manner that
does not allow the dog to exit the pen, kennel or other
structure inadvertently or upon its own volition. The pen,
kennel or other structure shall have secure sides and a
secure top attached to all sides. Any structure used to
confine a vicious dog shall be securely locked with a key or
combination lock when the dog is within the structure. The
structure shall have a secure bottom or floor attached to
its sides or the sides of such structure must be embedded
in the ground at a depth of no less than two feet. A dog
may be confined as required under this subsection by its
secured enclosure within an area entirely surrounded by a
fence of such height, depth of installation, design,
structural integrity and strength so as to confine a dog and
prevent its ungoverned egress from the confined area. All
structures erected to house or confine vicious dogs shall
comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City.
[2] Indoor confinement. No vicious dog may be kept on a
porch, patio or similar curtilage upon any premises or in
any part of a house, building or other structure that would
allow the dog to exit the house, building or other structure
inadvertently or upon its own volition. No vicious dog may
be kept in a house, building or other structure when the
windows are open or when screen windows or screen
doors fail to prevent such dog from exiting the house,
building or other structure.
(c) Warning signage. The owner of a vicious dog shall display, in
prominent places upon his or her premises near or about all
entrances or possible access points to the premises, signs
containing letters of not less than two inches in height and
width against a pronounced and visible contrasting color field,
warning that there is a vicious dog upon or about the property.
An identical version of such sign is required to be posted on the
kennel, pen or other confining structure of the dog. Language
such as "Beware of Dog" or substantially similar and effective
words shall be conforming to the requirements of this
subsection.
(d) Spay and neuter requirements. Any vicious dog must be spayed
or neutered if it is known or reasonably believed or observed to
be older than six months. The owner of any vicious dog shall
possess written proof endorsed by a licensed veterinarian that
the dog has been spayed or neutered.
§ 410-45 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-45
1:498
(e) Insurance and special licensing/registration. Any owner of any
vicious dog shall, on or before November 1, 2013, and annually
thereafter on or before April 1 of each ensuing year, register
such dog with the City Clerk/Treasurer as a vicious dog and,
additionally, provide at the time of registration a high quality
current color photograph of such dog, supply proof of spaying
or neutering and pay a special registration fee as set by the
Common Council and provided under a separate fee schedule.
At the time of registration, each owner of any vicious dog kept
within the City limits shall provide verifiable proof of an inforce
and effective policy of liability insurance in amounts of at
least $100,000 to be paid for any acts of property damage,
injury or other liability incurred by virtue of any injury or
damage inflicted by such vicious dog. Such insurance shall
name the City of Watertown as a coinsured solely for the
purpose of notice of cancellation of such insurance policy. The
City Clerk/Treasurer shall not issue a license for any such
vicious dog except in conformity with the requirements of this
subsection, and any license so otherwise issued shall be
void.135
(f) Multifamily buildings. No vicious dog may be owned or
otherwise made present within, upon or about any portion of
any multiple-living-unit dwelling building or upon the lands
associated therewith. For the purposes of this subsection, a
multiple-living-unit dwelling shall mean only such building that
contains three or more separate living units such as, by
nonlimiting example only, a building commonly known as a
"triplex" or larger. Real property that has been declared a
condominium pursuant to the Wisconsin Condominium Act136
shall not constitute a multiple-living-unit dwelling building
under this subsection.
(g) Notifications. The owner of any vicious dog shall, as soon as
practical, but not more than 24 hours after any of the following
events occur, notify or cause notification to the Police
Department that such dog:
[1] Is at large.
[2] Has attacked a human being or domestic animal, whether
provoked or not.
[3] Is dead.
[4] Has been sold, transferred or otherwise given away and to
whom (with valid telephone number and valid mailing
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 703, Wis. Stats.
§ 410-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-45
1:499
§ 410-46. Harassment of police animals. [Added by Ord. No. 00-10]
§ 410-47. Sale or gift of animals prohibited. [Added by Ord. No.
89-97]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away
any domestic animal or vertebrate as a prize or as an inducement to enter
any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a
place of amusement, or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into
any business agreement when the offer was for the purpose of attracting
trade.
§ 410-48. Removal of animal defecation. [Added by Ord. No. 90-53]
address), for what purpose and for what, if any, exchange
of value.
(h) Limit on number of vicious dogs. The owner of any vicious dog
shall not own more than one additional dog.
(i) Orders of Municipal Court and agreements. No owner may own
any vicious dog contrary to any order issued by the Municipal
Court or agreement reached with the City Attorney and/or the
Public Safety and Welfare Committee related to the ownership
of such dog.
A. No person may do any of the following to any animal that is used by a
law enforcement agency to perform agency functions or duties:
(1) Frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass the animal.
(2) Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject the animal to physical
contact.
(3) Strike the animal by using a dangerous weapon.
B. Subsection A does not apply to any of the following:
(1) Any act that is performed by or with the authorization of the
animal's handler or rider.
(2) Any act that is necessary for the training of an animal to perform
functions or duties for a law enforcement agency.
C. Violations and penalties. A violation of this section shall carry a
forfeiture which conforms with the bond schedule, as modified.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person who has custody of a dog on
any public or private property, other than the premises of the owner or
person having custody of said dog, to permit said dog to defecate on any
property without removing any excrement deposited by such a dog
promptly and disposing of the same in a sanitary manner.137
§ 410-45 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-48
1:500
B. This section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically
handicapped.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-48
1:501

ARTICLE IX
Gambling, Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs
§ 410-49. Gambling, lotteries, fraudulent devices and practices.138
§ 410-50. Use of cigarettes and tobacco products prohibited.
[Amended by Ord. No. 92-87; Ord. No. 96-14; 7-16-2019 by Ord. No.
19-12]
A. All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices
prohibited by Ch. 945, Wis. Stats., are prohibited within the City.
B. Any police officer or peace officer of the City is authorized to seize
anything devised solely for gambling or found in actual use for
gambling within the City and to dispose of such device after a judicial
determination that said device was so devised or used.139
A. Except as provided in Subsection B and pursuant to § 254.92, Wis.
Stats., no person under 18 may do any of the following:
(1) Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette, tobacco product, or electronic
smoking device;
(2) Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any
cigarette, tobacco product, or electronic smoking device;
(3) Possess any cigarette or tobacco product; or
(4) Possess any electronic smoking device. "Electronic smoking
device" means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an
inhaled dose of nicotine or any other substance intended for human
consumption that may be used by a person to simulate smoking
through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. It includes
any such device whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or
sold as an electronic cigarette, commonly known as e-cigarettes; an
electronic cigar; an electronic cigarillo; an electronic pipe; an
electronic hookah; vape pen; or any other product name or
descriptor.
B. A person under 18 may purchase or possess cigarettes, tobacco
products, or electronic smoking devices for the sole purpose of resale in
the course of employment during his or her working hours, if employed
by a retailer licensed under § 134.65(1), Wis. Stats.
138. Editor's Note: Former § 11.135, Smoking prohibited, which immediately preceded this
section, added by Ord. No. 10-12, was repealed by Ord. No. 10-22. See now § 410-56,
Smoking in prohibited places.
139. Editor's Note: Former § 11.141, Use of tobacco products in taxicabs prohibited, added by
Ord. No. 95-37, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 410-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-50
1:503
§ 410-51. Restrictions on sale or gift of tobacco products. [Added by
Ord. No. 94-38]
C. A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, tobacco product or
electronic smoking device involved in any violation of Subsection A
committed in his or her presence.
D. Any person under 18 who violates this section shall be subject to a
forfeiture not to exceed $50. If a person under 18 fails to pay the
forfeiture, the court may suspend his driver's license for not less than
30 days nor more than 90 days. Suspended licenses are to be disposed
of pursuant to § 938.343(2), Wis. Stats.
E. No person shall use cigarettes, tobacco products, or an electronic
smoking device on any school premises located within the City of
Watertown. The term "school premises" is defined in § 410-33E(1) of
this chapter. A violation of this subsection shall result in a forfeiture not
to exceed $50.
A. Pursuant to § 134.66(5), Wis. Stats., the Common Council of the City of
Watertown does hereby incorporate by reference all of the provisions of
§ 134.66, Wis. Stats.
B. Restrictions.
(1) No retailer may sell or give cigarettes or tobacco products to any
person under the age of 18, except as provided in § 254.92(2)(a),
Wis. Stats. A vending machine operator is not liable under this
paragraph for the purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products from
his or her vending machine by a person under the age of 18, if the
vending machine operator was unaware of the purchase.
(2) Signs.
(a) A retailer shall post a sign in areas within his or her premises
where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold to consumers
stating that the sale of any cigarette or tobacco product to a
person under the age of 18 is unlawful under this section and
§ 254.92, Wis. Stats.
(b) A vending machine operator shall attach a notice in a
conspicuous place in front of his or her vending machines
stating that the purchase of any cigarette or tobacco product
by a person under the age of 18 is unlawful under § 254.92,
Wis. Stats., and that the purchaser is subject to a forfeiture of
not to exceed $25.
(3) Vending machines.
(a) Except as provided hereafter, no retailer may keep a vending
machine in any public place that is open to persons under the
age of 18 unless all of the following apply:
§ 410-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-51
1:504
[1] The vending machine is in a place where it is ordinarily in
the immediate vicinity, plain view and control of any
employee.
[2] The vending machine is in a place where it is inaccessible
to the public when the premises is closed.
(b) The person who ultimately controls, governs or directs the
activities within the premises where the vending machine is
located shall ensure that an employee of the retailer remains in
the immediate vicinity, plain view and control of the vending
machine whenever the premises is open.
(c) Except as provided in Subsection B(3)(d), a vending machine
operator shall remove all of his or her vending machines that
are located in any place prohibited by this paragraph upon the
adoption of this section.
(d) Notwithstanding Subsection B(3)(c), if a written agreement
binding on a vending machine operator governs his or her
vending machine that is located in any place prohibited by this
paragraph, the vending machine operator shall remove the
vending machine on the date that the written agreement
expires, or would be extended or renewed, or upon the
adoption of this section, whichever occurs first.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section provided
hereinabove, no retailer may place a vending machine within 500
feet of a school. If a written agreement binding on a vending
machine operator governs the location of his or her vending
machine which is located within 500 feet of a school, the vending
machine operator shall remove the vending machine on the date
that the written agreement expires or upon the adoption of this
section, whichever occurs first.
(5) No manufacturer, distributor, jobber, subjobber or retailer, or its
employees or agents, may provide cigarettes or tobacco products
for nominal or no consideration to any person under the age of 18.
C. Defense of retailer. Proof of all of the following facts by a retailer who
sells cigarettes or tobacco products to a person under the age of 18 is a
defense to any prosecution for a violation of the provisions of this
section:
(1) That the purchaser falsely represented that he or she had attained
the age of 18 and presented an identification card.
(2) That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary
and prudent person would believe that the purchaser had attained
the age of 18.
§ 410-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-51
1:505
§ 410-52. Possession of alcohol beverages on public ways.
[Amended by Ord. No. 09-33]
(3) That the sale was made in good faith, in reasonable reliance on the
identification card and appearance of the purchaser, and in the
belief that the purchaser had attained the age of 18.
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) A person who commits a violation is subject to a forfeiture of:
(a) Not more than $500 if the person has not committed a previous
violation within 12 months of the violation; and
(b) Not less than $200 nor more than $500 if the person has
committed a previous violation within 12 months of the
violation.
(2) A court shall suspend any license or permit issued under § 134.65,
139.34 or 139.79, Wis. Stats., to a person for:
(a) Not more than three days, if the court finds that the person
committed a violation within 12 months after committing one
previous violation.
(b) Not less than three days nor more than 10 days, if the court
finds that the person committed a violation within 12 months
after committing two other violations.
(c) Not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days, if the court finds
the person committed the violation within 12 months after
committing three or more other violations.
(3) The court shall promptly mail notice of a suspension as provided
hereinabove to the Department of Revenue and to the clerk of the
municipality which has issued a license or permit to the person.
(4) Whoever violates Subsection B(2) hereinabove shall forfeit not
more than $25.
A. No person shall have in his possession any open can, bottle or other
receptacle containing alcohol beverages or drink from the same on any
public street, sidewalk, boulevard, boardwalk, alley or public parking
lot or on or in any vehicle parked on a public street, alley or public
parking lot. "Public parking lot" shall include all premises held out to
the public for use of their motor vehicles, whether such premises are
publicly or privately owned, and whether or not a fee is charged for the
use thereof.
B. No person shall have in his possession any open can, bottle or other
receptacle containing alcohol beverages or drink from such can, bottle
or receptacle on the Watertown Riverwalk and the contiguous public
§ 410-51 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-52
1:506
§ 410-53. Use of lodging establishments. [Added by Ord. No. 96-17]
property between the Cady Street Bridge and the Milwaukee Street
Bridge along both the east side and west side of the Rock River.
C. Exceptions.
(1) This section shall not apply to such events for which a Class "B"
picnic license has been obtained under Chapter 220 of this Code.
(2) This section shall not apply to those areas designated in Subsection
A of this section that may be temporarily closed for a City-approved
event. [Added by Ord. No. 05-19]
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE — Has the meaning given in § 125.02(1), Wis.
Stats.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Has the meaning given in § 961.01(4),
Wis. Stats.
LODGING ESTABLISHMENT — Has the meaning given in
§ 106.52(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
UNDERAGE PERSON — Has the meaning given in § 125.02(20m), Wis.
Stats.
B. Any person who procures lodging in a lodging establishment, and
permits or fails to take action to prevent any of the following activities
from occurring in the lodging establishment, is subject to the penalties
provided in Subsection E:
(1) Consumption of an alcohol beverage by any underaged person not
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the legal drinking age.
(2) Illegal use of a controlled substance.
C. An owner or employee of a lodging establishment may deny lodging to
an adult if the owner or employee reasonably believes that consumption
of an alcohol beverage by an underaged person, not accompanied by his
or her parent, guardian or spouse, who has attained the legal drinking
age, or illegal use of a controlled substance may occur in the area of the
lodging establishment procured.
D. An owner or employee of a lodging establishment may require a cash
deposit or use of a credit card at the time of application for lodging.
E. A person who violates Subsection B shall forfeit:
(1) Not more than $500 if the person has not committed a previous
violation within 12 months of the violation; or
§ 410-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-53
1:507
§ 410-54. Possession of marijuana. [Amended by Ord. No. 97-66]
§ 410-55. Instruments for use with controlled substances.
[Amended by Ord. No. 07-03]
(2) Not less than $200 nor more than $500 if the person has committed
a previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
A. No person may possess or attempt to possess 25 grams or less of either
marijuana or a derivative of marijuana, as defined in § 961.01(14), Wis.
Stats., as amended from time to time, unless the person obtains the
substance or the derivative directly from, or pursuant to a valid
prescription or order of, a practitioner, who is acting in the course of his
or her professional practice, or unless the person is otherwise
authorized by Chapter 961, Wis. Stats., to possess the substance or the
derivative.140
B. This section is adopted pursuant to § 66.0107(1)(bm), Wis. Stats., and
shall be enforced in a manner consistent with the guidelines contained
therein. Any person who violates this section is subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $10 nor more than $500, plus all applicable court costs
and assessments.
A. Intent. It is determined by the Common Council that the open display
and availability for sale of simulated controlled substances and
instruments used for inhaling or ingesting controlled substances in
places of business and within the schools of the City suggests and
encourages the illegal use of drugs and other controlled substances by
the youth of the City of Watertown. The Common Council finds that
such availability and display serves to entice young people and others to
abuse substances which are known to be harmful and unsafe for human
consumption. The Common Council further finds that to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the youth and others of the City of
Watertown, it is necessary that the regulations herein provided be
enacted.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COCAINE SPOON — A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use
for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer
cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful
uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be merchandised on
a chain and may or may not be labeled as a "cocaine" spoon or "coke"
spoon.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any drug, substance or immediate
precursor enumerated in Schedules I through V of the Uniform
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-53 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-55
1:508
Controlled Substances Act found in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats., and as such
schedules may from time to time be amended.
DRUG —
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — As adopted as set forth in § 961.571(1),
Wis. Stats., and any subsequent amendments to § 961.571(1), Wis.
Stats.
Substances recognized as drugs in the Official United States
Pharmacopoeia, Official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United
States or Official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of
them.
(1)
Substances intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, medication,
treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals.
(2)
Substances, other than food, intended to affect the structure of any
function of the body of man or animals.
(3)
Substances intended for use as a component of any article specified
in Subsections (1), (2) and (3) above.
(4)
C. Determination. The determination of drug paraphernalia shall be made
as set forth in § 961.572, Wis. Stats., and any subsequent amendments
to § 961.572, Wis. Stats.141
D. Sale and display of instruments and simulated controlled substances
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
display, furnish, supply, give away, deliver, possess with intent to
deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver any cocaine spoon,
marijuana pipe, hashish pipe, simulated drugs or simulated controlled
substances, or any drug paraphernalia, under circumstances where he
knows or should reasonably know that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance or simulated controlled substance in
violation of this section or any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
E. Possession of instruments and simulated controlled substances
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with
intent to use any simulated drugs or simulated controlled substances or
any drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance or
simulated controlled substance in violation of this section or any state
or federal law relating to any controlled substances.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-55
1:509
§ 410-56. Smoking in prohibited places. [Added by Ord. No. 10-22;
7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-13]
F. Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person may deliver,
possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver
drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be primarily used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance or controlled substance analog in violation
of this section.
G. Enhanced penalty upon delivery or sale to a minor. Any person who is
17 years of age or older who violates Subsection F herein by delivering
drug paraphernalia to a person 17 years of age or under, who was at
least three years younger than the violator, shall be required to forfeit
not less than $200 nor more than the maximum penalty allowed under
§ 1-4 of this Code, together with the costs of prosecution thereof.
H. Exceptions. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The display of any such items for educational or scientific purposes.
(2) Manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacists and practitioners
engaged in the normal, lawful course of their respective business
or professions, nor to a patient's possession of such materials
pursuant to a valid prescription or suffering from diabetes or any
other medical condition requiring self-injection, nor to
warehousemen or their employees engaged in the lawful
transportation of simulated controlled substances or instruments.
(3) Public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of
their official duties.
I. Seizure and forfeiture of instruments and simulated controlled
substances. All cocaine spoons, marijuana pipes, hashish pipes,
simulated drugs or simulated controlled substances or drug
paraphernalia used or possessed in violation of this section may be
seized by any law enforcement officer and shall be disposed of either by
retention for official use in educational or scientific displays or by
destruction or disposition according to law.
J. Declaration of nuisance. Any violation of this section is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided in this
chapter, the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any
violation of this section. Such application for relief may include, but is
not limited to, seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary
injunction and permanent injunction.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 410-55 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-56
1:510
PERSON IN CHARGE — The person, or his or her agent, who ultimately
controls, governs or directs the activities aboard a public conveyance
or at a location where smoking is prohibited or regulated under this
section.
PROHIBITED PLACE — Any place or location in the City of Watertown
as described in § 101.123(2)(a), (d) and (e), Wis. Stats.
SMOKING —
"Smoking" includes burning or holding, or inhaling or exhaling
smoke from, any of the following items containing tobacco:
(a) A lighted cigar.
(b) A lighted cigarette.
(c) A lighted pipe.
(d) Any other lighted smoking equipment.
(1)
"Smoking" also includes using an electronic smoking device.
"Electronic smoking device" means an electronic device that can be
used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or any other substance
intended for human consumption that may be used by a person
to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from
the product. It includes any such device whether manufactured,
distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, commonly
known as e-cigarettes; an electronic cigar; an electronic cigarillo;
an electronic pipe; an electronic hookah; vape pen; or any other
product name or descriptor.
(2)
B. No person may smoke in or at any prohibited place or location.
C. A person in charge:
(1) May not allow any person to smoke in or at any prohibited place or
location under the control or direction of the person in charge.
(2) May not provide matches, ashtrays or other equipment where
smoking is prohibited.
(3) Shall make reasonable efforts to prohibit persons from smoking at
a location where smoking is prohibited by doing all of the following:
(a) Posting signs setting forth the prohibition and providing other
appropriate notification and information concerning the
prohibition.
(b) Refusing to serve a person if the person is smoking in a
restaurant, tavern or private club.
(c) Asking a person who is smoking to refrain from smoking and, if
the person refuses to do so, asking the person to leave the
location.
§ 410-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-56
1:511
(4) Shall immediately notify an appropriate law enforcement agency of
a violation if a person refuses to leave a place or location after
being requested to do so.
D. If the person in charge has not previously received a warning notice for
a violation of Subsection C(2) through (3), the law enforcement officer
shall issue the person in charge a warning notice and may not issue a
citation.
E. No single person in charge may be required to forfeit more than $100 in
total for all violations of Subsection C(2) through (3) occurring on a
single day.
F. All definitions and other provisions of § 101.123, Wis. Stats., consistent
with the foregoing, and as may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted by reference.
§ 410-56 WATERTOWN CODE § 410-56
1:512
Chapter 419
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Compulsory connection to water and
sewer — See Ch. 319, Art. I.
Housing standards — See Ch. 332.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 512.
§ 419-1. State Plumbing Code adopted. [Amended by Ord. No.
89-35; Ord. No. 97-34; Ord. No. 12-09]
The Wisconsin State Plumbing Code, § SPS 305.90 and Chs. SPS 381, 382,
383, 384, 385, 386 and 387, Wis. Adm. Code, so far as applicable, is adopted
by reference and made a part of this chapter. A violation of such chapters
shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 419-2. State license required.
No person shall engage in or work at plumbing as defined in § 145.01(10),
Wis. Stats., without being licensed as required in § 145.06, Wis. Stats.
§ 419-3. Definitions.
A. Definition of "plumbing."142
(1) In this chapter, "plumbing" means and includes:
(a) All piping, fixtures, appliances, equipment, devices and
appurtenances in connection with water supply systems, water
distribution systems, wastewater drainage systems, reclaimed
water systems, and stormwater use systems, including hot
water storage tanks, water treatment devices, and water
heaters connected with these systems, and also includes the
installation thereof.
(b) The construction, connection, installation, service or repair of
any drain or wastewater piping system that connects to the
mains or other terminal within the bounds of or beneath an
area subject to easement for highway purposes, including
private on-site wastewater treatment systems and stormwater
treatment and dispersal systems, and the alteration of any such
systems, drains or wastewater piping.
(c) The construction, connection, installation, service or repair of
water service piping that connects to the main or other water
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-3
1:513
§ 419-4. Plumbing Inspector.
utility service terminal within the bounds of or beneath an area
subject to easement for highway purposes and its connections.
(d) The water pressure system other than municipal systems as
provided in Ch. 281, Wis. Stats.
(e) A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping
so installed as to keep the air within the system in free
circulation and movement; to prevent with a margin of safety
unequal air pressures of such force as might blow, siphon or
affect trap seals, or retard the discharge from plumbing
fixtures, or permit sewer air to escape into the building; to
prohibit cross-connection, contamination or pollution of the
water supply and distribution systems; and to provide an
adequate supply of water to properly serve, cleanse and
operate all fixtures, equipment, appurtenances and appliances
served by the plumbing system.
(2) "Plumbing" does not include any of the following:
(a) A rainwater gutter or downspout down to the point that it
discharges into a plumbing system, a subsoil drain, or a
foundation drain.
(b) A process water reuse system if the process water reuse
system is not connected to any plumbing fixture or appliance.
(c) A stormwater culvert under a roadway or walkway that is
placed there only to equalize the water level from one end of
the culvert to the other end.
(d) The practical installation of process piping within a sewage
disposal plant.
B. "Master and journeyman plumbers" are any persons duly licensed as
such by the State Department of Safety and Professional Services,
pursuant to Ch. 145, Wis. Stats.
C. A "plumbing apprentice" is any person other than a master or
journeyman plumber registered as such with the State Department of
Safety and Professional Services.
D. "Fixtures" shall include all types of fixtures or appliances which are
directly connected to the water supply or drainage system.
A. Qualifications. The Plumbing Inspector shall be a person of good moral
character, duly licensed as a master or journeyman plumber according
to the Wisconsin Statutes. He shall be well versed in local ordinances,
Wisconsin Statutes, and rules and regulations of the State Department
of Safety and Professional Services which pertain to plumbing or the
duties of his office.
§ 419-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 419-4
1:514
§ 419-5. Records.
The Plumbing Inspector shall prepare suitable forms for the application for
permits required, keep in his office a proper daily record of all transactions
of his office, and file a monthly report covering the same with the Common
Council.
§ 419-6. Permits. [Amended by Ord. No. 85-4; Ord. No. 91-27; Ord.
No. 91-44]
B. Duties and authority. The Plumbing Inspector shall be under the
direction of the Building Inspector and the City Engineer and shall have
the control of the supervision and inspection of plumbing and drainage
work within or in connection with all buildings in the City of Watertown.
He shall make or cause to be made all inspections of house sewers and
water supply piping from the sewer or water main to the building as to
their depth below grade, manner of construction, materials and
workmanship, and as to replacing of earth, pavement and sidewalks,
and shall faithfully enforce all laws, ordinances and rules in relation
thereto. It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to see that the
construction, reconstruction and alteration of all plumbing, drainage
and plumbing ventilation hereinafter installed in all buildings in the
City of Watertown shall conform to the laws and ordinances of the State
of Wisconsin, the City of Watertown, the rules and regulations
contained in the Wisconsin State Plumbing Code, the State Department
of Safety and Professional Services orders and the provisions of the
State Department of Safety and Professional Services relating to
plumbing. He shall see that the work shall be done by licensed
plumbers, as provided by the law and this chapter, and make all
inspections required thereby and in the manner set forth. He shall have
the right to enter any building during reasonable hours in the discharge
of his official duties. He shall supervise all plumbing installations as
may be necessary to adequately enforce this chapter and all state
plumbing laws and codes to make all plumbing safe and sanitary in all
classes of buildings, both public and private. It shall be the duty of the
Plumbing Inspector, with the assistance of the State Department of
Safety and Professional Services, to make such interpretations of the
State Plumbing Code and local ordinances so as to provide uniform,
safe standards of installation. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30]
A. Permit to do plumbing. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30]
(1) No person shall install or cause to be installed any plumbing or
drainage system, or establish or permit to be established, replace
or permit to be replaced any water lateral or sanitary sewer lateral
as defined in Chapter 512 of this Code, unless a permit therefor has
been granted by the Plumbing Inspector, and no plumbing,
including water laterals and/or sanitary sewer laterals, shall be
used until it has been inspected and approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.
§ 419-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-6
1:515
(2) No permit shall be granted to any licensed person who is to install
any plumbing or drainage system which has been reviewed by the
State of Wisconsin, Department of Safety and Professional
Services, unless a copy of those plans is submitted to the Plumbing
Inspector for his records. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-09]
B. Fees. The schedule of permit fees shall be as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule. [Amended by Ord.
No. 98-30; Ord. No. 06-18143]
(1) Permit and minimum inspection fee applies to the inspection of
rough-in of all soil, waste, vent and water supply piping, including
water laterals and sanitary sewer laterals as defined in Chapter
512 of this Code, private sewage disposal systems, yard catch
basins, and building, sanitary and storm drains.
(2) Additional fees are based on drain or water connections and
administrative fees. Failure to take out a permit before work is
started: doubled fee.
(3) There shall be no inspection fee or fixture fee for the replacement
of any part of the plumbing system within a building if the location
of such plumbing has not changed, with the exception of water
heaters used to heat domestic hot water, which will require a
plumbing permit. A minimum inspection fee, but no fixture fee,
shall be applicable.
C. Permit restrictions. No permit shall be issued to any licensed plumber
who has failed to renew such license or who has not otherwise complied
with the provisions of this chapter regulating such license. No permit
shall be issued to any plumber against whom an order issued by the
Plumbing Inspector for corrections or additions to work previously
improperly installed is pending or who is incompetent to make a
plumbing installation. No permit shall be issued to any master plumber
during the time that he shall fail to remedy any defective work after
written notification by the Plumbing Inspector.
D. Expiration of permit. All permits are issued for a period of 12 months
from the date of issue, after which time the permit may be renewed for
additional 12 months by payment of 1/2 of the administration fee. When
a permit expires and is not renewed, all plumbing work will cease, and
it will not continue until a new permit is issued upon receipt of full
payment to the City. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30]
E. A permit shall be required of an owner or any agent when engaged in
the laying of water laterals and/or sanitary sewer laterals pursuant to
Chapter 512 of this Code as set forth herein in this chapter. For the
purposes of this subsection, the City of Watertown Water Department is
deemed an agent of the owner in laying said water laterals and/or
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 419-6
1:516
§ 419-7. Inspections.
sanitary sewer laterals and a permit is required thereunder. No permit
shall be required of a contractor or his employees while engaged in
laying water mains and service pipes while under a written contract
with the City of Watertown or of persons employed by the City for such
purpose and when such work is performed by the City of Watertown
or its agents at its own expense for its own beneficial use exclusive of
the requirements contained in Chapter 512 of this Code. [Amended by
Ord. No. 91-45]
A. Inspections and tests. Inspections shall be made by the Plumbing
Inspector as provided in the State Plumbing Code and this chapter and
shall include:
(1) Inspection of the house sewer from main to building.
(2) Water service piping from main to building shall be inspected at the
time of installation.
(3) The soil, wastewater and vent pipe, known as "roughing in," shall
be tested and inspected before it is enclosed or covered.
(4) Final inspection of the plumbing installation is to be made after
fixtures and appliances have been tested and completed and the
installation is considered ready for use.
B. Certificate of inspection.
(1) Whenever any plumbing is ready for inspection, the plumber in
charge or the person receiving the permit shall notify the Plumbing
Inspector that the work is ready for roughing-in or final inspection.
The Plumbing Inspector shall inspect the installation or work
within 24 hours of the time such notice is received. The plumber, or
person receiving the permit, shall specify the plan or permit
number under which the work is being done. If upon inspection it is
found that such installations are fully in compliance with this
chapter and the state plumbing laws, the Plumbing Inspector shall
issue a certificate stating that the plumbing is installed in
accordance with this chapter and the state plumbing law.
(2) The plumber in charge or the owner shall make such arrangements
as will enable the Inspector to reach all parts of the building readily
and shall have present the proper apparatus and appliances for
making the tests and shall furnish all materials and shall perform
all labor in making such tests as required by the Plumbing
Inspector.
C. Rejections. Whenever any plumbing is declared by the Plumbing
Inspector to be incomplete or not in accordance with the Wisconsin
State Plumbing Law or this chapter, the Plumbing Inspector shall not
issue a certificate of inspection. It shall be his duty to issue orders to the
§ 419-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-7
1:517
§ 419-8. Sewers. [Amended by Ord. No. 88-44; Ord. No. 89-34]
person doing the work to make the necessary changes or additions to
the plumbing or drain laying to bring it up to an acceptable standard.
The person receiving such orders shall make such changes or additions
as ordered by the Plumbing Inspector within a period of 10 days.
Concealment of roughing-in before inspection or failure to comply with
the orders of the Plumbing Inspector shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
D. Report of existing unsanitary conditions. Whenever it shall be reported
to the Health Officer that plumbing in any building is contrary to this
chapter or is of faulty construction, liable to breed disease or sickness,
or is a menace to health, or when upon complaint made to the Health
Officer by any person that the plumbing in any building is defective, the
Health Officer, upon proper investigation, shall declare such premises
condemned and unfit for habitation and properly post such affected
premises. Poor workmanship, design or method of installation likewise
shall be sufficient for the condemnation of the whole or any part of the
plumbing system.144
A. Sewer improvement tax. No person shall be allowed to connect with the
public sewage system in any manner unless a sewer improvement tax
has been duly made to or paid on the frontage of the property to which
sewer connection is to be installed, except when permission to do so
has been duly given by the Common Council.
B. Record of drain junctions. The City Engineer and Plumbing Inspector
shall keep a record and make maps showing the location of all house
sewer connections and position of all house drains, connections,
junctions and other data necessary for the efficient service of the Water
and Wastewater Department. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30]
C. Location of drain junctions. No person but a licensed plumber as herein
provided shall be permitted to tap or make connection with the main
sewerage system or any part thereof. Such information as the City
Clerk/Treasurer or City Engineer may have regarding the location of
the sewer junctions or slants will be furnished to the plumbers, the City
of Watertown assuming no risk as to the accuracy of the same. When in
accordance with the measurements furnished by the City Engineer and
Plumbing Inspector the junction is not found, a slant connection and 1/8
bend shall be used, and such connections shall be made under the
direction of the Plumbing Inspector. This subsection shall not apply to
any sewer contractor or his employees while engaged in construction or
repairing any sewer under any contract with the City, nor shall this
subsection apply to any person lawfully employed by the City or other
duly qualified officer or officers on behalf of the City to do any of the
acts herein referred to. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30]
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 419-8
1:518
D. Drain for each building. Whenever practicable, the sewer drainage
system of every house or building in the City must be separately and
independently connected with the street sewer or main sewer, except
that where a building stands in the rear of another on the same lot, the
house sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building, private garage or barn, and the whole will be considered as
one house sewer or main drain.
E. Sizes and materials for house sewers. The house sewer extending from
the main in the street to the property line shall be constructed of one of
the following: polyvinyl chloride (PVC), ASTM designation D2665 or
D1785 commonly referred to as schedule 40; acrylonitrile butadiene
styrene (ABS), ASTM designation D1527 or D2661 or F628 commonly
referred to as schedule 40; cast iron, ASTM designation A74 or CISPI
301; concrete, ASTM designation C14 or C76. All schedule 40 pipe shall
be bedded with a minimum of three inches of sand, pea gravel or a
graded stone which is capable of passing through a three-fourths-inch
sieve. Initial backfill on the sides of the pipe and to a height of 12 inches
over the top of the pipe shall be commensurate with the bedding. In no
case shall the size of the pipe be less than four inches in size.
[Amended by Ord. No. 89-36]
F. Defective or inferior pipes prohibited.
(1) No person shall lay or connect with any public or private sewer,
either storm or sanitary sewer, a pipe that is cracked or of inferior
make or quality. Should any property owner or agent thereof
furnish pipe of inferior make or quality for laying or connecting the
same to any sewer, either public or private, the plumber shall
refuse to lay or connect the same.
(2) No person shall connect, permit or allow any person to connect
collecting lines to a house drain, house sewer or storm sewer when
such house drain, house sewer or storm sewer is known or found to
be defective or of inferior quality or is too small to serve the
purpose for which it is intended.
G. Grade or pitch of drains. A house sewer or house drain must have a
grade of 1/4 inch or more if possible, and in no case shall the grade be
less than 1/8 inch per foot. In cases where the main sewer in the street
has sufficient depth or where a lot is three feet or more above the grade
line, the grade between the curbline and lot line may receive much
greater inclination as in the judgment of the City Engineer or Plumbing
Inspector may be deemed necessary. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30]
H. Depth of house sewers and house drains.
(1) Where the depth of the main sewer in streets or alleys or other
disposal terminals, including private sewage disposal systems,
within the City permit, the house sewer or main drain shall be laid
not less than six feet below the surface after the street or lot is
§ 419-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-8
1:519
brought to grade, but in no case shall the depth of the house sewer
or main drain be less than five feet below the finished grade.
(2) All house drains shall be installed at least 12 inches below the
ground level, but where such depths cannot be maintained, the
depth of the house drain shall not be less than four inches below
the ground level, measurements to be taken from the top of
horizontal house drain to graded ground level.
I. Drain ends and connections guarded. The ends of all sewer and drain
pipes not immediately connected shall be securely closed so as to
prevent the introduction of sand or earth, and where the ends of a
sewer or drain pipe are connected with a temporary catch basin for
draining foundations during the erection of any building or for other
purposes, the plumber shall guard the same against the introduction of
sand or earth.
J. Construction of joints.
(1) Joints in vitrified clay sewer pipe shall by Type III compression
joints meeting all the requirements of the ASTM C425-60T
specifications. In repairing vitrified pipe, joints shall be made of
either a mortar or a jointing compound. In joining vitrified clay
pipe, the spigot of one pipe must be carefully centered into the bell
of the next pipe. Joints shall be firmly packed with hemp, oakum or
jute in such a manner as not to disturb the alignment of the pipes,
and in such a way as to permit the joint compound to have the
greatest unobstructed surface for good pouring and adhesion.
When mortar is used, it shall be composed of equal parts of
portland cement with clean sharp sand thoroughly mixed with
enough water added to give the proper consistency. Jointing
compounds shall be approved by the Plumbing Inspector or the City
Engineer. Pipes before pouring shall be clean. [Amended by Ord.
No. 98-30]
(2) In joining cast-iron soil pipe to vitrified clay sewer pipe, proper
reducers, increasers, bends or curves shall be used; the joint
construction of cast-iron soil pipes to vitrified clay sewer pipe shall
be made as specified in Subsection J(1).
(3) All joints in cast-iron pipe shall be made by first inserting a roll of
oakum, hemp or jute and thoroughly caulking it into place, and
then followed with pure molten lead well-caulked not less than one
inch deep, lead to be brought to top of hub and faced.
(4) The use of cement mortar shall not be approved or accepted for the
construction of joints in any portion of the house sewer, house
drain, storm sewer or other drains.
K. Change in direction and alignment. All sewer and drain pipes are to be
laid carefully in a trench with perfect alignment where the bottom is
trimmed to a perfect grade, and any deviation or change in direction
§ 419-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 419-8
1:520
from a straight line shall be made by the use of proper curves, bends
and Y's. No sewer or drain pipe shall be clipped where proper fittings
can be used for the change of direction.
L. Old pipe or drains.
(1) Whenever it is necessary to disturb a sewer or drain in actual use,
the same shall not be obstructed or disconnected without special
permission of the City Engineer. Whenever such drains are to be
obstructed or disconnected, the person doing the work shall notify
the Plumbing Inspector, who shall thereupon thoroughly
investigate the same and report his findings to the City Engineer,
who shall thereupon review the evidence presented and submit his
recommendation as to what shall be done. [Amended by Ord. No.
98-30]
(2) No person shall permit or allow any person to make any
connections with or extension to any old sewers or drains without
permission or a permit.
M. Drains when obstructed. In all cases where the course of any sewer or
drain is obstructed by water, gas, steam or other pipes or conduits, the
question of passing over or under such obstructions or the raising or
lowering thereof so as to permit the construction and installation of the
sewer or drain shall be determined by the City Engineer. [Amended by
Ord. No. 98-30]
N. Permit to connect during freezing weather. No openings in the streets
will be permitted when the ground is frozen, except when in the
judgment of the City Engineer such openings are absolutely necessary,
and if such permission is granted, the work shall be done as directed by
the City Engineer granting such permit. Said City Engineer or the City
of Watertown shall in no way be responsible for any damage done to
pipes of any description due to freezing or other causes when such
permits are granted. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30]
O. Drains conveying industrial waste.
(1) No person shall connect either directly or indirectly any factory,
brewery, distillery, stockyard, slaughterhouse, tannery or other
building or establishment of any kind whatsoever by any drain
sewer with the main sewer through which it is intended or
designed to discharge any offal, garbage, filth or other solid refuse
or through which substances may be discharged into the main
sewer, unless such sewers or drains are provided with adequate
and accepted intercepting or grinding appliances.
(2) No person shall permit or allow any liquids or solids to enter any
public or private sewer or drain which will interfere with the
normal process of sewage treatment purification.
P. Oil and gasoline separators.
§ 419-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-8
1:521
(1) No person shall permit or allow the connection of any building,
premises or equipment in or outside of such building or premises
with any sewer or drain, either storm, sanitary or private, through
which any obnoxious, explosive, odorous or unhealthful liquids,
gases or substances may be discharged into such sewers.
(2) Every filling station which is equipped with a grease or wash rack
and which has a sewer connection, every public garage, every Cityowned
garage, every cleaning or dyeing establishment, and every
industrial plant which has grease or oil waste shall be equipped
with a suitable grease or oil waste separator or gasoline separator,
or both. The size, efficiency, capacity and location thereof shall be
approved by the Plumbing Inspector before such equipment is
installed.
Q. Domestic grease catch basins. All domestic grease traps or catch basin
installations and equipment shall be approved by the Plumbing
Inspector before being installed.
R. Yard catch basins. All sewer and drain pipes which must be left open to
drain cellars, areas, yards, gardens or other places must be connected
with a suitable catch basin of brick, vitrified clay pipe, cement or other
suitable material and be of not less than 24 inches inside diameter, and
the bottom of said catch basin must not be less than 2 1/2 feet below the
bottom of the inverted outlet pipe. Every such catch basin or receptacle
must be placed inside the lot line of the lot or lots to be drained.
S. Steam or hot water blowoffs. Steam exhausts or blowoffs from steam
boilers, engines or steam equipment shall not be connected directly
with any drain or sewer but shall discharge into a catch basin of
suitable size and capacity as provided for in the Wisconsin State
Plumbing Code.
T. Adequate flushing of drains. No person shall connect any water closet
or other plumbing fixture with any drain or sewer unless means are
provided and employed for the abundant and adequate flushing of the
same with clear water every time it is used. Every such water closet or
other fixture shall be properly connected with the City or private water
supply system.
U. Draining of rain or surface water into sanitary sewer. No person shall
cause or permit groundwater, surface or rain water from any building
or premises owned or under the control of such person to enter the City
sanitary sewer system from drain tile, downspouts, cistern overflow or
by any other means. Persons owning or having control of any property
where downspouts from buildings now empty into a sanitary sewer, or
having a cistern which overflows into the sanitary system, or having a
sump from drain tile which overflows or empties in the sanitary system,
shall cause the same to be corrected in such a manner as to prevent all
groundwater, surface or rain water from entering the sanitary sewer
system from said property.
§ 419-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 419-8
1:522
V. Storm sewers.
(1) Where a storm sewer is available, all cistern overflows, drain tile,
downspouts, roof leaders, surface or area drains shall be connected
to it.
(2) Where storm sewers are not available all cistern overflows, drain
tile, downspouts, roof leaders, surface or area drains or other clean
water shall be piped separately to the street curb or other place of
disposal.
(3) Where a sump pit is constructed for the collection of water from
drain tile, cistern overflows, downspouts, roof leaders, surface or
area drains, the inside diameter shall be at least 18 inches, and the
sump shall project a minimum of three inches above the highest
level of the basement floor. The discharge pipe from the sump pit
shall be rigid pipe with a minimum inside diameter of 1 1/4 inches.
W. Opening in plumbing systems. No persons shall cut, break or cause a
hole or opening to be made in any plumbing or drainage system unless
a proper fitting is inserted. The connection between the pipe and
fittings shall be made with a threaded, caulked or wiped joint or other
approved method.
X. Backflow valves. Where there is a danger of backflow or where
backflows have resulted from overloading of storm or sanitary sewers
or drains, a backflow valve shall be installed by the property owner.
Every backflow valve shall be approved by the Plumbing Inspector
before being installed.
Y. Openings in soil, waste or vent pipes for future fixtures.
(1) When openings or fittings are left in soil, waste, vent or drain pipes,
to which fixtures will be connected at a later date, a cap, plug or
wiped joint or caulked blind ferrule or blind closet flange with
watertight gasket shall be used to close all openings. All such
openings shall be made watertight. In no case shall the use of
wooden plugs, putty, cement tar or like materials be used for the
closing of such openings.
(2) When openings or fittings are made or left or used in any soil, waste
or drain pipe into which plumbing fixtures will be connected, vent
pipes shall also be installed for the proper venting of all fixtures.
Z. Soil, waste and vent pipe fixture fittings. All soil, waste or vent pipes
shall be provided with correctly faced inlet fittings for fixture
connections.
AA. Prohibited connections. No main or back vent circuit or loop vent above
the highest installed fixture shall be used as a soil or waste pipe.
§ 419-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-8
1:523
BB. Ferrules. A ferrule shall be installed when lead, brass, copper or iron
waste or vent pipes are connected to soil, waste or vent pipe hub
fittings.
CC. Entire development distance of soil stack and collecting lines. When the
entire developed distance of a soil stack, including all offsets, exceeds
50 feet from the roof terminal to the point where such pipe enters the
house drain, extra heavy pipe shall be used throughout the entire
drainage and venting system, except that galvanized iron, brass, copper
or lead pipe of standard weight may be used for connecting individual
fixture wastes to main soil or waste stacks, branches or collecting lines.
DD. Roof terminal flashings. The roof terminal of any soil or vent stack shall
be made watertight by the use of copper, lead or cast iron plate
flashing.
EE. Traps required. Each fixture shall be separately trapped by a water seal
trap placed as close to the fixture as possible, except that laundry trays
or wash tubs may waste into a single trap.
FF. Cleanouts. All soil and waste stacks shall have full-size cleanouts
installed at their base. All house drain cleanouts shall be extended two
inches above the finished floor line, and the cleanout shall be the same
size as the house drain.
GG. Cleanouts in soil and waste pipes. Every horizontal soil, waste or
collecting line shall have sufficient cleanouts installed. Cleanouts shall
be so located and installed that every part of the horizontal piping is
accessible for the purpose of rodding or cleaning.
HH. Size of cleanouts.
(1) Pipe cleanouts shall be the same size as the pipe, up to four inches
in diameter and not less than four inches for larger pipe. Cleanouts
at the base of soil and waste pipes shall be placed in a vertical
position, so that access can be secured to the stack as well as the
house drain.
(2) The bottom of the clean-out opening in soil or waste stack shall not
be less than 28 to 30 inches above the finished floor.
II. Bar and soda fountain wastes. Waste pipes from bars or soda fountains
shall be connected to the traps serving them with a watertight slip joint
or union connection. A waste pipe from bars or soda fountains shall not
drain into an open trap, floor drain or other plumbing fixture but shall
be connected solid to the sewer and shall be properly trapped and
vented.
JJ. Beer drips. If beer drips are installed separate from the serving bar,
they shall be considered a plumbing fixture and shall be properly
trapped and vented.
§ 419-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 419-8
1:524
§ 419-9. Hot water systems and appliances.
KK. Water closet back vents. Two water closets with floor outlets located on
the same floor, discharging into a vented double Y or sanitary tee cross
or one water closet discharging into a vented Y or sanitary tee, when no
other closet is discharged in the same pipe above, need not be backvented,
provided that the developed distance of the horizontal branch
extended with a grade of not less than 1/4 inch per foot does not exceed
the inside diameter of the soil branch and the vertical leg between the
horizontal soil branch and the vertical leg and the trap water level does
not exceed three feet.
LL. Back vents for fixtures other than water closets. Two fixtures other than
water closets discharging into a vented double Y or sanitary tee cross or
an individual fixture other than a water closet discharging into a Y
branch or sanitary tee, when no other fixture is discharged in the same
pipe above, need not be back-vented, provided that the total fall of the
waste pipe between the water level of the trap and the vent pipe
extended at a grade of not less than 1/4 inch per foot does not exceed
the inside diameter of the branch waste pipe.
MM.Circuit or loop vent. Circuit or loop vents shall be installed as provided
for in the Wisconsin State Plumbing Code, except that when a single
battery of plumbing fixtures is installed on a horizontal soil or waste
branch, the first two fixtures nearest the soil or waste stack shall be
individually vented, and when a double battery of plumbing fixtures is
installed on a soil or waste branch, the first two fixtures of each battery
nearest the soil or waste stack shall be individually vented.
NN. Tapping of east side interceptor sanitary sewer.
(1) No person shall be allowed to tap in or make connection with the
east side twenty-four-inch interceptor sanitary sewer unless
written permission is obtained from the City Engineer. [Amended
by Ord. No. 98-30]
(2) In the event written permission is obtained to tap into said
interceptor sanitary sewer, a fee as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule shall first be paid to the City
Clerk/Treasurer and said tapping in or connection shall be
inspected by the City Engineer. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-30145]
(3) The applicant for said tap-in shall be liable for all damage which
may be sustained to said east side interceptor sanitary sewer by
reason of said tap-in.
A. Temperature and pressure relief valve.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-9
1:525
§ 419-10. Street and sidewalk openings. [Amended by Ord. No.
88-97; Ord. No. 91-19; Ord. No. 92-13; Ord. No. 97-15; Ord. No.
06-18; Ord. No. 98-30; Ord. No. 99-19; 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15]
See § 457-6 of this Code.
(1) Every domestic hot water system, hot water storage tank or any
device or appliance in which water is heated or stored shall have
suitably installed on it an automatic temperature and pressure
relief valve of such design that the valve opens to relieve the
temperature before the temperature of the hottest water reaches
212° F., and allows the water to go to waste until the temperature
in the system is reduced not less than 10° F. nor more than 20° F.
(2) The valve shall also relieve the pressure in the system should the
pressure increase above the maximum working pressure for which
the system is intended.
(3) The valve shall be constructed of nonferrous metal throughout, and
the relieves shall be through a single port, the opening and closing
of which is automatically controlled by temperature and pressure
rises. The valve shall open in the direction of the pressure in the
system to atmosphere.
(4) In addition, the relief valve shall have a safety plug set to melt at
230° to 240° F.
(5) The valve shall be of not less than three-fourths-inch iron pipe size
inlet and not less than one-half-inch waste outlet. The valve shall be
installed directly in the tank, or in a fitting to which the hottest
water has constant access, or in the hottest waterline not more
than 18 inches from the outlet of the tank.
B. Valves in hot water circulation pipes. The installation or maintenance of
shutoff valves is prohibited in the floor or return pipe between heating
units and hot water storage tanks or range boilers.
C. Range boilers. All range boilers or hot water storage tanks installed on
a domestic hot water system shall be of quality and weight known as
extra heavy. Such tanks shall be tested at 150 pounds working pressure.
D. Water supply control. A valve or shutoff shall be installed on the water
supply pipe just inside the foundation wall; a stop and waste valve for
each flat or apartment; a stop and waste valve for each sprinkler faucet;
a stop or shutoff valve for each range boiler or hot water storage tank;
and a stop for each water closet and urinal.
E. Water system. The water system shall be provided with a drip at its
lowest point or where it may be tapped.
§ 419-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 419-11
1:526
§ 419-11. Compulsory connection to sewer and water.
See Chapter 319, Article I, of this Code.
§ 419-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each day
a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
section shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 424
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE, COMMERCIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 282.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 303.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 325.
Housing standards — See Ch. 332.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 419.
Control of weeds, grass and brush — See Ch.
446, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 419-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-12
1:527

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 424-1. General.
§ 424-2. Applicability.
A. Title. These regulations shall be known as the "City of Watertown
Commercial Property Maintenance Code," hereinafter referred to as
"this chapter."
B. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing
nonresidential structures and residential portions of such structures
and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises,
structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space,
heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety
from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the
responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of
existing structures and premises; and for administration, enforcement
and penalties.
C. Intent. This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level
of health and safety as required herein.
A. General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a
specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where
differences occur between provisions of this chapter and the referenced
national standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. Where, in
a specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
B. Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this chapter or a previous regulation or code under which the structure
or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in
good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
chapter to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any
occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary
while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this
chapter are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation
of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures.
Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's
designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings,
structures and premises.
C. Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
§ 424-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-2
1:529
§ 424-3. Code official.
the procedures and provisions of the City of Watertown Housing Code,
International Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International
Mechanical Code and NFPA 70.
D. Existing remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed
to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers
or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which
is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.
E. Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this
chapter shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions.
F. Historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic
buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code
official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
G. Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced
in this chapter shall be those that are listed in § 424-45, as well as the
City of Watertown Housing Code contained in Chapter 332, and
considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed
extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this chapter and the referenced standards, the provisions
of this chapter shall apply. Exception: Where enforcement of a code
provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or
appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply.
H. Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure
or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the code
official.
I. Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or
to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to
refer to such chapter, section or provision of this chapter.
J. Other laws. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify
any provisions of local, state or federal law.
A. General. An official of the Department of Building, Safety and Zoning of
the City is appointed as the executive official in charge hereof and shall
be known as the "code official."
B. Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
City, subject to approval by the Common Council.
§ 424-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-3
1:530
§ 424-4. Duties and powers of code official.
C. Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the City and
with the concurrence of the Common Council, the code official shall
have the authority to appoint a deputy(s). Such employees shall have
powers as delegated by the code official.
D. Liability. The code official charged with the enforcement of this chapter,
while acting for the City in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent law
or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to
persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or
omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against
any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of
this chapter shall be defended by the legal representative of the City
until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs or attorneys' fees in an action,
suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of
this chapter.
E. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the Department
in carrying out its responsibilities under this chapter shall be as set by
the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule.146
A. General. The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. The code official shall have the authority
to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and
procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall
not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in
this chapter.
B. Inspections. Whenever the code official believes or receives a complaint
of any person, shall make all of the required inspections or shall accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of
such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible
officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The
code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to
the approval of the Common Council. [Amended 6-4-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-9]
C. Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the code official has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-4
1:531
§ 424-5. Approval.
premises a condition in violation of this chapter, the code official is
authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to
inspect or perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that, if
such structure or premises is occupied, the code official shall present
credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or
premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of
the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code
official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure
entry.
D. Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under
this chapter.
E. Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or
orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
F. Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all
business and activities of the Department specified in the provisions of
this chapter. Such records shall be retained in the official records for
the period required for retention of public records.
A. Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the code official shall have
the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon
application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the code
official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict
letter of this chapter impractical and the modification is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this chapter and that such modification
does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of
action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
Department files.
B. Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this
chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
chapter, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An
alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where
the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter, and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least
the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
C. Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in
order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the
§ 424-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-5
1:532
§ 424-6. Violations.
code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as
evidence of compliance at no expense to the City.
(1) Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or
by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized
and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to
approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved
agency.
(2) Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official
for the period required for retention of public records.
D. Used material and equipment. The use of used materials which meet
the requirements of this chapter for new materials is permitted.
Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested
when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and
approved by the code official.
E. Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices
approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with such approval.
F. Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the
approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this
chapter, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
A. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or
order in accordance with § 424-7.
C. Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of
violation or order served in accordance with § 424-7 shall be deemed
guilty of a civil violation and shall be subject to the issuance of a citation
by the City, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If
the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination
of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions
of this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located
and shall be a lien upon such real estate pursuant to Chapter 76, Article
III, of the City's Code.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local
§ 424-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-6
1:533
§ 424-7. Notices and orders.
laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. Penalties imposed shall be
as authorized in § 1-4 of the City's Code.
E. Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting
appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an
illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or
premises.
A. Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines
that there has been a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe
that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in Subsections B and C to the person responsible for the
violation as specified in this chapter. Notices for condemnation
procedures shall also comply with § 424-8D.
B. Form. Such notice prescribed in Subsection A shall be in accordance
with all of the following:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued.
(4) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the structure into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
(6) Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
§ 424-6C.
C. Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if
a copy thereof is:
(1) Delivered personally;
(2) Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address of the owner; or
(3) If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a
copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice.
D. Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the
code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or
removed without authorization from the code official.
§ 424-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-7
1:534
§ 424-8. Dangerous, derelict or abandoned structures in
commercial and industrial districts. [Amended 8-18-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-27]
E. Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be
as set forth in § 424-6D.
F. Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice
of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of such structure to another until the provisions of
the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or
until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee
or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed
and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
A. General. This section is meant to prevent buildings or structures in the
City of Watertown from becoming dangerous and/or neglected or
remaining dangerous and derelict, as the terms may be defined in this
chapter; to prevent structures from becoming blighted; to mitigate
blighting impacts of such buildings; to provide for the regular
inspection of structures and buildings that are or are likely to become
dangerous, derelict or abandoned; and to impose fees to cover the cost
of inspections of those properties upon owners, operators, mortgagees,
tenants or lessees who have a legal or equitable interest in the property
and have a responsibility to maintain the property.
B. Conditions. When upon and following inspections made as set forth in
Subsection C of this section, any structure, building or premises is
found to contain conditions as defined in the definitions in § 424-14
under "neglected," "dangerous structure," "abandoned structure,"
"derelict," "blighted" or "nuisance," it shall be declared to be in
violation of this § 424-8, subject to fines and penalties as hereinafter
stipulated.
C. Inspection and registration.
(1) Inspection. Whenever the code official believes or receives a
complaint that a building or structure is dangerous, abandoned,
blighted or derelict, the code official shall cause an inspection to be
done to determine if it complies with the Building Code, Electrical
Code, Plumbing Code and this chapter, and all other applicable
local and state codes.
(2) Determination.
§ 424-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-8
1:535
(a) In the event the code official determines that a building or
structure is a dangerous, abandoned, blighted or derelict
building, notice of that determination shall be given to the
building's or structure's owner of record who is listed at the
County's Land Information Department by certified mail, who
is hereafter required to register the building within 15
calendar days of the code official's notification date.
(b) Required information that the notice shall include:
[1] The building's address and legal description of the
property;
[2] A specific and detailed statement listing all the items not in
compliance as to form the basis of the code official's
determination;
[3] A statement that the building must be registered with the
City of Watertown's Building, Safety and Zoning Division
as provided in this chapter and an administration/initial
inspection fee, as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule, paid to the City of
Watertown.147
(3) Registration. Registration shall be completed on forms to be
provided by the City of Watertown Building, Safety and Zoning
Division and shall include the information relating to the location
and ownership of the building, the expected period of its vacancy, a
plan for regular maintenance during the period of vacancy and a
plan for rehabilitation, proposed occupancy and use or its
demolition, which plans shall be reviewed by and subject to
approval of the Site Plan Review Committee.
(4) Appeals. See § 424-11.
(5) Quarterly inspections. For buildings declared dangerous,
abandoned, blighted or derelict, the code official shall conduct
quarterly inspections to endeavor to bring the owner in compliance
with applicable codes. Fees for dangerous, abandoned, blighted or
derelict buildings shall be as set out in Subsection D.
(6) Compliance. When all code violations have been corrected and a
building has been legally repaired or reoccupied and brought up to
all code standards, or when the building has been demolished and
the lot cleared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
Building Code, Electrical Code and Plumbing Code, it shall cease to
be dangerous, abandoned, blighted or derelict building.
D. Inspection fees payable.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-8
1:536
(1) Fees; late payments. The owner of any dangerous, derelict,
blighted or abandoned building so declared under Subsection C
shall be placed on a register and subject to quarterly inspection to
ensure compliance. A basic nonrefundable quarterly fee as set by
the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule
shall be paid on each building under his or her ownership and
control for as long as the structure is declared dangerous, derelict,
blighted or abandoned, notwithstanding subsequent repairs which
might be made, until the structure comes into full compliance.
Owners of structures and/or buildings in excess of 10,000 square
feet of floor space at ground level shall pay a higher nonrefundable
quarterly fee as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule on each building under his or her or their
ownership and control, for as long as the structure is declared
dangerous, derelict, blighted or abandoned, notwithstanding any
subsequent repairs which might be made, until the structure comes
into full compliance.148
(a) Inspections; penalties. Pursuant to the initial inspection made,
first payment of fees will be due 90 calendar days from the date
of the initial inspection, and subsequent inspections and
payments shall be due quarterly thereafter. In the event fees
for quarterly inspections are not paid within 15 calendar days
from the date of the notice given to make payment, the owner
shall be assessed a penalty of $10 per day until payment is
made in full or until the code official determines the property is
in compliance with all applicable codes.; penalty to start on the
16th calendar day following the date of the notice.
(2) Transfer of ownership. The registration fee and inspection fees
imposed under the terms of this section are to be paid prior to any
transfer, purported or actual, of ownership interest in a structure,
as well as prior to the issuance of any permit required for the
demolition, alteration or repair of a structure subject to the terms
of this chapter and all applicable codes. Any present owner or
person having a financial interest in any structure or property upon
which inspection fees and penalties have been assessed, or
continued inspections are required, shall be required to notify in
writing the prospective buyer or purchaser of the inspections,
inspection fees or penalties or other conditions related to the
inspection, repair or rehabilitation of the subject property prior to
the completion of a sale or the transfer of title of the property,
which are continued in nature and monitored by the code official.
(a) Exception. The owner(s) and purchaser(s) may elect to provide
a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit, in favor of
the City, equal to the outstanding balance owed for the
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-8
1:537
registration fee, inspection fees and any penalties before the
time of closing (transfer of title).
(b) Purpose. The purpose of the exception is to allow an owner to
transfer title as need for the purpose of rehabilitating the
subject property and bringing it into compliance with this
chapter.
(c) Plan. A plan of compliance shall be submitted to the code
official at least 10 days prior to the closing date. The plan shall
include: 1) a detailed list of hazards and/or repairs to be
corrected; 2) a schedule for starting the repairs, projected
completion date; and 3) signed contract with a properly
licensed contractor. The plan must be approved by the Site
Plan Review Committee to qualify for the exception.
(d) Use of funds. The owner(s), seller(s) and buyer(s) shall waive
any and all claims to the performance bond at the closing
(transfer of title). After completion of all of the work indicated
in the plan of compliance and approval by the Site Plan Review
Committee and all applicable code enforcement agencies, the
performance bond will be released and returned to the seller.
(e) Default. If a purchaser fails to comply with the approved plan,
the code official is authorized to declare and collect the funds,
without notice to the purchaser, to be used as a payment for
the fees and penalties owed at the time of the transfer.
(f) Limitations. The use of the "exception" is limited to one time
for each parcel unless otherwise approved by the code official.
All other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(3) Abeyance and waiver of fees and penalties. The code official shall
have authority to place in abeyance and/or waiver fees and
penalties imposed under this chapter and all applicable codes as
follows.
(a) The code official shall have authority to place fees and/or
penalties in abeyance if all of the following are met:
[1] A plan and timetable for the repair, demolition and/or
maintenance of the structure has been submitted by the
owner and approved by the Site Plan Review Committee;
[2] The property is being maintained so that it does not
constitute or become a nuisance;
[3] The owner is acting in a timely fashion in adherence to any
plan approved by the Site Plan Review Committee.
(b) The code official shall have authority to waive fees and/or
penalties if the following conditions have been met:
§ 424-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-8
1:538
[1] All of the conditions in Subsection D(1)(a) of this section
have been met;
[2] The property has been brought into compliance with all
applicable codes and approved by the code official.
(4) Unpaid fees on property. In addition to above fees and penalties,
should the owner fail to pay accumulated inspection fees and
penalties, the City shall affect a lien on the property to recover the
fees and penalties. All uncollected costs for the current year shall
be certified to the City Clerk/Treasurer. The lien will be assessed as
a special tax, the amount so certified at the time City taxes levied
against properties on which the fees and penalties were assessed
for the next succeeding year are collected. The fees and penalties
for this section are declared to be a special tax assessment to be
collected as general taxes levied by the City, pursuant to Chapter
76, Article III of the City's Code, and may be collected by any other
legal remedies.
E. Vacate. If the structure is vacant and/or unfit for human habitation and
occupancy and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is
authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order
the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in
the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and
secured through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be
a lien upon such real estate, pursuant to Chapter 76, Article III of the
City's Code, and may be collected by any other legal remedies.
(1) Authority to disconnect service utilities. The code official shall have
the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the
building, structure or system regulated by this Code and the
referenced codes and standards set forth in §§ 424-2G and 424-45
in case of emergency, where necessary to eliminate an immediate
hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been
made without approval. The code official shall notify the serving
utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the
building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect
prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection,
the owner or occupant of the building structure or service system
shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.
(2) Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by
such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons
responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with
§ 424-7C. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed
§ 424-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-8
1:539
on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form
prescribed in § 424-7B.
(3) Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to
comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code
official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a
placard bearing the word "condemned" and a statement of the
penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the
equipment or removing the placard.
(a) Placard removal. The code official shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon
which the condemnation and placarding action were based
have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a
condemnation placard without the approval of the code official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code.
(4) Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and
placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the
code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or
shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a
placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable
for the penalties provided by this Code.
F. Probation period and rehabilitation plan.
(1) Preparation of rehabilitation plan. The code official is authorized to
permit probation periods alleviating or suspending payment of fees
and penalties by an owner who submits a rehabilitation plan, which
may be required to be prepared by a registered architect or
engineer experienced in preservation and rehabilitation of
buildings and structures, showing a proposed or scheduled date for
completion. The plan is subject to the review and approval by the
Site Plan Review Committee.
(2) Concurrence of Historic Preservation and Downtown Design
Commission.
(a) If the building or structures are within a historic district
designated by the City of Watertown, the rehabilitation plan
must also be approved and issued a certificate of
appropriateness by the Historic Preservation and Downtown
Design Commission.
(3) Suitability of plan. A suitable rehabilitation plan shall include,
where applicable:
(a) Legal description of property.
(b) Final set of plans as approved by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee.
§ 424-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-8
1:540
(c) Repair items may include, but are not limited to, the following
categories:
[1] Storefront and show windows;
[2] Windows other than show windows;
[3] Building fronts, sides and rears, abutting or visible from
streets, public parking lots or other public places;
[4] All signs and signage, including billboards and other
outdoor advertising, whether related or unrelated to the
property;
[5] Awnings and canopies;
[6] Mechanical and electrical equipment on exterior walls;
[7] Water systems, sewer systems, heating/cooling systems,
electrical, plumbing systems and fire protection systems;
[8] Auxiliary structures, if any;
[9] Demolition;
[10] Rear and side yards and parking areas, if any;
[11] Vacant lots;
[12] Fencing;
[13] Landscape and planting;
[14] Roofs, gutters, downspouts;
[15] Exitways and stairs;
[16] Basements, excluding properties located within Mid
America Mall;
[17] Other.
(d) Statement of approximate cost for rehabilitation work.
(e) Estimated construction time.
(f) Detailed statement of proposed use of property.
(4) Progress. The subject property is subject to review as to progress
or continuing repairs at each three-month period after the
rehabilitation plan is approved and until completion; the owner
shall be responsible for submission of a progress report each three
months to the code official. If an owner is unable to show
satisfactory progress at any three-month interval, the code official
is authorized to cancel or discontinue the probation, and fees shall
be reinstated.
§ 424-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-8
1:541
§ 424-9. Emergency measures.
(5) Work permits required. After the rehabilitation plan is approved,
the owner shall be required to obtain necessary permits for
construction, excavation, demolition or other requirements for the
Building, Safety and Zoning Department and to notify the
department when the project is completed.
(6) Final work and continuing inspections. At the end of the
rehabilitation work upon notice by owner an inspection will be
made within 10 days of notification, and additional inspections shall
be conducted as necessary to ensure property is in compliance, by
the Building, Safety and Zoning Department. If maintenance by
owner is not complied with in accordance with the inspection, the
owner shall be notified in writing of the noncompliance and given
30 days in which to either bring the building or structure back into
compliance or give acceptable reason for noncompliance, at which
time an additional period may be given or final notification given
that the probation period has ceased, and fees are to be reinstated
against the owner.
(7) Emergencies during rehabilitation work. When 50% or more of a
structure suffers major damage by fire, act of God or other peril
while rehabilitation work is in progress, the structure must be
repaired to meet the regular rehabilitation and maintenance plan
requirements or be demolished. The affected owner shall present
an additional plan of proposed reconstruction or start demolition.
The structure must at all times be fenced or boarded, so as to
safeguard the general public against the dangers which may
become eminent because of the damaged building or structure.
When demolition is requested and approved, the cost shall be
borne by the owner. No work, demolition, excavation, alteration or
improvement shall be undertaken prior to the approval of the plan
and proper permits, except where an emergency exists and the
safety of the general public is affected. If and when the emergency
is designated or declared existing by the code official, all other
code sections shall take precedence, in addition to this chapter, to
alleviate the emergency.
A. Imminent danger. When in the opinion of the code official there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there
is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or
vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation
of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to
vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted
at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This
§ 424-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-9
1:542
§ 424-10. Demolition. [Amended 8-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-28]
Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the
required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing
the same.
B. Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter, whenever in the opinion of the code official there is imminent
danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the
necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to
render such structure temporarily safe, whether or not the legal
procedure herein described has been instituted, and shall cause such
other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet
such emergency.
C. Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall
temporarily close structures and close or order the City's Public Works
Department to close sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent
to unsafe structures and prohibit the same from being utilized.
D. Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official
shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible.
E. Costs of emergency repairs. The owners or occupants of the
structure(s) shall pay all costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work. The City Attorney shall institute appropriate action
against the owner or occupants of the premises where the unsafe
structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs in addition to
the ability of the City to recover all such costs as a special charge
against the premises, pursuant to Chapter 76, Article III of the City's
Code.
F. Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon
petition directed to the City's Public Safety and Welfare Committee of
the Common Council, be afforded a hearing as described in this
chapter.
A. General.
(1) The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which
is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment after
review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for
human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to
repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if
such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair
and make safe and sanitary or to board up and hold for future
§ 424-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-10
1:543
repair or to demolish and remove, at the owner's option; or where
there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure
for a period of more than two years, the code official shall order
the owner to demolish and remove such structure or board up until
future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not
extend beyond one year, unless approved by the Building Inspector
of the City. The code official shall comply with § 66.0413, Wis.
Stats., in proceeding under this section.
(2) This section of code shall also apply to any owner-initiated
demolition.
B. Permits.
(1) No principal structure within the City of Watertown shall be
demolished without a permit from the City of Watertown Building,
Safety and Zoning Department. A snow fence or other approved
barricade shall be provided as soon as any portion of the structure
is removed and shall remain during demolition operations. After all
demolition operations have been completed, unless the owner
produces and submits proof from a state-approved architect or
engineer certifying the existing foundation is stable and usable, the
foundation and floor slab shall be broken up with all utilities being
capped, sealed and appropriately marked. The foundation shall
then be filled at least one foot above adjacent grade, the property
raked clean, and all debris hauled away. If determined by the
Building Inspector, a site that remains idle for more than 30 days
must be seeded (between April 15 and October 15) and/or
appropriate erosion control practices implemented. Demolition
permits shall lapse and be void unless work authorized thereby is
commenced within six months from the date thereof or completed
within 30 days from the date of commencement of the work. Any
unfinished portion of work remaining beyond the required 30 days
must have special approval from the code official or a penalty may
be issued.
(2) All debris must be hauled away at the end of each week for the
work that was done during that week. No combustible material
shall be used for backfill but shall be hauled away. There shall not
be any burning of materials on the site of the demolished structure.
If any demolition or removal operation under this section results in
or would likely result in an excessive amount of dust particles in the
air, creating a nuisance in the vicinity thereof, the permittee shall
take all necessary steps by use of water spraying or other
appropriate means to eliminate such nuisance. The permittee shall
take all necessary steps prior to demolition of a structure, through
the employment of a qualified person in the field of pest control or
by other appropriate means, to treat the building so as to prevent
the spread and migration of rodents and insects therefrom during
and after the demolition operations. The site must be returned to a
dust-free surface within 30 days as approved by the code official.
§ 424-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-10
1:544
C. Insurance and bonding.
(1) Residential demolition projects. If the homeowner is completing
the demolition work without a contractor, proof of homeowner's
insurance is required. If a homeowner hires a contractor for the
demolition work, the contractor must submit the following:
(a) Comprehensive liability insurance. An applicant for a permit
shall provide proof of comprehensive liability insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and per person and
$50,000 property damage.
(b) Performance and payment bond. Any application for a permit
to engage in the demolition of structures within the boundaries
of the City shall be accompanied by a performance and
payment bond, approved by the City Attorney as to form, in the
amount of the actual cost of the permitted work including
linear feet of any sidewalk, curb and gutter, and resurfacing as
applicable based on annual contract prices for said items. Such
bond shall guarantee that all work is performed in accordance
with this Code and other state and local laws, rules and
regulations, and hold the City harmless from any costs and
expenses arising from the permitted work and secure timely
performance of the work. The City may reasonably require a
bond of a greater amount, on a case-by-case basis, where
deemed necessary to protect the City.
(2) Commercial demolition projects. All commercial demolition
projects require comprehensive liability insurance and a
performance and payment bond as set out in Subsection C(1)(a)
and (b), respectively.
D. Concurrence of Historic Preservation and Downtown Design
Commission.
(1) If the building or structures are within a historic district designated
by the City of Watertown, the demolition must also be approved and
issued a certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Preservation
and Downtown Design Commission.
(a) No person shall demolish all or part of a landmark or
improvement on a landmark site unless the Historic
Preservation and Downtown Design Commission has approved
such work. Unless the Commission has approved the work, a
demolition permit shall not be issued for such work.
(b) When a person applies for a permit to demolish such property,
such application shall also be filed with the Historic
Preservation and Downtown Design Commission.
(c) Upon the filing of an application, the Commission may refuse to
approve the work for up to 120 days from the date of filing,
§ 424-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-10
1:545
§ 424-11. Means of appeal.
during which time the Historic Preservation and Downtown
Design Commission and the applicant shall undertake serious
continuing discussions to try to find a method to save such
property. During such time, the applicant and the Historic
Preservation and Downtown Design Commission shall
cooperate to try to avoid demolition of the property. At the end
of the 120 days, if no mutually agreeable method of saving
the property bearing a reasonable prospect of eventual success
is underway, or if no formal application for funds from any
governmental unit or nonprofit organization to preserve the
property is pending, the demolition permit may be issued
without the approval of the Historic Preservation and
Downtown Design Commission.
(2) Subsection D does not apply to buildings or structures deemed by
the code official to be so deteriorated or dilapidated or so out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for
human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to
repair the structure.
E. Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with § 424-7.
F. Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall
cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be
a lien upon such real estate, pursuant to Chapter 76, Article III of the
City's Code.
G. Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished
and removed, the Common Council or other designated officer under
said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition
and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted,
for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If
such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so
state.
A. Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this chapter other than a
condemnation order shall have the right to appeal to the Public Safety
and Welfare Committee, provided that a written application for appeal,
on a form approved by the code official, is filed within 20 days after the
day the decision, notice or order of the code official was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
§ 424-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-11
1:546
§ 424-12. Stop-work order.
this chapter or rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this chapter are adequately satisfied by other means.
B. Notice of meeting. The Committee shall meet upon notice from the
Chairperson, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal.
C. Open hearing. All hearings before the Committee shall be open to the
public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official
and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of a simple majority of
the entire membership of the Committee present at such hearing.
D. Procedure. The Committee shall adopt and make available to the public
through the City Clerk/Treasurer procedures under which a hearing
will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with
strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information
be received.
E. Postponed hearing. When the full Committee is not present to hear an
appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have
the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
F. Committee decision. The Committee shall affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of
the total number of appointed members present at such hearing.
G. Records and copies. The decision of the Committee shall be recorded in
the minutes of the meeting at which the hearing occurred. Copies of the
minutes shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.
H. Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Committee.
I. Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal,
shall have the right to apply to the circuit court of the appropriate
county for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Filing of an
application for certiorari review shall be made within 30 days of the
date that the decision was issued by the Committee and following the
filing of the decision in the office of the code official.
J. Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than
imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the Committee decides the appeal.
A. Authority. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this
chapter being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this
chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the code official is
authorized to issue a stop-work order.
§ 424-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-12
1:547
B. Issuance. A stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property, to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the
work. Upon issuance of a stop-work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop-work order shall state the reason for the
order and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to
resume.
C. Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
D. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform by the code official to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a forfeiture of not less than $100 or more
than $2,000 for each day or portion thereof that said person continues
to violate the stop-work order.149
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-12 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-12
1:548
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 424-13. Interpretation.
§ 424-14. General definitions. [Amended 8-18-2015 by Ord. No.
15-29]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED STRUCTURE — A vacant structure when it is without obvious
supervision by an owner, tenant, lessee, mortgagee or person in charge and
the structure or any portion thereof is in such a condition as to constitute
a danger, nuisance or in any way a hazard to the public. Abandonment may
also be constituted by, but not limited to, any one or more of the following
conditions which may exist:
A. Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
B. Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
C. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the International Building Code, NFPA 1 Fire
Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code or
NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
stated in those codes.
D. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.
E. Parts. Whenever the word "premises," "building" or "story" is stated in
this chapter, it shall be construed as though it were followed by the
words "or any part thereof."
A. Failure to answer notices;
B. Failure to pay taxes;
C. Failure to make appearances at court hearings;
Failure to properly board up broken windows or open doors, secure
basements, reinforce and secure walls which may have caved-in or
buckled on subject properties;
D.
Failure to properly secure walls which are subject to buckling or caving
onto adjacent or adjoining properties.
E.
§ 424-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-14
1:549
ANCHORED — Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
APPROVED — Means approved by the code official.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE DOCTRINE — The failure to observe a legal duty;
one which contemplates the guarding against some danger which is neither
common or obvious; the liability of an owner or mortgagee of ordinary
prudence and foresight to recognize the unreasonable risk of harm to
children or adults who may be enticed or lured to the premises and under
normal reasoning power cannot conceive danger to themselves; where
owner has created a dangerous condition attractive to children and adults
and has not taken such precautions as a reasonably prudent person would
take to prevent injury to such persons. (Also see "nuisance.")
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
BATHROOM — A room containing plumbing fixtures, including a bathtub or
shower.
BEDROOM — Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
BLIGHTED CONDITIONS — Conditions existing on property which is
unsecured, left open to the elements and without apparent and latent
supervision by the owner or mortgagee; such conditions include but are
not limited to: the exterior of premises is in disrepair; premises is regularly
occupied by vagrants or uninvited persons; contains unduly or uncommon
amounts of litter about the premises; fallen exterior building apertures
about the property; broken windows; accumulation of debris on the
premises, the value of the subject real property would be greater if the
building was removed, or assessed land value is greater than assessed
improvement value; the building has fire damage which has remained
unrepaired for a period of more than one year.
BOARDED — A boarded building secured against entry by apparatus which
is visible off the premises, and the apparatus is neither lawful or customary
to install on occupied structures.
BUILDING/STRUCTURE — See definition in § 253-1.
CITY — The City of Watertown, Jefferson and Dodge Counties, Wisconsin.
CODE OFFICIAL — The official in the City's Building, Safety and Zoning
Division who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this
chapter or any duly authorized representative; also known as "City Building
Inspector."
COMMITTEE — The Public Safety and Welfare Committee of the Common
Council of the City of Watertown.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
Failure to remove accumulated debris declared as a health or fire
hazard.
F.
§ 424-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-14
1:550
CONTINUING VIOLATIONS — Whenever any building or structure exists or
is allowed by the owner to be in constant violation of specific requirements
or prohibitions applicable to such building or structure, as provided in
building regulations under municipal ordinances or state codes.
DANGEROUS STRUCTURE — Any structure, whether occupied or
unoccupied, which is found to have any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the
public or its occupants are endangered:
Live/dead load stress: whenever the stress in any materials, member or
portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, exceeds more than 90%
of the materials' yield stress or is more than 1 1/2 times the working
stresses allowed in the Building Code for buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location.
A.
Fire, earthquake, flood and other causes: whenever 50% or more of a
structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any
other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability
thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less
than the minimum requirements of the Building Code for buildings of
similar structure, purpose or location.
B.
Falling timbers and unsecured ornamentations: whenever cornices,
parapets, walls, signs, gutters, downspouts, windows, supports or walls
with peeling paint, rotting wood, holes and other forms of material
decay are likely to fail or become detached or dislodged, or to collapse,
and thereby injure persons or damage property.
C.
Wind pressure: whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation of the exterior thereof, is not of
sufficient strength or stability as determined by a qualified and licensed
engineer, architect or inspector or is not anchored, attached or fastened
in place so as to be capable of resisting a window pressure of 2/3 of
that specified in the Building Code for buildings of similar structures,
purpose or location without exceeding the work stresses permitted in
the Building Code for such buildings.
D.
Buckling conditions: whenever any portion thereof was wrecked,
warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that wall or other
structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or
earthquakes than is required in the case of similar construction
specified in the Building Code. Or whenever the exterior walls or other
vertical structural members list, lean, split or buckle due to defective
materials or deterioration to such extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle 1/3 of the
base.
E.
Interior/exterior maintenance: when, upon inspection by the code
official, there is found a visible lack of interior or exterior maintenance
of 50% or more deterioration of any of the following components of a
building or structure set forth in this chapter or their appropriate code.
F.
§ 424-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-14
1:551
DERELICT BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof
containing any of the conditions set forth under "neglected," "abandoned
structure" or "dangerous structure," which may be either occupied or
unoccupied, or meets any of the following criteria:
DETACHED — When a structural element is physically disconnected from
another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.
DETERIORATION — To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and
lose effectiveness.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above
a said lot or lots.
Damaged supports, exclusive of foundation: whenever the building or
structure, exclusive of foundation, shows 33% or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members existing or 50%
damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members existing, either
in the interior or exterior of the structure.
G.
Fire resistance: whenever any building or structure which, whether
or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances,
does not meet the fire-resisting qualities or characteristics required by
the Building Code in the case of a constructed building of like nature,
height and occupancy.
H.
Utilities: whenever any building or structure is found to have
deteriorated, damaged or inadequate and faulty electrical wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus.
I.
Weather elements: ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and
foundations, broken windows or doors and deterioration of exterior
plasters or mortar, so as to allow rain, snow or other effects of the
weather to enter the building.
J.
Debris: whenever any portion of the debris of a building or structure
remains on a site for more than 30 days after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure.
K.
A. Has been ordered vacated by the code official;
B. Has been issued a correction notice by the code official;
Has been posted for violation more than once in any twelve-month
period and such violations have not been corrected;
C.
D. Is unsecured; or
E. Is not boarded.
§ 424-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-14
1:552
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT — Those structural members or assemblies of
members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs,
snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and
operating load between the equipment and the structure.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GUARD — A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that
minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable space, equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating, which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition which could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which cannot be driven upon
the public streets for reasons including but not limited to being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved
under its own power.
LABELED — Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed
a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized
testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with
product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production
of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the
equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been
tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, morning unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
NEGLECT — A structure possessed of any or all conditions as may be
set out and defined in "dangerous structure," "abandoned structure" and
"nuisance" and subject to being declared a neglected/derelict, abandoned
or dangerous building.
NUISANCE — A structure or building in such a state of deterioration or
abandonment that is a blighting influence on neighboring properties. The
§ 424-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-14
1:553
fact that buildings on neighboring properties are abandoned or deteriorated
is not a defense. Existence of three or more of the following conditions is
sufficient to establish a prima facie case that the structure or building is a
nuisance:
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building or having
possession of a space within a building.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, mortgagee, firm or corporation
having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the
official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person; and the executor or administrator
of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property
by a court.
A. The building has been vacant for more than five years.
The building has not had insurance coverage during at least 12 months
of the preceding 24 months.
B.
Cost of renovation of building would exceed value of the building if
renovated.
C.
D. Owner has not paid property taxes within the past three years.
Code officials have found the building to be unsecured and have
ordered same to be secured at two or more occasions within the past
two years, or it is presently unsecured.
E.
Building's heat, plumbing or electrical is inoperable or in a state of
substantial disrepair.
F.
Building has unsafe, hazardous or unsanitary conditions and has been
previously cited in violation of state or local building, fire or health
codes.
G.
Whenever there is a lack of maintenance of a building's environment,
e.g., fences, gates, sidewalks, steps, signs, outbuildings, deteriorating
and falling landscaping or premises overgrown with weeds and
vegetation; and/or there is an accumulation of refuse, garbage or other
conditions which renders a building or property a health or fire hazard.
H.
All or any portion of the building or structure is located within the
floodplain.
I.
§ 424-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-14
1:554
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PEST ELIMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved
pest elimination methods.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
REGISTRATION FEE — The fee required for registration of an abandoned,
dangerous or derelict building.
REPAIR — The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building
or structure for the purpose of its maintenance.
REQUESTED INSPECTION — Any additional inspection which is not part of
the code official's regular or mandated inspection program.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
SLEEPING UNIT — A room or space in which people sleep, which can
also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or
kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of
a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE — An offense in which the prosecution in a
legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its
case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was
prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required
to do.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed; an edifice, monument,
memorial or building of any kind or any piece or work artificially built up
or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, and which is
further defined as:
§ 424-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-14
1:555
SUBJECT STRUCTURE — Any structure as used in this chapter when
referring to unsafe, dangerous, derelict, neglected or abandoned or upon
which the code official has commenced abatement proceedings.
SUBSTANDARD — In violation of any of the requirements as set out in this
chapter, the Building Code, Electric Code or Plumbing Code.
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM — A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION — The deformation at which failure occurs and
which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80% or
less of the maximum strength.
UNOCCUPIED — Any premises or structure not presently used for a lawful
purpose or occupancy permitted by the owner.
UNSAFE — Any structure or building which is structurally or
environmentally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress or which
constitutes a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life, as
previously defined under "dangerous," "abandoned," "derelict" or
"neglected" structure.
UNSAFE APPENDAGES — Unsafe appendages include, but are not limited
to, parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuaries or other
appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to or
part of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise
unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in the Building Code.
UNSAFE USE — Any use of a structure or building constituting a hazard
to health, safety or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment.
UNSECURED — The lack of a secure means of ingress and egress, thus
allowing for occupancy or use of building or structure by unauthorized
persons.
VACANT PROPERTY — (1) Without legal occupancy and not maintained in
a manner allowing normal human habitation with access to utility services
such as light, water, heat; (2) currently unoccupied; or (3) occupied by
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure in which is conducted, or in
which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot
on which it is located.
A.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure which:
Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use
as identified in § 550-56;
(1)
Any portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be
devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory structure.
(2)
B.
§ 424-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-14
1:556
vagrants, squatters, trespassers or other persons having no legal right to
occupy premises.
VALUE/VALUATION — The estimated cost to replace the structure or
building in kind, based on either the building valuation data reported to the
code official to give an accurate assessment of building replacement costs.
VENTILATION — The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WAREHOUSING — Securing a structure against vandalism, deterioration
and unauthorized entry pending its return to active use or occupancy. All
windows, doors and other openings shall be closed and securely locked,
barricaded or otherwise secured.
WEEDS — Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall
not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
Install plywood or an acceptable material approved by the code official,
to adequately secure and cover the exterior of each opening in the
plywood or other acceptable material, as necessary, at each floor level
for proper ventilation.
A.
An acceptable alternative method: install the plywood or other
acceptable material on the interior of each opening and remove, repair
or replace all loose and damaged window panes, sashes, frames, trim
and or jambs: scrape, sand, seal, caulk and paint the exterior of each
opening.
B.
§ 424-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-14
1:557

ARTICLE III
General Requirements
§ 424-15. General.
§ 424-16. Exterior property areas.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of
structures, equipment and exterior property.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures
and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as
otherwise provided for in this chapter. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which
are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with
the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit within a commercial building or structure are
responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part
of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises
within a commercial building or structure which they occupy and
control.
C. Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a
clean and sanitary condition.
B. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water thereon or within any structure located thereon. Exception:
approved retention areas and reservoirs.
C. Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
D. Weeds.
(1) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds, grasses or plant growth exceeding eight inches in height
and all brush exceeding one foot in height, pursuant to § 446-23 of
the City's Code. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited, pursuant to
§ 446-23 of the City's Code.
(2) Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to
cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, he shall
§ 424-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-16
1:559
§ 424-17. Exterior structure.
be subject to prosecution in accordance with §§ 424-6C and 446-25
as prescribed by the City's Code. Upon failure to comply with the
notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the City or
private contractor hired by the City shall be authorized to enter
upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the
owner or agent responsible for the property, pursuant to Chapter
76, Article III, of the City's Code.
E. Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found,
they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will
not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent
reinfestation.
F. Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other
gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.
G. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in
good repair.
H. Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored
on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved
spray booth. Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo
major overhaul, including bodywork, provided that such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
I. Defacement of property.
(1) No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface
any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or
public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
(2) In the event such damage, mutilation, or defacement does occur on
the premises, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore
said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
A. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary, so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.
§ 424-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-17
1:560
(1) Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as
unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced, under § 424-8, to comply
with the International Building Code as required for existing
buildings:
(a) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by
nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
(b) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns and of
walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all
nominal loads or load effects;
(c) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
(d) Siding and masonry joints including joints between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and
skylights are not maintained weather-resistant or watertight;
(e) Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that
are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load
effects;
(f) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings,
are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not
properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects;
(g) Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and
supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks
or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not properly
anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads
and resisting all load effects;
(h) Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit
rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of
the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of
deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and
incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
(i) Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect
serviceability or flooring components that show signs of
deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are
incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
(j) Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all
nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
§ 424-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-17
1:561
(k) Overhang extensions or projections, including, but not limited
to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire
escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored
or that are anchored with connections not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
(l) Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar
appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and
handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or
that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting
all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or
(m) Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar
appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly
anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) When the safety or suitability of the condition is substantiated
otherwise to the code official by an approved method.
(b) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when
approved by the code official.
B. Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to
doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or
treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and
surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those
between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors
and skylights, shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight. All
metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit
such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation
stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
C. Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or
road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with
a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
D. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed dead and live loads.
§ 424-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-17
1:562
E. Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so
as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
F. Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting materials and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface-coated where required to prevent deterioration.
G. Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not
have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
H. Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim,
wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
I. Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions, including but not limited
to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly
anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements
and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
J. Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck,
porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
K. Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound
and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
L. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
M. Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
(1) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
(2) Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware.
§ 424-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-17
1:563
§ 424-18. Interior structures.
(3) Within the Central Business (CB) District all loose and damaged
window panes, sashes, frames, trim and/or jambs must be repaired
to sound condition, good repair and weathertight within 60
calendar days. Boarding of loose and damaged window panes,
sashes, frames, trim and/or jambs does not constitute repair.
[Added 8-19-2015 by Ord. No. 15-30]
N. Insect screens. During the period from June 1 to October 15, every door,
window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where
products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with
approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16
mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall
meet the standard for the International Building Code as required for
existing buildings.150
A. General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they
occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a
structure containing a rooming unit, housekeeping units, a hotel, a
dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential
occupancies shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the
shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
(1) Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as
unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the
International Building Code as required for existing buildings:
(a) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by
nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
(b) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns and of
walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all
nominal loads or load effects;
(c) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
(d) Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads
and load effects;
(e) Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces,
including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not
properly anchored or are anchored with connections not
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-18
1:564
§ 424-19. Component serviceability.
capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
(f) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings,
are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not
properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) When the safety or suitability of the interior structure is
substantiated otherwise to the code official by an approved
method.
(b) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when
approved by the code official.
B. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
C. Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling,
chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or
covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective
surface conditions shall be corrected.
D. Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch,
deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition
and good repair.
E. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
F. Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its
frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being
properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended
by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
A. General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition.
(1) Unsafe conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the
component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or
system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or
replaced to comply with the International Building Code as
required for existing buildings.
(a) Soils that have been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
§ 424-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-19
1:565
[1] Collapse of footing or foundation system;
[2] Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other
structural element due to soil expansion;
[3] Adverse effects to the design strength of footing,
foundation, concrete or other structural element due to a
chemical reaction from the soil;
[4] Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical
investigation;
[5] Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in
doubt; or
[6] Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or
other structural element due to the groundwater table.
(b) Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
[1] Deterioration;
[2] Ultimate deformation;
[3] Fractures;
[4] Fissures;
[5] Spalling;
[6] Exposed reinforcement; or
[7] Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
(c) Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
[1] Deterioration;
[2] Corrosion;
[3] Elastic deformation;
[4] Ultimate deformation;
[5] Stress or strain cracks;
[6] Joint fatigue; or
[7] Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
(d) Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
[1] Deterioration;
§ 424-19 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-19
1:566
[2] Ultimate deformation;
[3] Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;
[4] Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;
[5] Spalling;
[6] Exposed reinforcement; or
[7] Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
(e) Steel that has been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
[1] Deterioration;
[2] Elastic deformation;
[3] Ultimate deformation;
[4] Metal fatigue; or
[5] Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
(f) Wood that has been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
[1] Ultimate deformation;
[2] Deterioration;
[3] Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin;
[4] Fire damage beyond charring;
[5] Significant splits and checks;
[6] Horizontal shear cracks;
[7] Vertical shear cracks;
[8] Inadequate support;
[9] Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
[10] Excessive cutting and notching.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) When the safety or suitability of the components or equipment
in the structure is substantiated otherwise to the code official
by an approved method.
(b) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when
approved by the code official.
§ 424-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-20
1:567
§ 424-20. Handrails and guardrails.
§ 424-21. Rubbish and garbage.
§ 424-22. Pest elimination.
A. General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than
three risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair, and every
open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other
walking surface which is more than 24 inches (610 mm) above the floor
or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30
inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high,
measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished
floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than
42 inches (1,067 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony,
porch, deck or ramp or other walking surface.
B. Exception. Guards shall not be required where exempted by the
adopted Building Code.
A. Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in
approved containers.
(1) Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the
owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of
rubbish.
(2) Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without
first removing the doors.
C. Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an
approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
(1) Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling unit in a
commercial building or structure shall supply each of the following:
an approved leakproof, covered, outside recycling disposal
container for each dwelling unit and an approved leakproof,
covered, outside garbage container for each dwelling unit.
(2) Containers. The operator of every establishment producing
garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized,
approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers
for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises
for disposal.
§ 424-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-22
1:568
A. Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious
to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken
to prevent reinfestation.
B. Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the
structure.
C. Single occupant. The occupant of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.
D. Multiple occupancy. The owner of a nonresidential structure containing
two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming unit or a
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the
public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If
infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such
infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be
responsible for extermination.
E. Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. Exception:
Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the
owner shall be responsible for extermination.
§ 424-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-22
1:569

ARTICLE IV
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
§ 424-23. General.
§ 424-24. Light.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying
a structure.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises that does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation
herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying
with the International Building Code shall be permitted.
A. Habitable spaces.
(1) Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved
size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total
glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area
of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a
window of any room and such obstructions are located less than
three feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above
that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to
face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included
as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the
room.
(2) Exception. Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior
glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the
unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of
the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25
square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on
the total floor area being served.
B. Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings,
shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard
incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or
equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall
not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 mm). In other than residential
occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress,
stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by
the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one footcandle (11
lux) at floors, landings and treads.
§ 424-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-24
1:571
§ 424-25. Ventilation.
§ 424-26. Occupancy limitations.
C. Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment and fixtures.
A. Habitable spaces.
(1) Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The
total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at
least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in § 424-24A.
(2) Exception. Where rooms and spaces without openings to the
outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the
unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of
the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25
square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall
be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
B. Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as
required by Subsection A, except that a window shall not be required in
such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air
exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet
room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
C. Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or
dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be
permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.
Exceptions:
(1) Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
(2) Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be
considered cooking appliances.
D. Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes,
gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air
shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
E. Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted outside the
structure in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Exception: listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.
§ 424-24 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-26
1:572
A. Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units
and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be
separate from other adjoining spaces.
B. Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not
be less than seven feet (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens
shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm)
between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
C. Minimum ceiling heights.
(1) Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms,
toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling
height of not less than seven feet (2,134 mm).
(2) Exceptions:
(a) Basement room(s) in nonresidential buildings or structures
containing at least two or more dwelling units and occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a
ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches (2,033 mm)
with not less than six feet four inches (1,932 mm) of clear
height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
(b) Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the
room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet (2,134
mm) over not less than 1/3 of the required minimum floor area.
In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions
of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524
mm) or more shall be included.
D. Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room
shall comply with the requirements of Subsection D(1) through (5).
(1) Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet
(11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet
(6.5 m2).
(2) Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only
means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall
not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.
Exception: units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
(3) Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through
another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have
access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same
story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
(4) Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not
be used for sleeping purposes.
§ 424-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-26
1:573
(5) Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the light,
ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements
of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities
requirements of Article V; the heating facilities and electrical
receptacle requirements of Article VI; and the firesafety
requirements of Article VII.
E. Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall
not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger
the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.
F. Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living
unit from meeting the following requirements:
(1) A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear
floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit
occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less
than 320 square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be
exclusive of the areas required by Subsection F(2) and (3).
(2) The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of
not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation
conforming to §§ 424-24 and 424-25 of this chapter shall be
provided.
(3) The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
(4) The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
G. Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare
and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities
and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage.
§ 424-26 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-26
1:574
ARTICLE V
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
§ 424-27. General.
§ 424-28. Required facilities.
§ 424-29. Toilet rooms.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
A. Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be
maintained in a sanitary, safe, working condition. The lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close
proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water
closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the
required lavatory.
B. Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
C. Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower
having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each 10
occupants.
D. Employees' facilities.
(1) A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking
facility shall be available to employees.
(2) Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain,
water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink
or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet
rooms or bathrooms.
E. Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a
safe, sanitary and working condition in accordance with the
International Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or
cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities
at all times during occupancy of the premises.
A. Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not
constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space or to the
§ 424-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-29
1:575
§ 424-30. Plumbing systems and fixtures.
§ 424-31. Water system.
exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all
common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
B. Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units, dormitory units or housekeeping unit shall have access by
traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from
a common hall or passageway.
C. Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access
from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities
shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees'
working area, and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a
distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be
separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the
same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of
500 feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the
facilities.
D. Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall
be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit
such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which
such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be
maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition and in
compliance with Chs. SPS 381 to 384, Wis. Adm. Code, inclusive.
[Amended by Ord. No. 12-12]
B. Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
C. Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross-connection,
backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for
similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
A. General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to
either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All
kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall
§ 424-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-31
1:576
§ 424-32. Sanitary drainage system.
§ 424-33. Storm drainage.
be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance
with the International Plumbing Code.
B. Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be
located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets,
janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are
attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved
atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently
attached hose-connection vacuum breaker.
C. Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable
the fixtures to function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
D. Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly
installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and
laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110° F. (43° C.). A gasburning
water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room,
bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate
combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and
pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
B. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
C. Grease interceptors. Where it has been determined that a grease
interceptor is not being maintained and serviced as intended by this
chapter and the manufacturer's instructions, an approved interceptor
monitoring system shall be provided or a maintenance program shall be
established with documentation submitted to the code official.
A. General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other
open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
B. Compliance with stormwater regulations. The owner or occupant of any
building, structure or premises subject to this chapter shall comply with
all stormwater regulations of the City, as contained in Chapter 288,
Chapter 419 and Chapter 453 of the City's Code, as from time to time
amended.
§ 424-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-33
1:577

ARTICLE VI
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
§ 424-34. General.
§ 424-35. Heating facilities.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
A. Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as
required by this section.
B. Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of
the International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used
to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30° F. (-1° C.), a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be
maintained.
C. Heat supply.
(1) Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets
one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F. (20°
C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the
minimum room temperature shall not be required, provided
that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity.
The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be
as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
(b) In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°
F. (-1 ° C.) a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be
maintained.
D. Occupiable work spaces.
§ 424-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-35
1:579
§ 424-36. Mechanical equipment.
§ 424-37. Electrical facilities.
(1) Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to
maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during the
period the spaces are occupied.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
(b) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
E. Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures
shall be measured three feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center
of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each
exterior wall.
A. Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solidfuel-
burning appliances, cooking appliances and water-heating
appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working
condition and shall be capable of performing the intended function.
B. Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
C. Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
D. Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be
maintained in effective operation.
E. Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and
for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall
be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
F. Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel
supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom shall
not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is
specifically approved.
A. Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an
electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section
and § 424-35.
B. Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as
a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with NFPA 70. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240
§ 424-35 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-37
1:580
volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60
amperes.
C. Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system
in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle
and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or
damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the
defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
D. Abatement of electrical hazards associated with water exposure. The
provisions of this subsection shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water.
(1) Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor
circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible
cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge
protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses,
luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and
communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall
be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the National
Electric Code.
(2) Exception. The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired
where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer
indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that
requires replacement:
(a) Enclosed switches, rated 600 volts or less;
(b) Busway, rated 600 volts or less;
(c) Panelboards, rated 600 volts or less;
(d) Switchboards, rated 600 volts or less;
(e) Fire pump controllers, rated 600 volts or less;
(f) Manual and magnetic motor controllers;
(g) Motor control centers;
(h) Alternating-current high-voltage circuit breakers;
(i) Low-voltage power circuit breakers;
(j) Protective relays, meters and current transformers;
(k) Low- and medium-voltage switchgear;
(l) Liquid-filled transformers;
(m) Cast-resin transformers;
§ 424-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-37
1:581
§ 424-38. Electrical equipment.
§ 424-39. Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.
(n) Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends
have not been exposed to water;
(o) Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet
locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water;
(p) Luminaires that are listed as submersible;
(q) Motors;
(r) Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.
E. Abatement of electrical hazards associated with fire exposure. The
provisions of this subsection shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire.
(1) Electrical equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures,
including furnace, water heating, security system and power
distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire shall be
replaced in accordance with the provisions of the International
Building Code.
(2) Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures shall be
allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the
equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer's
representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained
damage that requires replacement.
A. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
B. Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit shall contain at
least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area
shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with
a ground-fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least
one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have groundfault
circuit interrupter protection.
C. Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen,
bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric luminaire.
A. General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in
compliance with Ch. SPS 318, Wis. Adm. Code. The most current
certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the
elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for
public inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a
publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The
inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic
§ 424-37 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-39
1:582
§ 424-40. Duct systems.
intervals listed in Ch. SPS 318, except where otherwise specified by the
code official. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-12]
B. Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one
elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building
is occupied.
C. Exception for single elevator: Buildings equipped with only one elevator
shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for
testing or servicing.
A. General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and
shall be capable of performing the required function.
§ 424-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-40
1:583

ARTICLE VII
Firesafety Requirements
§ 424-41. General.
§ 424-42. Means of egress.
§ 424-43. Fire-resistance ratings.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for firesafety relating to structures and
exterior premises, including firesafety facilities and equipment to be
provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such firesafety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises that does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
A. General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way.
Means of egress shall comply with NFPA 1 Fire Code.
B. Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the NFPA 1 Fire
Code shall be unobstructed.
C. Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily operable from
the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys,
special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms
to that permitted by the NFPA 1 Fire Code.
D. Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings
shall be maintained in accordance with the NFPA 1 Fire Code in effect
at the time of construction, except as follows: required emergency
escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the
room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar
devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue
openings, provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with
the NFPA 1 Fire Code that was in effect at the time of construction and
such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without
the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for
normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
A. Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of
fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and
floors shall be maintained.
B. Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained
in an operative condition. All fire and smoke-stop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke-barrier doors
shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
§ 424-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-44
1:585
§ 424-44. Fire protection systems.
A. General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an
alarm, or suppress or control a fire, or any combination thereof, shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
NFPA 1 Fire Code.
B. Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of
automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25.
C. Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4 and in dwelling
units not regulated in Group R occupancies of the NFPA 1 Fire Code,
regardless of occupant load, at all of the following locations:
(1) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
(2) In each room used for sleeping purposes.
(3) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In
dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper
level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level, provided that the
lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
(4) Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other
groups in accordance with the NFPA 1 Fire Code.
D. Power source.
(1) In Group R occupancies and in dwelling units not regulated as
Group R occupancies under the NFPA 1 Fire Code, single-station
smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building
wiring, provided that such wiring is served from a commercial
source, and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms
shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be
permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as
required for over-current protection.
(2) Exception. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely batteryoperated
in buildings where no construction is taking place,
buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and
in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that
do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available which could provide access for building wiring
without the removal of interior finishes.
E. Interconnection.
§ 424-44 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-44
1:586
§ 424-45. Referenced standards.
This section lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of
this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency
of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and
the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The
application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in § 424-2G.
(1) Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed
within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3 and R-4 and in
dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies under the NFPA 1
Fire Code, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a
manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the
alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in
all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening
doors closed.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
(b) Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the
removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the
structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement
available which could provide access for interconnection
without the removal of interior finishes.
A. International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW 6th Floor,
Washington, D.C. 20001.
Standard
Reference
Number Title
Referenced in Code
Section Number
IBC-09 International Building
Code®
424-2C, 424-13C, 424-23C,
424-37E(1)
IEBC-09 International Existing
Building Code®
424-17A(1) and N,
424-18A(1), 424-19A(1)
IFGC-09 International Fuel Gas
Code®
424-2C
IMC-09 International
Mechanical Code®
424-2C, 424-13C
B. National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA
02269.
§ 424-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-45
1:587
Standard
Reference
Number Title
Referenced in Code
Section Number
NFPA 1-09 Fire Code 424-13C, 424-42A, B, C
and D, 424-44A, C, D and
E
NFPA 25-08 Standard for the
Inspection, Testing, and
Maintenance of Water-
Based Fire Protection
Systems
424-44B
NFPA 70-08 National Electrical Code 424-2C, 424-13C, 424-37B
and D(1)
§ 424-45 WATERTOWN CODE § 424-45
1:588
Chapter 428
PUBLIC EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment establishments — See
Ch. 205.
Alcohol and other beverages — See Ch. 220.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 398.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 410.
§ 424-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-45
1:589

ARTICLE I
Music in Public Places
[Adopted as §§ 9.10 and 9.20 of the former City Code; amended in
its entirety by Ord. No. 02-22]
§ 428-1. License required.
§ 428-2. License types and fees.151
Music license: at a fee per year, expiring on the next June 30, as set by the
Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule.
§ 428-3. Application for license.
§ 428-4. Rules and regulations.
A. No public place may have live music, karaoke or a disc jockey without
first obtaining a license.
B. No license will be issued for a premises that is within 100 feet of a
residential district unless a conditional use permit has been issued or
the premises currently holds a dancing on premises or dance hall
license on the date the original ordinance went into effect (May 8,
2002). [Amended by Ord. No. 07-39]
A. Procedure. Application for a license shall be made by the owner, tenant,
lessee or renter of the premises and shall be directed to the City Clerk/
Treasurer. All licenses shall be subject to the review, approval and
recommendation of the Licensing Board. Any license not recommended
for approval will not be sent to the Common Council. All licenses shall
receive final approval by the Common Council.
B. Exceptions. No license shall be required for music conducted under the
auspices of proper church, school or municipal authorities, and their
associated agencies and organizations, or by any recognized fraternal
society solely for members and guests. It also does not include those
events that have obtained a special events license, outdoor sales permit
or other license or permit that includes other restrictions.
A. All premises licensed under this article shall be subject to the closing
hours as set forth in § 220-10 of the Municipal Code or other hours that
may be specified in other permits or codes.
B. All premises licensed under this article shall comply with the building,
fire and health codes of the state and City.
C. The Licensing Board, in its sole discretion, may deny any license
application or impose additional conditions on any license issued under
this article where such conditions are deemed reasonable and
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 428-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-4
1:591
§ 428-5. Revocation, suspension or refusal to renew license.
Upon notice and hearing, the Licensing Board may revoke, suspend or
refuse to renew any license issued under this article in the event the
licensee or activities conducted under or in association with such license
have violated state law or City ordinance or constitute a public nuisance or
threat to public safety, health or welfare. Such hearing shall be conducted
by the Licensing Board, and any subsequently ordered action by the
Licensing Board may be appealed to the Common Council, which may
overrule or amend such order by a majority vote of members present.
§ 428-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
necessary for the health, safety or well-being of the attending public
and the community at large.
D. No outdoor music will be permitted from any premises licensed under
this article without the necessary license or permit.
§ 428-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 428-6
1:592
ARTICLE II
Special Events License
[Adopted as §§ 9.18 and 9.20 of the former City Code; amended in
its entirety 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20]
§ 428-7. Special events.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable restrictions
for special events, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare
from the potential adverse effects which may arise from such special events
or the large number of persons attracted to such events upon premises
not regularly used for or developed to regularly accommodate such events
or gatherings. Such regulations are intended to protect against traffic
congestion, the overcrowding of lands, the potential for fires, explosion, riot
or disorder or other dangers to persons or property, the diversion of public
health, safety and emergency services from regular necessary duties, and
the additional cost to the community of providing public services necessary
to protect the public health, safety and welfare arising from such temporary
special events; and to promote the preservation of public peace and order,
the furtherance of sanitation and the safeguarding of the public health.
A. Definition. A "special event" is a temporary entertainment and
amusement activity defined as:
(1) Open to the general public and organized;
(2) Produced or sponsored by a person or organization which event is
extraordinary in that it is not ordinarily conducted on a daily or
regular normal average use basis as a lawful use of the premises
upon which such event is to occur;
(3) Cannot be held completely within the confines of an existing
building on such premises; or
(4) For which event it is reasonably anticipated that the number of
persons attending will at any time exceed the maximum occupancy
of the existing building(s) on the property or will substantially
exceed the regular normal average patronage and traffic generated
otherwise attending such premises as a result of its regular normal
average and lawful use. Such special events include, but are not
limited to, festivals, carnivals, athletic or contest tournaments,
picnics and fairs.
B. License required. Any person planning to hold a special event as
defined in Subsection A shall be required to obtain a special event
license prior to the event.
C. Exemptions. The requirement under Subsection C shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Any regularly established place of worship, stadium, athletic field,
arena, auditorium, coliseum or other permanently established
§ 428-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-7
1:593
place of assembly for special events for which it is reasonably
anticipated that the number of persons attending will not exceed
the maximum seating capacity of the structure where the assembly
is held.
(2) Special events that sole purpose is to celebrate a federally
recognized holiday must apply but all fees will be waived.
D. Regulations.
(1) Duration and hours of operation. The duration of any special event
shall not exceed four consecutive days and any permit issued under
this section shall specify the days upon which the event shall occur.
No special event shall be open to the public except between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on any day of the week, occurring
within the duration of the special event. Such permit shall also
specify the hours during which pre-event setup and post-event
takedown operations may occur and no such operations may be
conducted other than as so specified.
(2) Maximum attendance. A special event license shall specify the
maximum peak number of people to attend the special event. The
licensee shall not sell tickets to nor allow the attendance of more
people at the special event at any time than as specified in the
license. Any tickets sold or advertisement made prior to the grant
of a license under this section and the satisfaction of all conditions
of such license shall include therein in like medium, a statement
that "the occurrence of the [special event] remains subject to the
approval of the City of Watertown."
(3) Parking on park property. Any special event that requires parking
on park property, other than a public roadway or parking area,
shall apply to the Parks and Recreation Director as provided in
Watertown Municipal Code § 398-5B.
(4) Sanitary facilities and potable water. All sanitary facilities and
potable water facilities shall be provided for the special event by
the event organizer.
(5) Solid waste. The event organizer shall be responsible for the
holding, collection and disposing of solid waste material.
(6) Illumination. If the special event is to continue during hours of
darkness, illumination shall be sufficient to light the entire area of
the event at the rate of at least five lumens, without the spillage of
such illumination unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the
special event premises.
(7) Noise. No licensee shall permit any sound created by the special
event activity to carry unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the
special event premises.
§ 428-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 428-7
1:594
(8) Fire protection. A licensee shall provide all fire protection
applicable to the special event activities and premises as required
by the municipal Fire Prevention Code (Chapter 303) and the
Wisconsin Administrative Code (DSPS 314), including alarms,
extinguishing devices, fire lanes and fire escapes.
(9) Compliance with other Code provisions. No special event shall
occur unless all other necessary municipal permits, licenses and
approvals applicable to the special event activities have been
granted and any license granted under this subsection shall be
conditioned upon the licensee obtaining all such other licenses,
permits and approvals.
E. Application.
(1) Any person intending to hold, sponsor or produce a special event
shall make written application for a special event license and file
same with the City Clerk's Office at least 45 calendar days prior to
the date of the special event.
(2) The application shall contain and disclose:
(a) The name, address, date of birth and telephone numbers of the
authorized representative of the applicant who shall be
responsible for the conduct of the special event and available
to the City at all times for all communications and necessary
contacts.
(b) The address and map of all property upon which the special
event is to be held and any streets the special event organizer
wishes to close.
(c) The nature or purpose of the special event.
(d) The total number of days and/or hours during which the special
event is to last, including setup and takedown operations.
(e) The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall
permit to attend at any time, not to exceed the maximum
number which can reasonably assemble at the location of the
special event in consideration of the nature of the special
event.
(f) Any plans for fencing the location of the special event and the
gates contained in such fence. Include a diagram, subject to
change by recommendation of the Police Department and
Streets Department.
(g) Any plans for selling food or beverages. If yes, please contact
the Health Department for permits. If the event is taking place
in a City park, please also obtain a concession permit
(Watertown Municipal Code § 398-20).
§ 428-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-7
1:595
(h) Any plans for vendors selling items other than food or
beverages, yes or no. If yes, please contact the Clerk's Office
for information on obtaining a transient merchant permit.
(i) Any plans for selling (including giving away) alcohol. All
alcohol related events shall comply with the requirements laid
out in Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 125 and Chapter 220 of the
Watertown Municipal Code.
(j) If the event involves any show or exhibition of animals, a
special use permit may be required under § 550-52J of the
Watertown Municipal Code.
(3) No application shall be accepted as filed until the City Clerk's
Office determines that the information in the application is
complete and sufficient for filing purposes as required under this
Subsection E. Upon filing, the City Clerk's Office shall distribute
copies of the application to the Police, Fire, Health, Street and
Recreation Departments.
F. Indemnity. The special event license application shall contain a
statement that: "The applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless
the City from and against all liabilities, claims, demands, judgments,
losses and all suits at law or in equity, costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorney fees, for injury or death of any person or loss or
damage to the property of any person, firm, organization or
corporation, arising in any way as a consequence of the granting of a
license for a special event." No license may be issued unless the
applicant has agreed to the terms of this statement on the written
application.
G. Insurance. Each applicant for a special event license that includes
alcohol, more than 200 people per day or involves a road closure shall
furnish to the City, no later than 10 days prior to the special event, a
certificate of insurance written by a company licensed in the State of
Wisconsin, approved by the City Attorney and covering any and all
liability or obligations which may result from the operations by the
applicant's employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, and
including workers' compensation coverage in accordance with Ch. 101,
Wis. Stats. The certificate shall provide that the company will furnish
the City with a ten-day prior written notice of cancellation, nonrenewal
or material change. The insurance shall be written in comprehensive
form and shall protect the applicant and City against claims arising
from injuries to members of the public or damage to property of others
arising out of any act or omission of the applicant, its employees,
agents, contractors and subcontractors. The policy of insurance shall
provide minimum combined single limits for bodily injury and property
damage of at least $1,000,000 per person/aggregate.
H. Mapped routes. All permit applications for special events, including
road closures, runs, rides, walks, or parades, shall include a detailed
§ 428-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 428-7
1:596
map of the proposed route. Routes for annual events must be submitted
with the application regardless of whether previously submitted.
Alteration of proposed routes may be made by the City prior to approval
of the permit. In the event that the organizers or sponsors of any special
event deviate from the route submitted without approval from the City,
the organizers or sponsors of such special events may be denied a
permit for the following calendar year.
I. License fees.
(1) Concurrent with the filing of any application for a special event
license, the applicant shall pay a fee as established in the City of
Watertown Municipal Fee Schedule.
(2) In addition, a special event licensee shall be responsible for and
pay to the City a fee for all City services for the special event. Such
fees shall not exceed the actual cost of providing the services. Such
fee shall be paid to the City by the licensee within 30 days of the
date of itemized invoice for same prepared by the City subsequent
to the special event.
(3) Tiered charge. The cost for all applicable City services for special
events for organizations shall be billed in the following manner:
First year of event No charge for City expenses
Second year of event 20% of City expenses charged
Third year of event 40% of City expenses charged
Fourth year of event 60% of City expenses charged
Fifth year of event 80% of City expenses charged
Sixth year of event and
succeeding years
100% of City expenses charged
J. Approval or denial of application. Upon receipt of a completed
application, the City Clerk shall submit the application for review to the
relevant City Departments, which shall approve, conditionally approve
or deny the license within 21 calendar days of its filing. Upon
recommendation of any City Departments, the Clerk shall have the
authority to modify the time and place or specified activities of a special
event to facilitate crowd control in the interests of relieving congestion
and promoting public safety. The Clerk shall issue the license if it
complies with all terms and provisions of this section. Grounds for
denial of the application shall include:
(1) Any false or misleading statements set forth upon the application.
(2) The special event is of such a size or nature so as to require the
diversion of so great a number of municipal services so as to deny
reasonable services to the City as a whole.
§ 428-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-7
1:597
§ 428-8. through § 428-10. (Reserved)
(3) The time, size and nature of the special event would unduly disrupt
the safe and orderly use of any street or public place or material
portion thereof, which is ordinarily subject to congestion or traffic
at the proposed time or substantially interrupts the safe and
orderly movement of traffic.
(4) The vehicles, temporary structures, sanitary facilities, tents,
equipment or other materials used in the special event do not
comply with or meet all applicable health, fire or safety
requirements.
(5) The special event will interfere or conflict with another special
event for which an application had been previously filed or with a
construction or public works project.
(6) The conduct of the special event will be contrary to law, including
noise regulations.
(7) Either the applicant or a proposed special event were previously
licensed for a prior special event under this section and violated
any term of this section while operating under such license.
(8) Any outstanding payments due to the City.
K. Appeal of application denial or modification. Any applicant who has
been denied a special event license or license has been modified may,
upon written request within five days of denial or notice of modification,
seek review of the matter before the Licensing Board. The appeal
procedures shall be those which are laid out in Chapter 10 of the
Watertown Municipal Code. If the applicant is still unsatisfied with the
decision of the Licensing Board, the applicant may seek judicial review
of the denial in the form of certiorari review to the Jefferson or Dodge
County Circuit Court within 30 days of the Licensing Board's decision.
L. Enforcement. Any person who violates any provision of this section or
who violates any condition upon which a special event license is
granted shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $1,000 nor more
than $10,000. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate
offense. In addition, the City may enforce this section by way of
injunctive relief and all other remedies available at law and in equity.
§ 428-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 428-8
1:598
ARTICLE III
Farmers Market
[Adopted as §§ 9.02 and 9.20 of the former City Code; amended in
its entirety by Ord. No. 95-12]
§ 428-11. Operation of market. [Amended by Ord. No. 10-18]
The Watertown Farmers Market, which occurs within the corporate City
limits of the City of Watertown on each Tuesday of each month between
May and November, shall be administered by the Watertown Area Chamber
of Commerce. Subject to the following restrictions, the operation and
promotion of the event, including the establishment of rules and regulations
governing the vendors, the location of the vendors' leased stalls, and
appropriate fees, are delegated to the Chamber of Commerce, which shall
retain all revenues that it generates.
§ 428-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
A. Location of farmers market. The farmers market may be held within the
border of Riverside Park, as defined at § 428-15 of Article IV of this
chapter. A person who has leased space shall not place any
merchandise outside of the limits of the stall assigned by the Watertown
Area Chamber of Commerce and must stay within the perimeter of his
leased area. Sale of merchandise by any firm or person at the farmers
market other than within the confines of leased stalls as mentioned
hereinabove is prohibited.
B. Sale of livestock. No person shall offer for sale, barter, trade or give
away any animals at the farmers market.
§ 428-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-12
1:599

ARTICLE IV
Annual Riverfest Celebration
[Adopted as § 11.115 of the former City Code]
§ 428-13. Annual festival.
The Annual Riverfest Celebration which occurs within the corporate City
limits of the City of Watertown in the month of August shall be subject to
the rules and regulations in this article.
§ 428-14. Riverfest Celebration Commission.
§ 428-15. Location.
Location. The Annual Riverfest Celebration shall be held in Riverside Park,
which includes the volleyball area, the ball diamonds, the island, swimming
pool and entire park area between Labaree Street and the Rock River from
Boughton Street west up to and including the west playground area. This
area shall be designated the Riverfest Grounds. (See map.152)
§ 428-16. Traffic control.
A. There is hereby established a Riverfest Celebration Commission for the
City, which shall consist of not more than 15 members to be selected by
the Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Riverfest Celebration
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Common Council, to serve for a term of one year without compensation.
B. The Chairperson of the Riverfest Celebration Commission is authorized
to execute such documents as are necessary on behalf of the City to
conduct the Annual Riverfest Celebration, subject to the terms and
conditions outlined below.
A. The Police Department will be authorized to close Riverside Park for
through traffic for up to three days prior to and one day after the
scheduled event on Labaree Street from Anne Street to Short Street.
Alternate route around the park shall be from Hus Drive to North
Fourth Street to Hill Street to Werner Street to Boughton Street.
Barricades shall be used to control traffic on Labaree Street between
North Fourth Street and Boughton Street as necessary for vehicle and
crowd safety.
B. The area just east of the barricade at Perry and Labaree Streets shall be
designated for police/emergency vehicles.
C. At the intersection of Perry and Labaree Streets on the south side of
Labaree Street, up to two parking spaces shall be marked as a "loading
zone" for the discharge and pickup of passengers only.
152. Editor's Note: The map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 428-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-16
1:601
§ 428-17. Fermented malt beverages.
§ 428-18. Regulation of commercial activities.
D. The south side of Labaree Street from the loading zone at Perry and
Labaree Streets shall be marked and designated for handicapped
parking from Perry Street to Boughton Street.
E. The police shall be authorized to post "no parking" signs on one side of
all the narrow streets in the Riverfest Grounds area in the interest of
crowd safety, traffic control or an emergency vehicle route.
A. Fermented malt beverages may be sold at designated stations within
the confines of the Riverfest Grounds during the course of the
celebration, and a license for the sale of fermented malt beverages is
not required pursuant to § 125.06(6), Wis. Stats., for the reason that the
City of Watertown will be conducting the celebration through an
appointed commission.
B. All receipts from the sale of fermented malt beverages during the
course of the celebration will be deposited to the treasury of the City of
Watertown.
C. The City of Watertown Riverfest Celebration Commission may hire
employees to dispense fermented malt beverages on the Riverfest
Grounds during the course of the celebration and arrange whatever
compensation it deems justified under the circumstances.
D. There shall be at least one licensed operator at each of the designated
stations on the premises where fermented malt beverages are
dispensed during the course of the celebration at all times that
fermented malt beverages are dispensed. The one or more licensed
operators shall have responsibility for supervising unlicensed
employees who are dispensing fermented malt beverages in their areas.
E. Section 410-52 of Chapter 410 of this Code, pertaining to the
possession of fermented malt beverages on public streets, sidewalks
and public parking lots, is to be waived for the dates of the celebration
in such areas of the Riverfest Grounds as designated by the Mayor and
Chief of Police, except that it shall not be allowed to dispense fermented
malt beverages at the volleyball courts unless by Commission approval.
F. During the event there shall be no alcohol beverages carried into or out
of the Riverfest Grounds.
A. The purpose of the Annual Riverfest Celebration is to provide first-class
entertainment, high-quality food, and a congenial atmosphere for the
enjoyment of the citizens of the City and surrounding communities; to
attract visitors and tourists to the City; and to further the economic
interests of the businesspersons of the City. It is the purpose of this
article to reduce or minimize the dangers or hazards to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic on or about the Riverfest Grounds; to reduce or
§ 428-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 428-18
1:602
§ 428-19. Regulation of noncommercial activities. [Added by Ord.
No. 91-84; amended by Ord. No. 96-39]
minimize the possibility of damage to public or private property and
the liability of the City therefor; to reduce or minimize the proliferation
of trash, garbage and litter arising out of the Riverfest Celebration; to
reduce or minimize the risks to public safety in the crowds and control
of the crowds on or about the Riverfest Grounds; and to promote the
Riverfest Celebration in furtherance of and in a manner consistent with
the public health, safety, welfare, tranquility and interest.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization to vend, sell,
dispose or offer to vend, sell, dispose or display any goods, wares or
merchandise on any public sidewalk, public way, street, alley or within
the public right-of-way upon the Riverfest Grounds, as defined in this
section, or within 500 feet of any of the primary entrances to the
Riverfest Grounds, without first having obtained a permit from the
Riverfest Commission for that purpose and having paid a permit fee
therefor, as set by said Commission.
C. Application for the permit to vend, sell, dispose or display merchandise,
goods or wares shall be made in writing to the City Clerk/Treasurer at
least two weeks prior to the beginning of the Riverfest Celebration. The
application shall contain the name of the applicant, if an individual; the
names of partners, if a copartnership; or the names of principal officers,
if a corporation, church, club or charitable institution, and shall include
the location of the place or places where such merchandise, goods or
wares are to be so displayed and sold. The Riverfest Commission shall
be authorized to designate where such merchandise, goods or wares
are to be so displayed and sold, if at all. [Added by Ord. No. 89-78]
A. No person shall operate, ride or use for transportation or recreation any
wheeled device while on the grounds defined in this section, other than
law enforcement officers in the normal course of their duties on the
grounds. A "wheeled device" shall include but not be limited to the
following: roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters
and roller skis.
B. No person shall fail to obey any official sign or warning erected on the
grounds to control pedestrian or vehicular traffic, which includes all
entrance and exit signs at all concession stands on the celebration
grounds.
§ 428-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-19
1:603
Chapter 442
SNOWMOBILES
§ 442-1. Snowmobile routes. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-109; Ord. No.
94-69153]
Pursuant to the authority granted in § 350.04(2), Wis. Stats., and subject to
the requirements of §§ 350.02 and 350.04, Wis. Stats., the following streets
within the City are designed as snowmobile routes:
§ 442-2. State snowmobile laws adopted. [Amended by Ord. No.
84-17]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory
provisions in Ch. 350, Wis. Stats., describing and defining regulations with
respect to snowmobiles, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to
penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the
statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are adopted and by
reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein
by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future additions,
amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein
are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform
statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the
state.
Chapter 446
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 319.
Housing standards — See Ch. 332.
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Property maintenance, commercial — See Ch.
428.
A. Along Silver Creek Road from a point 500 feet west of North Water
Street to a point 650 feet further west, along the Chicago and
Northwestern Railroad right-of-way, to the City limits.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 428-19 WATERTOWN CODE § 442-2
1:604
ARTICLE I
Recycling
§ 446-1. Title.
This article shall be the "Recycling Ordinance for the City of Watertown."
§ 446-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote recycling, composting and resource
recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as
provided in § 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 446-3. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted as authorized under § 287.09(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 446-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 446-5. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where
any terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting,
the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a
provision of this article is required by Wisconsin Statutes or by a standard
in Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the article provision is unclear,
the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes and
the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this
article or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
article.
§ 446-6. Applicability.
The requirements of this article shall apply to all persons, businesses and
other legal entities within the corporate City limits of the City of Watertown,
Wisconsin.
§ 446-7. Administration.
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the appropriate City
officials of the City of Watertown.
§ 446-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-8
1:605
§ 446-8. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall take effect on March 15, 1994, for all
areas in the City served by curbside collection as of that date. As the
curbside collection is expanded within the City, the new areas shall then be
covered by this article. Total compliance for every person or business within
the City shall be obtained no later than December 31, 1994.
§ 446-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 2.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, water
heater, garbage compactor, refrigerator or stove.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing five or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This
term does not include multiple-family dwellings.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS or MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
Code No. 7.
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 446-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-9
1:606
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit as defined in § 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state
agency or authority or federal agency.
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code No. 1.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods; hazardous waste, as defined in § 291.01(7),
Wis. Stats.; waste from construction and demolition of structures; scrap
automobiles; or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(17),
Wis. Stats.
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI Code No. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI Code No. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries; major
appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper
or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers;
magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including
those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple
resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bimetal containers.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter and three feet in length. This term does not include tree stumps.
§ 446-10. Separation of recyclable materials.
Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the
following materials from post-consumer waste:
A. Lead acid batteries.
B. Major appliances.
C. Waste oil.
§ 446-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-10
1:607
§ 446-11. Separation requirements exempted.
The separation requirements of § 446-10 do not apply to the following:
§ 446-12. Care of separated recyclable materials.
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 446-10 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such
as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable materials,
including but not limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste and
agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a
D. Yard waste.
E. Aluminum containers.
F. Bimetal containers.
G. Corrugated paper or other container board.
H. Foam polystyrene packaging.
I. Glass containers.
J. Magazines.
K. Newspaper.
L. Office paper.
M. Rigid plastic containers made of PETE and HDPE (classified as No. 1
and No. 2, respectively), PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple
resins (classified as No. 3 through No. 7, respectively) will not be
subject to this article. [Amended by Ord. No. 09-24]
N. Steel containers.
O. Waste tires.
A. Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send
their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the
materials specified in § 446-10 from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
B. Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less
than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste
burned as supplemental fuel.
C. A recyclable material specified in § 446-10E through O for which a
variance has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources
under § 287.11(2m), Wis. Stats., or § NR 544.14, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 446-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-12
1:608
manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather
conditions.
§ 446-13. Lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and tires
and yard waste. [Amended by Ord. No. 06-33]
Occupants of single-family and two-to-four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall manage lead
acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, waste tires and yard waste as
follows:
A. Lead acid batteries will not be accepted by the City. All lead acid
batteries must be taken to area retailers who sell vehicle batteries or to
a salvage yard.
B. Major appliances with compressors will not be accepted by the City.
Residents desiring to dispose of refrigerators, freezers, dehumidifiers,
or air conditioners must have the freon removed from those appliances
by a state-certified contractor before the City will accept the appliance
for pickup. If a resident places these items curbside for pickup, all
doors on the equipment shall be removed and placed on the side of the
equipment to prevent children from being injured by crawling into the
equipment. Failure to remove the doors when placing those items on
the curb shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable by a
forfeiture of not less than $25 nor more than $100. [Amended by Ord.
No. 11-03]
C. Waste oil and tires shall not be picked up by the City in its curbside
collection system. Waste oil may be delivered by residents to the City's
Recycling Center in sealed, disposable containers, not larger than one
gallon in capacity. These containers will be accepted by the Recycling
Center. Residents desiring to dispose of tires shall do so through a tire
dealer or private contractor. The City will not accept tires at its
Recycling Center.
D. Yard waste consisting of grass clippings, leaves, twigs and branches
less than six inches in diameter and under three feet in length and other
organic yard materials shall be separated from refuse. Grass clippings,
leaves, twigs and branches less than six inches in diameter and under
three feet in length and other organic yard materials shall not be
collected by the City, except during the fall season when leaves only
may be placed out for collection in the tree border in a loose, neatly
piled state. The City shall make a dropoff site available to City residents
during posted hours from April to December of each year, depending
upon weather and temperature conditions, at the discretion of the
department head. The City will compost these materials south of the old
City landfill on Boomer Street. All boxes or other containers used by
City residents to transport the yard waste shall be removed by said
persons immediately after depositing the contents thereof at the
dropoff site. Plastic bags only may be disposed of at the dropoff site. If a
citizen of Watertown is physically unable to deliver the materials
§ 446-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-13
1:609
§ 446-14. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.
[Amended by Ord. No. 06-33]
Except as otherwise directed by the appropriate City officials, occupants of
single-family and two-to-four-unit residences shall do the following for the
preparation and collection of the separated materials specified in § 446-10E
through O:
referred to hereinabove at the dropoff site, due to a physical disability
or due to lack of transportation, he or she may obtain a yearly permit
from the City, to be issued between March 1 and April 1 of each year,
at a cost as set by the Common Council and provided under separate
fee schedule. The City will grant an exemption when no person in
that individual household has a vehicle and/or a driver's license, or if
the person presents a certification from his or her personal physician
that he or she is unable to transport the material due to physical
disability. Application for the exemption permit shall be obtained from
the Street Department and, when returned, shall be granted by the
Street Department after being approved by the Street Superintendent
or his designee. [Amended by Ord. No. 09-24; Ord. No. 11-03154]
A. Citizens of the City who reside in one- to four-family residential units
shall be provided one authorized recycling container per residential
unit. All recyclable materials shall be prepared and collected as set
forth below. Except as otherwise stated, all recyclable materials shall be
commingled in said container. Such container shall be placed at the
edge of the street or roadside in an area of easy accessibility no sooner
than 12:00 noon on the day before collection and no later than 6:00 a.m.
on the designated day of pickup. Empty containers shall be removed
before 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection. Recyclables that have been
scattered by wind, animals, vandals or the like shall be the
responsibility of the residents to retrieve properly. [Amended by Ord.
No. 08-10; Ord. No. 11-03]
B. Additional authorized recycling containers must be purchased from the
City. Replacement of a damaged, lost or stolen recycling container must
be purchased from the City. Any container other than the blue
containers with the City of Watertown logo thereon shall not be
permitted to be used for recycling collection.
C. If a resident is physically unable to place the recycling container at
roadside, said container will be picked up near the residence.
Certification of the disability will be made by the Health Officer.
D. Aluminum cans, foil and food trays shall be thoroughly cleaned or
rinsed and placed in the recycling container for collection.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 446-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-14
1:610
§ 446-15. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings. [Amended by Ord. No. 06-33]
E. Bimetal containers shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed, and the
labels removed, and then placed in the recycling container for
collection.
F. Corrugated paper or other container board shall be free of debris,
flattened, and placed inside the recycling container for collection.
G. Glass bottles and jars shall be cleaned and rinsed, and all metal and
plastic caps and rings shall be removed, and then the items shall be
placed unbroken in the recycling container for collection.
H. Dry magazines, catalogs, dry newspaper and newspaper
advertisements, and dry office paper shall be placed inside the
recycling container for collection.
I. Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows:
(1) Plastic containers made of PETE (No. 1), such as two-liter soda
bottles, shall be rinsed and placed within the recycling container
for collection. These plastic containers may be flattened to save
space within the recycling container.
(2) Plastic containers made of HDPE (No. 2) such as milk jugs, food
tubs and bottles containing detergent, etc., shall be rinsed and
placed within the recycling container for collection. These plastic
containers may be flattened to save space within the recycling
container.
J. Each new residence which is a one- to four-family facility shall be
provided with one City of Watertown authorized container. [Amended
by Ord. No. 08-10; Ord. No. 11-03]
K. Waste tires shall be delivered by the owner to a tire dealer or private
contractor.
A. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in § 446-10E through O:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established
recycling program and thereafter of any changes in the program.
(3) Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid
waste and for the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.155
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 446-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-15
1:611
§ 446-16. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties. [Amended by Ord. No.
06-33; Ord. No. 13-22]
(4) Notify tenants which materials are collected, how to prepare the
materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection
methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact
person or company, including a name, address and telephone
number.
(5) The property owner is responsible for the proper containerizing,
disposal and placement for all trash, garbage, recycling or other
debris placed at the curb or property line by tenants and occupants
of multiple-family dwellings for City collection services.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A above do not apply to the
owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the postconsumer
waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a
processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources
that recovers for recycling the materials specified in § 446-10E through
O from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.156
A. Owners or designated agents of businesses and institutional or other
nonresidential facilities and properties shall do all of the following to
recycle the materials specified in § 446-10E through O:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the recycling program and
thereafter any changes that may occur in the program.
(3) Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants of their nonresidential
facilities and properties and provide for the transportation and
delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants which materials are collected,
how to prepare materials in order to meet the processing
requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company, including a name,
address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A above do not apply to the
owners or designated agents of businesses or institutional or other
nonresidential facilities and properties if the post-consumer waste
generated within the facility or property is treated at a processing
facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 446-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-16
1:612
§ 446-17. Title to recyclable material. [Amended by Ord. No. 06-33]
The title to recyclable material placed curbside for collection by the citizens
of the City of Watertown or delivered to the Recycling Center within the City
of Watertown shall transfer to the City of Watertown upon placement. Any
person not authorized by the proper City officials to pick up said materials
and who removes said materials from the residential recycling bins or from
the Recycling Center shall be guilty of theft and subject to a fine of not less
than $200 nor more than $500.
§ 446-18. Recycling center. [Amended by Ord. No. 06-33]
The City of Watertown will provide, for the use of its citizens living in one- to
four-family dwelling units, a recycling center for the purpose of accepting,
storing, marketing and transporting of recyclable waste as set forth herein.
The citizens living in one- to four-family dwelling units may bring proper
recyclable waste generated from their homes to such facility at such place
and times as established hereafter by the City.
for recycling the materials specified in § 446-10E through O from solid
waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
§ 446-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-18
1:613

ARTICLE II
Garbage and Refuse Disposal
[Added by Ord. No. 13-24]
§ 446-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Discarded materials resulting from the handling, processing,
storage and consumption of food.
INSTITUTIONAL — Refers to all buildings or structures containing more
than four family or housekeeping units, schools, commercial
establishments, industry or other institutions.
REFUSE — Combustible and noncombustible rubbish, including but not
limited to wood, nonrecyclable plastics and cloth. "Refuse" does not include
all recyclable items identified in Article I, Recycling, of this chapter; motor
vehicle bodies and engines; large machinery or equipment; animal
carcasses or bodies; and lumber, concrete or other debris resulting from
construction due to remodeling or maintenance, or demolition of structures.
RESIDENTIAL — Refers to a building or portion thereof used exclusively as
a residence or sleeping place.
§ 446-20. Residential collections.
A. Approved containers for garbage and refuse storage.
(1) Plastic carts. Each residential premises shall be provided by the
City of Watertown with one authorized plastic container for
garbage and refuse disposal. All plastic bags containing garbage or
refuse shall be placed for collection within an approved City-issued
plastic container with a securely tied top closure.
B. Disposal of materials.
(1) Garbage shall be drained and wrapped in paper or plastic prior to
placement in approved container listed in Subsection A(1).
(2) No ashes or other burnt material shall be placed out for collection
in a hot condition which could cause a fire. All ashes and other
burnt material shall be placed in plastic bags, as set forth in
Subsection A(1), to ensure that the material has cooled off.
(3) Brush acceptable for curbside pickup shall be a maximum of three
feet in length and shall not exceed six inches in diameter. Brush is
to be piled in an easily accessible location at or near the curbside.
Brush shall be piled with the cut ends facing one direction.
Branches shall be limbed to a maximum width of four feet. All roots
are to be removed, and no yard waste or other debris shall be
placed in the brush pile.157
§ 446-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-20
1:615
§ 446-21. Institutional collections.
C. Manner of collection.
(1) The collection and removal of garbage and refuse in residential
districts of the City shall be made once weekly.
(2) The resident shall place garbage and refuse containers a the edge
of the street or alley abutting his or her property no sooner than
12:00 noon on the day before collection and no later than 6:00 a.m.
on the day which collection will be made. Empty containers shall be
removed before 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection. If an individual is
physically unable to place garbage and refuse containers at the
edge of the street or alley, said containers will be picked up near
the residence. Certification of the disability shall be made by the
Health Officer.
(3) The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage shall be
conducted under the supervision, direction and control of the
Street Superintendent or designee with assistance from the Health
Officer as needed.
D. Items not collected. Sofa sleepers, mattresses, box springs, and rollaway
beds shall not be collected by the City unless the steel or metal
frames have been previously removed. The following items will not be
collected: televisions, computer monitors, printers, CPUs, laptops,
video displays, keyboards, mouse, external hand devices, fax machines,
DVD players, VCRs, oil filters and microwaves, toasters, toaster ovens,
pizza ovens, space heaters, electric fans, blenders, food processors,
electric mixers, pots and pans, sump pumps, hair dryers, corded or
uncorded household electronics and appliances, garbage disposals,
water pipes and faucets, carpeting, carpet padding and carpet matting,
oil filters and used oil. Residents are required to take the above items to
the Recycling Center for proper disposal, except that all carpeting,
carpet padding and carpet matting shall be taken by residents to Y's
Way Flooring. Construction debris will be collected by the City only if it
is placed in City-approved containers. The size of any construction
debris shall be so reduced that the cover of the container shall be
closed at the time of pickup.158
A. Manner of collections.
(1) The collection and removal of garbage and refuse in institutional
districts of the City shall be made by private contractors under this
section.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 446-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-21
1:616
(2) The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage and refuse
under this section shall be conducted under the supervision,
direction and control of the Street Department. No private
contractor shall be permitted to pick up and deposit in a licensed
landfill any item identified as a recyclable item in Article I,
Recycling, of this chapter.
B. Vehicles for collecting garbage and refuse. Any person engaged in the
business of collecting garbage and refuse in the City shall use rearloading,
side-loading, or self-loading, completely enclosed vehicles.
C. Dumping garbage and refuse. All garbage and refuse is to be taken to a
landfill licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 446-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-21
1:617

ARTICLE III
Control of Weeds, Grasses and Brush
§ 446-22. Noxious weeds.
Noxious weeds are defined as and shall include:
A. Any and all weeds and other vegetation prohibited by § 66.0407, Wis.
Stats., or any Wisconsin Administrative Code provision, and as they may
be from time to time amended.
B. Each and every of the following:
Common Name(s) Botanical Name(s)
Buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica
Rhamnus frangula
Burdock (yellowdock) Artium lappa
Field bindweed (wild morning
glory)
Convolvulus arvensis
Garlic mustard Alliaria petiolata
Goatsbeard (oyster plant, salsify) Tragopogon porrifolius
Leafy spurge Euphorbia esula
Marijuana Cannabis sativa
Nettle Urtica dioica
Oxeye daisy Chrysanthemum leucanthemu
Pigweed (lambs quarters) Chenopodium album
Poison ivy Rhus radicans
Purple loosestrife Lythrum salicaria
Quackgrass Bromus brizaeformis
Ragweed (common) Ambrosia artemisifolia
Ragweed (great) Ambrosia trifida
Spotted knapweed Centaurea maculosa
Thistle bull Cirsium vulgare
Thistle canada Cirsium arvense
Thistle musk or nodding Carduus nutans
Thistle star (caltrops) Centaurea calicitrapa
Thistle sow (field) Sonchus arvensis
Thistle sow (common) Sonchus oleraceus
Thistle sow (spiny leaved) Sonchus asper
Sweet clover (yellow) Melilotus officinalis
Sweet clover (white) Melilotus alba
§ 446-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-22
1:619
§ 446-23. Noxious weeds, grasses and brush prohibited; height
limit.
No owner of property within the City shall permit to grow or pollinate
upon his or her property or upon any lands between the lot line of his or
her property and the curb or pavement fronting such property any noxious
weeds, grasses or brush that may cause or produce hay fever in human
beings, produce unpleasant or noxious odors or conceal filthy deposits or
provide a place for the accumulation of trash or litter. In order to prevent
such growth and pollination, every property owner shall mow or cause
to be mowed upon his or her property all weeds and grasses exceeding
eight inches in height and all brush exceeding one foot in height. If any
owner in the City neglects or fails to cut the same after having been
given a seven-day written notice (only one such notice need be issued per
property per calendar year, thereafter enforcement action may proceed
without prior notice) by the Weed Commissioner or his or her designee,
the Weed Commissioner or Weed Commissioner's designee is authorized to
enter upon such property and cause the weeds, grasses or brush in violation
of this section to be cut or mowed in conformity with this section. Written
notice under this section shall be issued to the owner of such property
and shall state that such weeds and grasses have exceeded a height of
eight inches and that such shall be cut within a time designated by the
Weed Commissioner or Weed Commissioner's designee. The notice shall be
sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner's last known and
reasonably ascertainable address.
Common Name(s) Botanical Name(s)
Winter cress Barbarea vulgaris
Japanese bamboo
Wild mustard
A. Exemptions. The height requirement of this section shall not apply to
the following:
(1) Zoned wetland.
(2) Zoned agricultural with only one seasonal harvest.
(3) Permit from DNR to grow wild grasses for wildlife.
(4) Special characteristics of land and location.
(a) Remote location as determined by the Weed Commissioner or
Weed Commissioner's designee.
(b) Historical character.
(c) Presently rough, wet or wild.
(d) Environmentally sensitive areas.
§ 446-22 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-23
1:620
§ 446-24. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Weed Commissioner or his or her
designee.
§ 446-25. Costs and fees; forfeiture.
The fee for mowing or removal of noxious weeds, grasses or brush by the
City's Weed Commissioner or Weed Commissioner's designee shall be no
less than $500 in each instance of any such expended labor. Any time spent
on a property in excess of three hours shall be billed at the rate of $250
per hour. In the event that City equipment is damaged while mowing or
otherwise applying an effort to bring property into compliance with this
article, the cost to repair the equipment shall be added to the bill. If such
fees and/or costs are not paid by November 15 of the year in which they
are billed, an administrative fee equal to 10% of the actual cost shall also
be charged to the property owner. In the event of nonpayment thereafter,
all such charges, costs and fees shall be placed on the tax roll pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats. The owner of such premises shall also be subject to a
forfeiture for violation of this article.
(5) Approved natural landscapes pursuant to Chapter 356, Article I, of
this Code.
(6) Government programs.
B. Review of exemptions. All property exemptions will be reviewed on a
case-by-case basis by the Public Works Commission and the Weed
Commissioner. [Amended by Ord. No. 05-29]
C. Waiver. The Weed Commissioner or Weed Commissioner's designee may
waive the provisions of this section in whole or part when, in the Weed
Commissioner or Weed Commissioner's designee's opinion, an
application for waiver is justified relative to grasses and other plants. A
waiver may be granted if the waiver will not cause a detraction from the
aesthetics of an area, not create a nuisance, and not otherwise detract
from the health, safety and welfare of near and neighboring residents,
and for other reasons in the sole judgment of the Weed Commissioner
or Weed Commissioner's designee.
§ 446-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-25
1:621

ARTICLE IV
General Regulations; Enforcement
§ 446-26. Dumping prohibited. [Amended by Ord. No. 06-33]
§ 446-27. Enforcement.
§ 446-28. Collection charges. [Added by Ord. No. 11-04; amended
by Ord. No. 11-30; Ord. No. 13-23]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or dump garbage,
recyclables, yard waste or any other debris in any street, alley or other
public place within the City or in any receptacles or on private property
in the City without the owner's consent, unless placed in bags or
containers in the manner and at the time specified by this article.
B. No person shall place for collection any garbage, recyclables, yard
waste or any other debris at any curbside adjacent to property not
owned or occupied by such person.
C. It shall be unlawful to burn or bury solid waste and recyclables by
residential and nonresidential sectors at any construction site.
D. It shall be unlawful to bring refuse or garbage for disposal (and
recyclables) from outside the corporate limits into the City unless
authorized by a specific written agreement with the City.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, any authorized City employee may inspect recyclable materials
separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal,
recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection
areas of multifamily dwellings and nonresidential facilities and
properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall
be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information.
No person may refuse access to any authorized City employee who
requests access for purposes of inspection and who presents
appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper or interfere
with such an inspection.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be issued a
citation by the City of Watertown. The issuance of a citation shall not
preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law
relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance
of a citation under this subsection.
C. Any person who violates any part of this chapter (unless otherwise
specifically set forth in this chapter) shall be required to pay a forfeiture
of $50 plus costs for the first violation, $200 plus costs for a second
violation, and not more than $300 plus costs for a third or subsequent
violation.
§ 446-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-28
1:623
§ 446-29. Noncompliance. [Added by Ord. No. 13-02; amended
3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-8]
A. The City shall compute the amounts due to the City for solid waste
collection charges and shall render a statement thereof, at periodic
intervals, to the owner or occupant of any premises subject to such
charge. Rates are established and updated periodically as fixed by
resolution of the Common Council and maintained by the Street
Department as identified at Internet site www.ci.watertown.wi.us or as
available by calling (920) 262-4080 during normal City business hours.
Industrial, commercial and institutional businesses utilizing private
services are exempt. Multifamily properties over the four-family
capacity may elect to opt into the City's solid waste collection service at
the then-current rate per unit upon written application by the owner.
Once an owner has opted into the City's solid waste collection service,
the owner agrees to continue participation and may not later opt out. In
the event that the owner transfers ownership of the property to a bona
fide purchaser with whom, or in which, the owner retains no financial
interest, the new owner may elect to opt out of the City's solid waste
collection service upon providing written notice to the City. The rates
shall be reviewed by the Common Council on an annual basis and
adjusted as necessary. For each additional solid waste collection
container requested by the owner or occupant of any premises subject
to the above-listed charge, the requesting owner or occupant shall be
responsible for an additional monthly charge, which shall be calculated
at the rate of 66% of the current rate fixed by Common Council
resolution.
B. The City currently computes the amount due to the City for recycling
collection charges attributable to a single recycling container and owed
by the owner or occupant of any premises subject to such charge, which
amount is included in the rate established at Subsection A above. For
each additional authorized recycling container requested from the City
by the owner or occupant of the premises, the owner or occupant of any
premises requesting the additional recycling container will be
responsible for an additional fee calculated at 33% of the rate
established at Subsection A above.
A. Notice. If solid waste, garbage, recycling, refuse or any other item is
placed at, near or about curbside or within the limits of the public rightof-
way or otherwise in such conspicuous manner consistent with
abandoning the item(s) in favor of collection or removal by the City or
another entity or individual in violation of this chapter, a Street
Department representative shall affix a written notice of the
noncompliance to the item(s), as reasonably possible providing notice
of the noncompliance. If the noncompliance is not fully cured within 24
hours per the observation and investigation of the Community Service
Officer or other law enforcement officer, the City shall deliver a notice
letter to the occupant and to the property owner, if different, requiring
the removal of the offending solid waste, garbage, recycling, refuse or
§ 446-28 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-29
1:624
any other item(s) within not more than six days from the date of
personal service or first-class mailing of the notice letter. The notice
letter may be personally delivered by the Community Service Officer
or a law enforcement officer to the occupant or may be sent by first
class mail to any reasonably ascertainable last known address of the
occupant and property owner.
(1) Where removal is necessitated pursuant to Subsection B below, the
failure to comply under the foregoing section shall constitute a
separately citable offense under this chapter.
B. Removal; special charge. If the item(s) for which a notice letter is issued
pursuant to Subsection A is not removed within the time specified
under such notice letter, the City shall arrange and cause the removal of
item(s) and shall charge the cost attributable thereto to the property
owner as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., consistent
with §§ 76-19 to 76-21 of this Code; however, the procedure under
§ 76-22 shall not be required for the levying of special charges for costs
borne by the City under this chapter. If the special charge is not fully
paid within 30 days of the date of issuance of billing thereof, the special
charge or any balance of special charges remaining owing shall become
a lien upon the serviced real property and, together with an
administrative charge in an amount equal to $100, shall be added to the
current or next tax roll, as statute dictates, for collection. The special
charge provided for hereunder shall not preclude proceeding under any
other ordinance, law or manner of enforcement relating to the same or
other matter.
(1) The method of calculating the costs borne by the City under this
section will include both direct and indirect costs, including human
resource productive rates of pay, fuel and fleet usage. The Street
Superintendent shall annually determine and report to the City
Clerk/Treasurer and Chief of Police the minimum costs that would
be borne by the City in any instance of remediating noncompliance
under this chapter.
(2) Any written communication issued to an occupant and/or property
owner directing compliance under this section shall clearly identify
such minimum cost to the City that may result in a special charge
as well as the administrative charge.
C. Appeal. The imposition of a special charge and administrative charge
hereunder may be appealed exclusively to the Public Works
Commission. Appeals filed pursuant to this section shall be filed no later
than 30 days from the date the bill is issued by the Street Department
for the recovery of special charge sums. The Public Works Commission
shall hear and consider the appeal no more than 30 days following
notice of receipt of the appeal and may, by simple majority vote, affirm
or reverse but may not modify the imposition of the special charge or
administrative charge. The only matters to be taken up under appeal
shall be the necessity of rendering such current service under this
§ 446-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-29
1:625
chapter and certification of the actual rendering of such current
service. The Chairperson of the Public Works Commission shall
forthwith cause to be transmitted to the appellant and City Clerk/
Treasurer a written decision by the Public Works Commission. Chapter
68, Wis. Stats., shall not apply to such an appeal.
§ 446-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 446-29
1:626
Chapter 453
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 446-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 446-29
1:627

ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management Utility
§ 453-1. Scope.
This article shall apply to the City of Watertown Stormwater Management
Utility, as hereinafter defined in § 453-4, and all appurtenances thereof.
§ 453-2. Findings.
§ 453-3. Establishment of Stormwater Management Utility.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, there is
hereby established the City of Watertown Stormwater Management Utility.
§ 453-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS — The costs of general management and
administration of the Utility, development plan and erosion control plan
A. The management of stormwater and other surface water discharges
within and beyond its border is a matter that affects the public health,
safety and welfare of the City of Watertown, its citizens and businesses
and others in the surrounding area.
B. Failure to effectively manage stormwater and other surface water
discharge from already developed and vacant property may create,
among other things, erosion of lands, threaten businesses and
residences with water damage and create sedimentation and other
environmental damage.
C. The City's Stormwater Management System, which provides for the
regulation, collection and disposal of stormwater and surface water
discharge, is of benefit and provides services to all real property within
the incorporated City limits.
D. The costs of operating and maintaining the City's Stormwater
Management System, ensuring regulatory compliance and financing
necessary plans, studies, repairs, replacement, improvements, and
extension thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated among
properties in proportion to the contribution to the system from each
property.
E. The final report entitled "Report of the Stormwater Management
Committee on the Feasibility of a Stormwater Utility," prepared by
Ruekert & Mielke, Inc. and dated February 2005, is hereby declared to
constitute the study and description of the analytical determinations
that demonstrate a rational basis for the enactment of this article.
§ 453-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-4
1:629
review, and compliance with the requirements of Wisconsin Administrative
Code Chapter NR 216 include, but are not limited to, the following:
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — The City of Watertown.
CAPITAL COST — The cost of acquiring, purchasing, leasing, planning,
designing, constructing, extending and improving all or any part of the
stormwater management system and any principal, interest or premiums on
any indebtedness incurred for these purposes.
COUNCIL — The Common Council of the City of Watertown.
DEBT SERVICE — All annual principal and interest requirements and
obligations of the City, including debt service reserves and coverage
requirements, that relate to Stormwater Management System
improvements.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT (ERU) — An amount of impervious surface
area on a lot or parcel that is equivalent to the amount of impervious
surface on a typical developed single-family residential lot. The square feet
of impervious surface area per ERU shall be as established by the Council
from time to time by resolution and set forth in a Stormwater Service
Charge Rate Table.
IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A horizontal surface that
has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly
resistant to infiltration by rainwater. It includes but is not limited to asphalt,
concrete, streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar surfaces.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS (O&M) — All direct and indirect
costs, excluding capital costs, necessary to ensure adequate drainage and
control of stormwater and surface waters on a continuing basis and assure
optimal long-term function of Stormwater Management System facilities.
O&M costs may include expenses for, but not limited to, the following
purposes:
Wages, salaries and related employee expenses for management and
administration of the Utility together with fringe benefits and premiums
paid on such wages and salaries for the state workers' compensation
coverage.
A.
B. Utility billing and accounting expenses.
C. Office supplies.
D. Permit fees.
E. Consultant and legal fees.
Wages and salaries and related employee expenses for operating and
maintenance of the stormwater management system and supervisory
personnel, together with fringe benefits and premiums paid on such
wages and salaries for the state workers' compensation coverage.
A.
B. Fuel and other operating supplies.
§ 453-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-4
1:630
REPLACEMENT FUND — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories and appurtenances which are necessary during
the useful life of the stormwater management system to maintain the
performance for which such system was designed and constructed.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries storm and surface drainage but
excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FUND — A fund established by the City for
the deposit of Utility revenues and the payment of Utility expenses.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — Any activities undertaken by
the City of Watertown for the collection, transportation, storage, treatment,
and disposal of stormwater and surface water and for the reduction or
elimination of pollutants in stormwater and surface water, including, but
not limited to administration, operation and maintenance of the stormwater
management system and Utility, constructing stormwater sewerage
facilities, and complying with the requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes
and Administrative Code.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Any plant, facilities, fixtures or
equipment owned or leased by the City for the collection, transportation,
storage, treatment, and disposal of stormwater and surface water. Such
facilities may include, without limitation by enumeration, surface and
underground drainage conduits of any type, storm sewers, watercourses,
retaining walls and ponds, and such other facilities as will support a
stormwater management system.
STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES — Charges imposed on properties in
the City to recover the administrative costs, operations & maintenance
costs, and capital costs relating to a stormwater management program
benefiting properties in the City. Stormwater service charges may include
user charges or any other special fees and charges that may be required to
provide for an equitable sharing of Utility costs by properties in the City.
UTILITY — The Stormwater Management Utility of the City of Watertown.
C. Repairs to and maintenance of the equipment associated therewith.
D. Premiums for hazard insurance.
Premiums for insurance providing coverage against liability for injury
to persons and/or property.
E.
F. Rents and leasing costs.
Operation, licensing and maintenance costs for trucks and heavy
equipment.
G.
H. Consultant and legal fees.
I. Replacement costs.
§ 453-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-5
1:631
§ 453-5. Applicability.
This article, its rules, regulations and rates shall apply to all real property
within the incorporated limits of the City of Watertown.
§ 453-6. Acquisition of facilities; rates and charges.
A. Facilities. The City through the Utility may acquire, construct, lease,
own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair,
conduct, manage and finance such facilities as are deemed by the City
to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of stormwater and
surface water management. These facilities may include, without
limitation by enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities,
storm sewers, watercourses, retaining walls and ponds, and such other
facilities that will support a stormwater management system.
B. Rates and charges. Rates and charges for the City of Watertown
Stormwater Management Utility are as follows: [Amended by Ord.
No. 12-01; 12-1-2015 by Ord. No. 15-44]
(1) ERU definition. One volume equivalent runoff unit (ERU) shall be
equal to 2,900 square feet of impervious surface area. The number
of ERUs assigned to each parcel shall be rounded to the nearest
0.50 ERU.
Service Charge Rates
Customer Class
Monthly
Administrative
Charge per
Customer
Monthly
Volume
Charge per
ERU
Monthly
Pollutant
Charge per
ERU
Single-family and
duplex residential
$1.12 $4.10 $3.73
Public authority $1.12 $4.10 $1.87
Multifamily
residential
$1.12 $4.10 $2.98
Commercial $1.12 $4.10 $4.10
Industrial $1.12 $4.10 $3.36
Institutional $1.12 $4.10 $1.87
C. Budgeting. The City through the Utility shall prepare an annual budget,
which is to include all administrative, regulatory compliance, operation
and maintenance costs, debt service, and other costs related to the
operation of the Utility. All costs shall be allocated amongst users of the
stormwater management system as recommended by the Finance
Committee and determined by the Council.
D. Authority. The City may utilize the full authority provided in § 66.0821,
Wis. Stats., with respect to financing methods, stormwater service
charges, and other matters therein dealt with, and shall have all legal
§ 453-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-6
1:632
§ 453-7. Management of Utility.
§ 453-8. Stormwater service charges.
authority permitted for municipal utilities to impose reasonable
charges for services.
A. Oversight by Common Council. The oversight of the Utility is hereby
vested in the Common Council. The Council shall direct and delegate
the management and operation of the Utility to City staff and shall
prescribe the functions thereof as may be necessary to operate and
manage the Utility.
B. Public Works Commission. The Public Works Commission, appointed in
accordance with Chapter 136, Article I, of the City of Watertown
Municipal Code,159 shall make recommendations to the Common
Council concerning the operation of the Utility.
C. Finance Committee. The Finance Committee of the Council, in
consultation with the Public Works Commission, shall make
recommendations to the Council concerning the Utility budget, service
charge rates and expenditures.
D. Street Superintendent. The Street Superintendent shall be responsible
for the day-to-day management of the Stormwater Management Utility.
These day-to-day responsibilities include, but are not limited to, budget
preparation, recommending utility rates, coordinating compliance with
all relevant permitting requirements, approval of expenditures,
directing daily activities of personnel and making reports to the Public
Works Commission, Finance Committee, Mayor and Common Council.
[Amended by Ord. No. 10-01]
E. Stormwater Management Fund. The City shall establish a Stormwater
Management Fund, which shall be used for collection of revenues and
payment of expenses relating to the Utility. Any excess of revenues over
expenditures in a year shall be retained by the fund for subsequent
years' needs.
F. Utility receipts. All Utility receipts shall be collected and accounted for
by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
G. Annual audit. The Council shall cause an annual audit of the books of
the Utility to be made and shall make the books and records relating to
the Utility available for inspection during regular business hours.
A. General.
(1) Charges established. There is hereby established a uniform system
of stormwater service charges that shall apply to each and every lot
or parcel with impervious surface area within the City. It shall be
159. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 24, Art. III, Public Works Commission.
§ 453-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-8
1:633
the policy to establish stormwater service charges in such amount
in order to pay for all or a part of the following costs relating to
the Utility: operations and maintenance costs; administrative costs;
contributions to a replacement fund; capital costs and debt service.
The Council may establish and modify stormwater service charges
as necessary so as to assure that the charges generate adequate
revenues to pay the costs of the stormwater management program
and that costs are allocated fairly and proportionately to all parcels
in the City.
(2) Service charge categories.
(a) Volumetric service charge. A volumetric service charge shall
be imposed on all property that has impervious surface area.
This charge shall be related to the costs of managing
stormwater runoff volume. The charge for each parcel shall be
equal to the product of the service charge rate in terms of
dollars per ERU and the number of volume ERUs assigned to
the parcel. The number of volume ERUs assigned to each lot or
parcel shall be determined based on the amount of impervious
surface area.
(b) Pollutant loading service charge. A pollutant loading service
charge shall be imposed on all property that has impervious
surface area. This charge shall be related to the costs of
managing pollutants in stormwater runoff. The charge for each
parcel shall be equal to the product of the service charge rate
in terms of dollars per ERU and the number of pollutant ERUs
assigned to the parcel. The number of pollutant ERUs assigned
to each lot or parcel shall be determined based on the amount
of impervious surface area and the land use.
(c) Special charge. A special charge may be imposed on property
that is in an area specially benefited by a particular stormwater
management facility. This charge will be developed to reflect
the benefits in a particular area that may not be appropriate to
allocate to property throughout the City.
(d) Administrative charge. An administrative charge shall be
imposed upon each property that has impervious surface area.
The administrative charge shall recover a portion of costs
related to stormwater flow not directly attributable to users
(i.e., stormwater runoff from streets and roads) and customer
costs (including accounting and billing). The administrative
charge shall be imposed on each user subject to stormwater
service charges and will consist of a flat fee per customer
account. [Added by Ord. No. 11-28]
(3) Billing and payment.
§ 453-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-8
1:634
(a) Billing. The City shall compute the amounts due the City for
stormwater service charges and shall render a statement
thereof, at periodic intervals, to the owner or occupant of any
premises subject to such charge.
(b) Payment. Property owner is held responsible for all stormwater
service charges on real property owned. All stormwater bills
and notices of any nature relative to the stormwater
management program will be addressed to the owner and
delivered to the addressee by first class mail. All amounts due
hereunder shall be payable at the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer. Failure to receive a bill does not relieve a party of
his/her obligation, nor relieve him/her of payment of the
penalty if not paid before the due date. Claims or complaints
must be made within five days from due date of bill. [Amended
by Ord. No. 10-28]
(c) Late charges. If stormwater service charges are not paid in full
on the due date, a one-percent-per-month charge shall be made
on the balance.
(d) Failure to receive bills. Reasonable care will be taken in the
delivery of stormwater service charge bills. Failure of any
person to receive bills for stormwater service charges shall not
be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor shall such failure
result in an extension of the period of time during which the
net bill should have been paid.
(e) Lien on property. Unpaid stormwater service charges shall be a
lien upon the property served and shall be enforced as
provided in § 66.0809(3), Wis. Stats.
(4) Rates set by resolution. All stormwater service charge rates shall
be established from time to time by written resolution of the
Common Council. The rates shall be reviewed by the Common
Council on an annual basis and adjusted as necessary.
B. Determination of ERUs.
(1) For purposes of imposing the service charges, all lots and parcels in
the City shall be classified into the following seven customer
classifications:
(a) Single-family residential.
(b) Condominium residential.
(c) Duplex and multifamily residential.
(d) Industrial.
(e) Commercial.
§ 453-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-8
1:635
(f) Institutional.
(g) Undeveloped.
(2) Volume ERUs shall be calculated for each classification as follows:
(a) Single-family residential: one ERU per dwelling unit.
(b) Condominium residential. The City Engineer shall be
responsible for determining the total impervious area of each
condominium parcel based on the best available information,
including but not limited to data supplied by the City Assessor,
Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator; aerial
photography; the property owner, tenant or developer; or
actual on-site measurement. The total impervious area of the
parcel shall be divided equally among the condominium units
to determine the square feet of impervious area per unit. This
amount shall be divided by the number of square feet per ERU
as established by the Common Council and set forth in the
Stormwater Service Charge Rate Table in § 453-6B(1) to
determine the number of ERUs to assign to each unit, except
that in no case shall a condominium unit be assigned less than
0.5 ERU. The number of ERUs per unit shall be rounded to the
nearest 0.5 ERU.160
(c) Duplex and multifamily residential: 0.50 ERU per dwelling
unit.
(d) Industrial, commercial and institutional property. The City
Engineer shall be responsible for determining the impervious
area of each nonresidential parcel based on the best available
information, including but not limited to data supplied by the
City Assessor, Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator;
aerial photography; the property owner, tenant or developer;
or actual on-site measurement. The total impervious area of
the parcel shall be divided by the number of square feet per
ERU as established by the Common Council and set forth in a
Stormwater Service Charge Rate Table in § 453-6B(1) to
determine the number of ERUs to assign to the parcel. The
number of ERUs per parcel shall be rounded to the nearest 0.5
ERU.
(e) Undeveloped property. For any lot or parcel that has no
impervious surface area, no volume ERUs shall be assigned for
purposes of imposing service charges under this article.
(3) Pollutant ERUs shall be calculated for each classification as
follows:
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 453-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-8
1:636
(a) Single-family and duplex residential: one ERU per dwelling
unit.
(b) Condominium residential. The number of volume ERUs shall be
multiplied by a factor of 1.0 to determine the number of
pollutant ERUs.
(c) Multifamily residential. The number of volume ERUs shall be
multiplied by a factor of 0.80 to determine the number of
pollutant ERUs.
(d) Industrial. The number of volume ERUs shall be multiplied by a
factor of 0.90 to determine the number of pollutant ERUs.
(e) Commercial. The number of volume ERUs shall be multiplied
by a factor of 1.10 to determine the number of pollutant ERUs.
(f) Institutional. The number of volume ERUs shall be multiplied
by a factor of 0.50 to determine the number of pollutant ERUs.
(g) Undeveloped property. For any lot or parcel that has no
impervious surface area, no pollutant ERUs shall be assigned
for purposes of imposing service charges under this article.
(4) New construction. For all classifications other than single-family,
duplex and multifamily residential, the construction of new or
expanded buildings, driveways or other structures or
improvements that add impervious surface area to the lot or parcel
shall be subject to an increase in the number of ERUs assigned to a
lot or parcel. The City shall recalculate the number of ERUs upon
completion of new construction.
C. Appeals and credits. [Amended by Ord. No. 10-01; Ord. No. 11-28]
(1) Nonresidential credits for the provision of stormwater mitigation
facilities and/or activities. Owners of nonresidential properties that
have facilities for on-site detention and runoff control or pollutant
loading reduction, that undertake activities designed to reduce the
quantity of or pollutant loadings in stormwater runoff from the lot
or parcel, or that conduct a public education and information
program designed to increase public awareness regarding the
water quality impacts of stormwater runoff may be eligible for a
reduction in the volumetric and/or pollutant loading service
charges for their lot or parcel. In order to be eligible for a credit,
the facilities or practices must exceed the City stormwater
discharge standards that were in effect at the time that the lot or
parcel was developed for its current use. Such property owners
may apply for a review of the service charges for the lot or parcel.
The amount of the credit or adjustment will be determined based
on the amount of reduction in the peak rate or total annual volume
of stormwater runoff or the percentage reduction in pollutant
§ 453-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-8
1:637
loadings that the facilities or activities are designed to achieve. No
credits will be provided for the administrative charges.
(a) Application for credit. Any property owner desiring to apply for
a reduction in the stormwater service charge shall submit an
application to the Street Superintendent on forms supplied by
the City. By submitting an application, the applicant is
authorizing the Street Superintendent to enter the property to
obtain information required for the review of the credit
request. The application shall be accompanied by the
following:
[1] Plans and studies. The applicant shall provide, as
applicable, a written description of the proposed practices
or public education program, hydrologic and/or hydraulic
studies, plans, computations, etc., that demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the City, that the practices, programs or
facilities meet the requirements for the credit requested.
[2] Maintenance agreement. The applicant shall provide a
plan for maintenance of the facilities or practices.
[3] Ongoing documentation. For as long as the credit is in
effect, the property owner or occupant shall supply to the
City copies of any documentation required to demonstrate
that the proposed practices or public education program is
being carried out in accordance with the plans submitted
to the City or that the facilities are being properly
maintained in accordance with the maintenance
agreement.
(b) Determination of credit. Within 30 days of receipt of a
complete application and supporting documentation, the
Street Superintendent shall review the application and
supporting documentation and shall make a recommendation
to the Public Works Commission regarding the credit request.
The Public Works Commission shall review said application
along with the Street Superintendent's recommendation and
shall determine whether a reduction in the stormwater service
charge is due the applicant. The applicant shall be provided
five business days' prior written notice of the time and place of
the Commission's consideration of the credit at the address
listed in the application. The Commission shall base its
decision on the record submitted to it at its meeting. The Street
Superintendent shall notify the applicant in writing of the
Commission's determination by first class mail addressed to
the applicant using the address listed in the application. The
credit shall be applied to the next practicable billing for
stormwater service charges and all subsequent billings for as
long as the facilities or practices are operated or carried out in
§ 453-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-8
1:638
accordance with the plans submitted with the application for
the credit.
(c) Amount of credit. Any credit to the stormwater service charge
shall be in the form of a reduction in the volume ERUs, a
reduction in the pollutant ERUs, or both. The percentage
reduction in the number of ERUs shall be equal to the
percentage reduction in the peak rate or total annual volume of
stormwater runoff or pollutant loadings beyond what is
required by the City's stormwater discharge standards, up to a
maximum reduction of 75% in the number of volume and/or
pollutant ERUs assigned to the parcel.
[1] Parcels developed under current stormwater discharge
standards. Parcels developed under the stormwater
discharge standards in effect at the time of a credit
application shall not be eligible for a reduction in
stormwater service charges unless the facilities or
practices exceed the City's stormwater discharge
standards.
[2] Parcels developed prior to current stormwater discharge
standards. Parcels that were developed prior to the
stormwater discharge standards in effect at the time of a
credit application may be eligible for a reduction in
stormwater service charges if the facilities or practices
exceed the City's stormwater discharge standards that
were in effect when the parcel was developed. The credit
shall be a percentage reduction in the number of volume
and/or pollutant ERUs assigned to the parcel equal to the
percentage reduction in the peak rate or total annual
volume of stormwater runoff or pollutant loadings beyond
what was required by the City's stormwater discharge
standards in effect at the time the parcel was developed,
up to a maximum reduction of 75% in the number of
volume and/or pollutant ERUs assigned to the parcel.
(d) Appeals. The stormwater service charge, a determination of
ERUs or ERU credits may be appealed by filing a written
appeal with the Street Superintendent prior to the due date, if
not paid, or within 30 days of payment. The appeal shall specify
all bases for the challenge and the amount of the stormwater
service charge the appellant asserts is appropriate. Failure to
timely file an appeal waives all right to contest such charge.
[1] The administrative review board shall review said written
appeal and shall determine whether the stormwater
service charge, the ERU determination or the ERU credit
is fair and reasonable or whether an adjustment or refund
is due the appellant. The applicant shall be provided five
business days' prior written notice of the time and place of
§ 453-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-8
1:639
§ 453-9. Amendments.
The City reserves the right to amend this article in part or in whole
whenever it may deem necessary, but only after due notice and hearing, as
provided by law.
the administrative review board's consideration of the
appeal to the owner at the address listed in the appeal. The
administrative review board shall base its decision on the
record submitted to it at its meeting. The City Engineer
shall notify the appellant in writing of the administrative
review board's determination by first class mail addressed
to the owner using the address listed in the appeal.
[2] If as a result of any appeal a refund is due the owner, such
refund shall be applied as a credit on the owner's next
practicable stormwater charge bill.
(2) Rebates to residential properties for the provision of stormwater
mitigation facilities. Residential properties that provide a rain
barrel or construct a rain garden to mitigate the volume of
stormwater and/or pollutant loadings discharged from the property
shall be eligible for a one-time rebate of $15. Property owners may
apply for the rebate by completing an application supplied by the
Street Superintendent and supplying a receipt or other appropriate
documentation of the purchase or installation of the rain barrel or
rain garden.
§ 453-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-9
1:640
ARTICLE II
Nonstormwater Discharges to Stormwater System
§ 453-10. Legislative purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Watertown through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable, as required by federal and state law. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(WPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
§ 453-11. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — The Street Superintendent is designated
by the City of Watertown to administer this article.[Amended by Ord. No.
10-01]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to City of Watertown or
WPDES construction permits. Such activities include but are not limited to
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 453-15 of this article.
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article.
§ 453-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-11
1:641
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Either of the following: Any drain or conveyance,
whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to
enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm drain system and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted or approved by the administering authority, or any drain or
conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records and approved by the administering authority.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to WPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures for which a municipal separate stormwater permit (also known
as a "MS4 Permit") has been issued by the WDNR to the City of Watertown
under Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by WDNR that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general areawide
basis.
§ 453-11 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-12
1:642
§ 453-12. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands, unless explicitly
exempted by the administering authority.
§ 453-13. Responsibility for administration. [Amended by Ord. No.
10-01161]
The Street Superintendent, the Water Systems Manager, and their
designees, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the administering
authority may be delegated in writing by the City of Watertown to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City of
Watertown.
§ 453-14. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 453-15. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: waterline flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air-conditioning condensation,
springs, individual residential washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated,
typically less than 1 ppm chlorine), firefighting activities, and any
other water source not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the administering authority as
being necessary to protect public health and safety.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 453-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-15
1:643
§ 453-16. Suspension of MS4 access.
The administering authority may suspend, prohibit and disconnect a person
from access to the storm drain system under the following conditions:
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the administering authority prior to the time of the
test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an WPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, use, maintenance or
continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is
prohibited.
(1) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(2) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
administering authority may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the administering authority may take such steps as deemed necessary
to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have its MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The administering authority will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
administering authority for a reconsideration and hearing.
C. Suspension due to unauthorized connection to MS4. A person commits
a violation of this article if the person reinstates MS4 access to
§ 453-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-16
1:644
§ 453-17. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity WPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the administering authority prior to the allowing of discharges
to the MS4.
§ 453-18. Monitoring of discharges.
premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval
of the administering authority.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The administering authority shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the administering authority.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the administering authority ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of a WPDES permit to discharge stormwater
and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state
and federal law.
(3) The administering authority shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of
the administering authority to conduct monitoring and/or sampling
of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The administering authority has the right to require the discharger
to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Street
Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the operator. [Amended by Ord. No.
10-01]
§ 453-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-18
1:645
§ 453-19. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
The administering authority may provide requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid WPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the WPDES
permit.
§ 453-20. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the administering authority access
to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge
permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility
with a WPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
administering authority reasonable access to the permitted facility
for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required
by this article.
(7) If the administering authority has been refused access to any part
of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the administering authority may
seek issuance of a special inspection warrant or a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 453-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-20
1:646
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 453-21. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or water of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the administering authority in person or
by phone or facsimile within 24 hours of becoming aware of the release.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the administering authority within three business
days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of
such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 453-22. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the administering authority finds that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
article, the administering authority may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. Notice of abatement. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within
which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice
§ 453-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-22
1:647
§ 453-23. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the administering authority. The notice of appeal must be received within
five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the City of Watertown Public Works Commission, which is designated
as the appropriate authority to hear and determine such appeal, shall take
place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the City of Watertown Public Works Commission shall be final,
subject to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction under law.
§ 453-24. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 10
days of the decision of the City of Watertown Public Works Commission
upholding the decision of the administering authority, then representatives
of the administering authority shall enter upon the subject private property
and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
§ 453-25. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If
the amount due is not paid within 60 days after receipt of the final bill,
the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable
to the administering authority by reason of such violation. Interest may be
assessed on the balance beginning on the 31st day following notice to the
property owner of the cost of the abatement.
§ 453-26. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the administering
authority may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 453-22 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-27
1:648
§ 453-27. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized
by this article, the administering authority may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 453-28. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is declared
and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 453-29. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall
be subject to a criminal penalty adopted by the Wisconsin Legislature
and imposed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources at its
discretion. This criminal penalty shall be on file in the offices of the Police
Chief and the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 453-30. Recovery of costs of abatement and enforcement.
The administering authority may recover any and all attorney's fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 453-31. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the administering authority to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 453-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-31
1:649
Chapter 457
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol beverage licensing and sales — See
Ch. 220.
Construction codes — See Ch. 253.
Plumbing: street and sidewalk
openings — See § 419-10.
Public events — See Ch. 428.
Solid waste — See Ch. 446.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 480.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 453-31 WATERTOWN CODE § 453-31
1:650
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 457-1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. No. 90-57]
It is in the interest of the City to provide for and regulate the size, number,
placement and safe construction of any obstructions or encroachments in
the public right-of-way, such as streets, alleys or sidewalks, within the City
so as to ensure that obstructions and encroachments do not constitute
a traffic hazard or distraction to the traveling public and to eliminate
potential nuisances and health or safety hazards.
§ 457-2. Street and sidewalk grades.
§ 457-3. Sidewalk construction and repair. [Amended by Ord. No.
70-45; Ord. No. 98-5; Ord. No. 09-15; Ord. No. 13-37]
A. Establishment. The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established by the Common Council and shall be recorded by the City
Clerk/Treasurer in his office. No permanent street, alley or sidewalk
shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. The grades of all
streets having curb and gutter on the effective date of this chapter are
established at the level then existing.
B. Altering grade prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof unless authorized or
instructed to do so by the Common Council.
A. The abutting property owner shall repair and perpetually maintain the
sidewalks which are adjacent to the property along any street in the
City.
B. Portland cement sidewalks of City specifications shall be required.
C. The Common Council will, by resolution, determine the priority of
establishing sidewalk improvement districts, based upon the dictates of
public health and safety, with special emphasis upon those areas
surrounding schools and playgrounds, in accordance with the policies
and programs specified in the City of Watertown Comprehensive Plan.
D. For those areas of the City that have been platted or subdivided after
February 20, 1998, the installation and maintenance of new sidewalks
shall be governed by the provisions of § 545-28 of this Code.
E. Notice and public hearing. Prior to sidewalk installation as set forth in
Subsection C herein, the Council shall give written notice to the
property owners of its intention to install and assess the installation
cost of a sidewalk adjacent to their property. Thereafter, within one
month of such written notice, the Common Council shall conduct a
public hearing to permit the property owner to appear before the
Council to indicate if the property owner is in favor of or opposed to the
construction of such sidewalk.
§ 457-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-3
1:651
§ 457-4. Sidewalk, curb and gutter. [Amended by Ord. No. 93-56]
F. Sidewalk repair. Sidewalk repair shall be according to § 66.0907(3),
Wis. Stats.
G. Installation by City of decorative sidewalk in Central Business District.
The City elects, pursuant to § 62.15(1), Wis. Stats., to construct and
replace the decorative brick between the curb and sidewalk and install
colored stamped concrete on the north and south sides of Main Street
between College Avenue on the east and Church Street on the west. All
of this work shall be performed directly by the City without submitting
or letting the work for public bids.
A. Permit required. No person shall construct, lay or rebuild any sidewalk
or curb and gutter on any public street or alley within the City without
first having obtained a permit from the City Engineer. The permit shall
be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance for any
work that the contractor may do within the City of Watertown.
B. Rules and regulations. The City Engineer may make such rules and
regulations as he may deem necessary for the constructing, laying or
rebuilding of sidewalks and curb and gutter within the City and may
prescribe standard specifications for the construction of such items.
C. Curb and gutter driveway openings. No person shall make or cause to
be made any curb and gutter openings (including sawing) within the
City without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer. All
openings shall be reported to the Street Superintendent, who shall saw
the appropriate curb opening width. A fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule shall be paid to the
City by the person applying for the permit at the time of application. A
fee as set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule shall be paid for sawing a sump pump hose connection to the
curb and gutter. [Amended by Ord. No. 97-14162]
D. Concrete sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks are the only type of sidewalks
that may be constructed within the City of Watertown.
E. Defective workmanship. If a permittee shall fail to perform said work or
to furnish material and workmanship of such quality as to conform to
the requirements established by the City Engineer, the permittee shall,
during such period of one year after the completion of the initial work,
make at his own expense such repairs and remove any damaged or
defective parts of the sidewalk or curb and gutter and repair the same
with new parts as may be required by and deemed necessary by the City
Engineer.
F. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to work done by the City or
under contract with the City.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-5
1:652
§ 457-5. Sewer and water service and curb and gutter required
before construction. [Amended by Ord. No. 90-33]
§ 457-6. Street and sidewalk openings. [Amended 9-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-16]
A. Before construction of any new street where sewer and water mains are
installed and where the land abutting the street is subdivided into lots
or before construction of a semipermanent street, the Director of Public
Works shall order the construction of curb and gutter and the
installation of water, sewer and gas services to within seven feet of the
property line of each lot which is classified as a buildable lot under
Chapter 550, Zoning.
B. In the event the owner of any such lot fails to comply with the order
within 10 days of written notice thereof, the Director of Public Works
shall cause the same to be installed and the cost thereof reported to the
City Clerk/Treasurer as a special charge against the property. The
special charge may be paid in cash within 60 days after receipt of the
final bill; thereafter interest at the rate of 12% per annum shall be
charged until the assessment is paid, or the assessment may be paid in
five equal annual installments with interest at 12% per year on the tax
roll. If a property owner elects to pay the assessment in five equal
annual installments, and if the property should be sold or ownership
transferred within said five-year period, then the entire remaining
balance shall be due and payable immediately upon sale or transfer of
ownership.
A. Permit required. No person shall make or cause to be made any
excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
within the City without first obtaining a permit from the Street
Superintendent. All openings to be made in improved streets shall be
reported to the Street Superintendent before work is begun. A
duplicate copy of the permit shall be deposited with the City Engineer.
B. Liability insurance required.
(1) No street opening permit shall be issued hereunder until the
applicant files with the Street Superintendent public liability
insurance written by a company licensed to do business in the State
of Wisconsin, for the principal sum of not less than $1,000,000
bodily injury per occurrence and $500,000 property damage per
occurrence, such policy to be written according to a standard form
now in general use. A duplicate of such policy shall be deposited
with the City Engineer. Aggregate coverage for bodily injury and
property damage may be in any amount in excess of the peroccurrence
amounts set forth hereinabove. Such policy shall have
an endorsement protecting the City as its interests may appear as
the result of any accident or injury for which the City may
otherwise become liable.
§ 457-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-6
1:653
(2) Exception. No insurance required in Subsection B(1) need be filed
by a public utility, but each such utility shall file with the City Clerk/
Treasurer an agreement to indemnify the City for any liability or
expense the City may become subject to or may incur by reason of
issuance of a permit hereunder or the work performed pursuant to
such permit.
C. Excavated material.
(1) When opening any street surface or other public way, all material
for paving or ballasting must be removed with the least possible
loss of surfacing material. When the side of a trench will not stand
perpendicular, sheeting and braces shall be used to prevent caving.
When caving occurs, all the street surface thus disturbed must be
restored in the same manner as though it were an excavated
trench. All trenches or ditches shall be constructed under the
regulations on tunnel, caisson or trench construction issued by the
State Department of Safety and Professional Services.
(2) Paving or ballasting material together with the excavated material
from the trenches, or otherwise, must be placed where it will cause
the least inconvenience to the public, and all such material must be
so placed that it will admit free passage of stormwater or other
water along the curb. As little as possible of the trench must be dug
until the slant or junction place in the main sewer is found.
D. Backfilling.
(1) All trenches made in any street shall be backfilled with sand or
gravel and the old excavated material carried away and disposed
of. The material moved in excavating for the trenches may be used
to backfill the same if it is a granular material and approval to do so
is obtained from the Street Superintendent.
(2) The plumber, drain layer or contractor shall exercise every possible
precaution to compact all backfill in such a manner as prescribed
by the Street Superintendent or his agent so the surface of the
ditch or trench after backfilling will not settle in excess of three
inches within six months after backfilling. The plumber, drain layer
or contractor who did the backfilling shall be liable to the City for
any and all costs incurred in restoring the ditch or trench surface to
proper grade.
(3) If any damage to person or property results within six months from
the completion of the backfilling of the ditch or trench by reason of
the sinking of the ditch or trench because of improper backfilling
thereof by the plumber, drain layer or contractor, and the City is
held liable therefor, the City shall be indemnified therefor on the
bond of the plumber, drain layer or contractor backfilling the ditch
or trench causing the damage.
§ 457-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-6
1:654
§ 457-7. Obstructions and encroachments. [Amended by Ord. No.
90-58]
E. Protection of public. Every person causing an opening to be made
hereunder shall enclose each opening with sufficient barriers. Warning
lights must be kept burning from sunset to sunrise, one light to be
placed at intervals of 10 feet. All necessary precautions shall be taken
to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage during the
work. The person doing the work will be held liable for all damages,
including the costs incurred by the City in defending any action brought
against it for damages and the costs of an appeal that may result from
injury or damage to persons, vehicles or property of any kind.
F. Relaying of pavement.
(1) The relaying of street surface following opening hereunder shall be
done by the Street Department or by a contractor under the
supervision and control of the Street Superintendent and shall be
paid for by the applicant at the time the permit is issued at the
rates established by Common Council.
(2) The Wisconsin Electric Power Company, Wisconsin Bell, Wisconsin
Natural Gas Company, and television cable company may elect to
relay the street surfaces of openings for which they have permits at
their expense, but subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The
pavement will be replaced as originally constructed or as specified
by the City Engineer.
(3) If pavement cut is made other than an emergency cut within 12
months of a new pavement being laid, the penalty will be three
times the above charge. If the pavement is cut from 12 to 36
months following a new pavement, the penalty will be two times the
above charge.
(4) Utility companies will not be allowed to relay street surfaces of
openings except for emergencies for which they have permits
within the first 36 months following a new pavement and will be
subject to the above penalties.
A. Obstructions and encroachments.
(1) Obstructions and encroachments prohibited. No persons shall
encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley,
sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any
part thereof, or permit such encroachments or encumbrances to be
placed or remain in any public way adjoining the premises of which
he is the owner or occupant, except as provided in Subsection B.
(2) Vending machine placement is prohibited on all streets, alleys and
sidewalks, except as set forth in Subsection B, Exceptions.
B. Exceptions. Subsection A shall not apply to the following:
§ 457-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-7
1:655
(1) Any items permanently attached to a building structure in
accordance with Chapter 550, Article XII, Signs and Projections.
(2) Vending machine placement shall specifically be allowed in public
parks and on City-owned property upon the approval of the City of
Watertown Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission and said
vending machine accruing to the benefit of the City of Watertown.
(3) Public utility encroachments duly authorized by state law or the
Watertown Common Council.
(4) Loading or unload of goods, wares or merchandise, which does not
extend more than three feet onto the sidewalk, and provided such
goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for a period of more than
two hours.
(5) Street furniture and landscape elements with a maximum area of
nine square feet per building, which must be placed against an
exterior wall and may be installed pursuant to this exception only if
a minimum of 12 feet of sidewalk width exists, measured from the
building front to the back of the curb, or specifically if the furniture
and/or landscape element is part of an approved City streetscape
plan.
(6) Newspaper vending machines, street furniture, and all other
encroachments located within the Main Street Commercial
Historic District may be permitted if said encroachment meets the
requirements of Subsection B(5) of this section; the proponent/
owner of any such encroachment shall make a written application,
pursuant to the procedures set forth below in Subsection D, prior to
installation or placement of the proposed encroachment in the
right-of-way; and the Watertown Historic Preservation Commission
shall make a recommendation approving or rejecting placement of
the proposed encroachment to the Watertown Common Council
Public Safety and Welfare Committee. [Amended by Ord. No.
91-1]
(7) Excavation and openings permitted under § 457-6 of this chapter.
[Amended 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
(8) Building materials permitted under Subsection C of this section.
(9) Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit
granted pursuant to § 66.0425, Wis. Stats. The cost of such permit
obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule and the permit
shall be valid for 14 consecutive days following its issuance.
[Amended by Ord. No. 13-06; 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(10) Other exceptions located outside of the Main Street Commercial
Historic District shall be allowed, provided they are subject to the
requirements of Subsection B(5) of this section and the proponent/
§ 457-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-7
1:656
owner of such an encroachment shall make written application,
pursuant to the procedures set forth below in Subsection D, prior
to installation or placement of the proposed encroachment in the
right-of-way. [Amended by Ord. No. 91-2]
(11) Booths, benches, tables or other structures erected or maintained
for the display of goods, wares, merchandise or foodstuffs, and
approved under § 457-12 shall not be considered obstructions or
encroachments. [Added by Ord. No. 93-23]
(12) Mailboxes and newspaper receptacles constructed as required by
the standards set forth in § 457-8 of this chapter. [Added by Ord.
No. 95-43]
(13) Utilities permitted under Chapter 457, Article II, Utility
Accommodations. [Added 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
C. Building materials.
(1) The Director of Public Works may grant permission to any person
for a period not to exceed three months to use not to exceed 1/3 in
width of any or all streets adjacent to any proposed building or
other improvement to be built or made for the purpose of
temporarily depositing thereon building material, excavated
material and other articles necessary to be used in and about the
construction of such building or other improvement.
(2) Every person to whom a permit is granted hereunder shall provide
a sufficient barricade and during the nighttime sufficient warning
lights around or on such building materials, excavating material or
other articles so as to effectually prevent the happening of
accidents to persons or property, and every such person shall be
liable for all accidents and damage caused by his failure to properly
provide and maintain such barriers and warning lights.
D. Application for variance. Application to request a variance granting the
proposed use or encroachment of the public way may be taken by any
person by filing a written application with the Watertown Common
Council Public Safety and Welfare Committee, which shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of the application, give a minimum of
72 hours' notice to the applicant by regular mail, and decide the same
within a reasonable time by approving or rejecting the request. Each
application shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule. At the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Committee
shall decide all applications within 30 days after the hearing thereon.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Public Safety and Welfare Committee may present to a court of
record a petition for certiorari within 30 days after the decision of the
Public Safety and Welfare Committee with respect to the application.
[Added by Ord. No. 91-3163]
§ 457-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-8
1:657
§ 457-8. Mailbox and newspaper receptacles. [Added by Ord. No.
95-44]
All mailbox and newspaper receptacle placement and construction within
the City of Watertown shall comply with the standards set forth herein,
which support and mounting standards comply with the requirements of the
United States Postal Service, as follows:
A. Support.
(1) The support shall be a wood post, steel pipe or steel channel
installed no more than 24 inches in the ground and extending to a
vertical height such that the bottom of the box is a minimum of 36
inches but not to exceed a maximum of 42 inches above the ground
surface. The support shall have no larger than the following
dimensions:
(a) Square wood post: four inches by four inches.
(b) Round wood post: 4 1/2 inches in diameter.
(c) Steel pipe: two inches inside diameter.
(d) Steel channel: two pounds per foot.
(2) The support shall not be set in concrete, nor is a base plate
acceptable. Anti-twist flanges may be installed on the pipe or
channel supports but shall not be imbedded more than 10 inches
into the ground.
B. Attachment. The box-to-post attachment shall be sufficient to prevent
the separation of the box from the support post when struck. An
approved newspaper receptacle may be attached to a post with a
mailbox, but not on a post by itself.
C. Multiple boxes. No more than four boxes shall be mounted on one
support post. For a multiple installation, support posts shall be spaced a
minimum longitudinal distance apart which is equal to 3/4 of the height
of the posts in the installation.
D. Location. The face of the box shall be located a minimum of six inches
behind the traffic face of curb and a maximum of 12 inches behind the
traffic face of curb. Installations shall avoid blind spots or poor sight
distance locations.
E. Liability. Mailboxes and newspaper receptacles placed within the street
right-of-way are the sole property and responsibility of the abutting
property owner. The City of Watertown shall not be liable for damages
caused to or by mailboxes and newspaper receptacles placed within the
street right-of-way.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-8
1:658
§ 457-9. Sidewalk cafes. [Added by Ord. No. 13-13]
For the purposes of this section, a "sidewalk cafe" is defined as an outdoor
dining area located in a public right-of-way that is operated adjacent to and
in conjunction with an indoor commercial entertainment use (as defined in
§ 550-52H of Chapter 550, Zoning), in which the sale of alcohol beverages
accounts for less than 50% of the gross receipts. Notwithstanding § 457-7A,
sidewalk cafes and dining upon the public rights-of-way shall be permitted,
subject to the following requirements:
F. Drawings. The City of Watertown shall maintain a supply of standard
drawings of approved mailbox installations for distribution to the
general public.
G. Violations and penalties. A mailbox or newspaper receptacle installed in
violation of the provisions of this section will result in the City issuing a
notice of noncompliance to the violating property owner. If the violation
is not corrected within 30 days, the City shall remove the violating
obstruction or encroachment and assess the cost of removal as a special
charge against the property as provided in § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.164
A. A sidewalk cafe permit must be granted by the City; a sidewalk cafe
permit shall be granted only to the operator of a restaurant that is in
compliance with the City of Watertown Code and is licensed by the
Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS) to operate a
restaurant pursuant to Ch. 254, Wis. Stats., and/or licensed with the
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection (DATCP) or
a local agent of DHS or DATCP to operate a retail food establishment
pursuant to Ch. 97, Wis. Stats. All food preparation, storage and
handling shall conform to all applicable health codes. [Amended by
Ord. No. 13-21]
B. Applicants for a sidewalk cafe permit must provide a complete
application form and a sketch plan of the proposed site, at a scale of 1/4
inch equals one foot, indicating the following:
(1) The location of the building front and all doorways;
(2) The proposed location of the sidewalk cafe barrier, tables, chairs,
serving equipment, planters, borders, awnings, umbrellas and
other facilities to be included in the seating area;
(3) The location of existing public improvements, including fire
hydrants, street signs, streetlights, utilities, traffic signals,
mailboxes, trees and tree grates, parking meters, planting boxes or
planting areas, fire escapes or other overhead obstructions and any
other public obstruction;
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-9
1:659
(4) The location of crosswalks, driveways, parking spaces, loading
zones, and other vehicular areas adjacent to the proposed sidewalk
cafe.
C. The application form and sketch plan shall be signed by the applicant
and by the property owner and shall be approved, in writing, by the City
Engineer or designee prior to any implementation of the sidewalk cafe.
D. The design of the sidewalk cafe, as depicted on the sketch plan and as
installed, maintained and operated following approval, shall comply
with all of the following requirements:
(1) Sidewalk cafes are restricted to the portion of the sidewalk which is
parallel to and immediately adjacent to the abutting business
establishment to which the sidewalk cafe permit has been issued or
in a location and configuration as otherwise approved.
(2) Sidewalk cafes are permitted only where both the sidewalk and the
paved terrace are wide enough to adequately accommodate both
the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the
proposed activity. Generally, the remaining unimpeded sidewalk
and adjacent terrace shall be a minimum of five feet.165
(3) The sidewalk cafe may not be wider than one chair or table which is
one-place-setting wide.
(4) The sidewalk cafe shall be located on an impervious surface.
(5) The sidewalk cafe shall not be located in or otherwise obstruct
more than 24 inches of the sidewalk.
(6) The sidewalk cafe shall be accessible to the disabled, and the
permit holder shall at all times comply with all applicable federal,
state and City laws, ordinances and regulations concerning
accessibility and nondiscrimination in the providing of service.
(7) No tables, chairs, fencing or any other fixtures used in connection
with a sidewalk cafe shall be attached, chained or in any manner
affixed to the public area or any other public property, including
street trees.
(8) Lighting to serve outside seating areas shall be provided by
ambient sources. No lighting fixtures or other electrical devices are
permitted.
E. Operations of sidewalk cafes shall comply with the following
requirements:
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-9
1:660
(1) A sidewalk cafe may only be open between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. on any day and only when the restaurant is
otherwise open.
(2) All tables, chairs and all other materials and equipment must be
removed from the site from close of business until normal opening
of business each day.
(3) All tables and chairs shall be heavyweight so as to withstand
moderate winds. Plastic and tubular aluminum furniture using
fabric seats and/or seat backs is prohibited.
(4) Diningware shall be heavyweight so as to withstand moderate
winds. Reusable, nondisposable flatware, dishware and beverage
containers are required for use in all sidewalk cafes. No food or
beverage, including water, shall be served in, on or with single-use
paper, plastic or polystyrene plastic dishes or utensils, nor shall any
food or beverage be served to the customer wrapped or packaged
in foil, paper, plastic or polystyrene plastic.
(5) No smoking shall be permitted within sidewalk cafe enclosures.
(6) No amplified music is permitted in sidewalk cafes. Live,
unamplified music is permitted, but musicians and equipment shall
be located within two feet of the building when performing.
(7) Additional parking shall not be required or reasonably necessitated
due to the addition of a sidewalk cafe area.
F. Businesses which intend to serve alcohol beverages at the sidewalk
cafe must additionally meet the following requirements:
(1) The business shall hold a valid liquor license for all premises where
alcohol beverages are served and consumed.
(2) Sidewalk cafes where alcohol beverages are served and consumed
shall be responsible for policing the area of the outdoor cafe to be
sure the area is in compliance with the alcohol beverage licensing
requirements at all times.
(3) The entire outdoor area utilized for service and consumption of
food and beverage shall be visible from the restaurant
establishment.
(4) No alcohol beverages may be served at any time if the restaurant
has not received Common Council approval for the enlargement of
the premises under its liquor license that includes the area of the
public sidewalk where the sidewalk cafe is located. Further, the
liquor license shall be automatically conditioned at the time of the
enlargement of premises to allow for the consumption of alcohol
beverages within the sidewalk cafe area only. Approval of the
enlargement of premises area (sidewalk cafe) shall not grant any
licensee or licensed premises any vested rights, and such approval
§ 457-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-9
1:661
§ 457-10. Daily notice signs. [Added by Ord. No. 13-12]
For the purposes of this section, "daily notice signs" include sandwich board
signs and menu board signs. Notwithstanding § 457-7A, daily notice signs
shall be permitted, subject to the following requirements:
may be suspended or revoked or nonrenewed without cause being
shown.
(5) Alcohol beverages must be sold and served by the licensee or
licensee's employees who have operator's licenses and sold, served
and consumed by patrons seated at tables in the sidewalk cafe,
pursuant to §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats.
(6) Alcohol beverages may only be served at the sidewalk cafe when
food service is available through the licensed establishment.
(7) The permittee shall be responsible for complying with the approved
sidewalk cafe plan.
(8) The permittee shall not allow patrons of the sidewalk cafe to bring
alcohol beverages into the sidewalk cafe, nor to carry open
containers of alcohol beverages about in the sidewalk cafe area,
nor to carry open containers of alcohol beverages served in the
sidewalk cafe outside the sidewalk cafe area.
(9) The permittee shall display signage indicating alcohol may only be
consumed by patrons seated at tables in the sidewalk cafe.
(10) The bar from which the alcohol beverages are dispensed shall be
located indoors and shall not be located in the sidewalk cafe area.
G. Both the owner/lessee/lessor of the business establishment and the
property owner shall agree in writing to hold the City harmless for any
personal injury or property damage resulting from the existence or
operation of the sidewalk cafe and guarantee the condition and
maintenance of the right-of-way upon which any sidewalk cafe is
located and shall furnish evidence of general liability insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000.166
H. The City may cause the immediate removal or relocation of all or any
part of the sidewalk cafe or its fixtures in emergency situations. The
City, its officers, agents and employees shall not be responsible for any
damages or loss of sidewalk cafe fixtures relocated during emergency
situations and shall not be responsible for any loss of revenue
associated with removal, costs associated with the removal, or the
return and installation of any sidewalk cafe fixtures.
A. Daily notice signs shall be permitted only in the Central Business (CB)
Zoning District. Only one daily notice sign per customer entrance shall
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-10
1:662
be permitted. The owner of the customer entrance may select which
type of daily notice sign to use, either one sandwich board sign or one
menu board sign.
B. A daily notice sign shall be considered an auxiliary sign; daily notice
signs shall not count as business signs for the purpose of regulating the
number of business signs or the area of business signs allowed on the
property.
C. Rules for sandwich board signs.
(1) Location requirements for sandwich board signs.
(a) Sandwich board signs are permitted within a street terrace or
on private property within the Central Business (CB) Zoning
District.
(b) Sandwich board signs shall be placed a minimum of one foot
from a sidewalk and shall not otherwise obstruct a sidewalk.
(c) Sandwich board signs shall be placed a minimum of one foot
from any of the following: doorway, loading zone, crosswalk,
curb cut, bike rack, bench or any other public facility or fixture
for vehicles or pedestrians.
(d) Sandwich board signs shall not obstruct access to any fire
hydrant, fire escape or fire door, or obstruct the clear view of
any traffic signal, regulatory sign or street sign. Whether such
a prohibited obstruction is created by the sandwich board sign
shall be in the sole, exclusive and irrebuttable determination of
the City.
(e) Sandwich board signs shall be kept inside the building when
the business is closed.
(2) Configuration requirements for sandwich board signs.
(a) No portion of a sandwich board sign shall be more than four
feet high or more than two feet wide, including any part of its
frame or supporting structure.
(b) Anything attached to a sandwich board sign shall not project
outside the perimeter of the sign face nor project in excess of
one inch from the sign face.
(3) Material requirements for sandwich board signs.
(a) Sandwich boards may be made of any material.
(b) Sandwich boards shall be heavy enough to remain stable in
moderate wind conditions.
(4) Illumination requirements for sandwich board signs.
§ 457-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-10
1:663
§ 457-11. Snow and ice removal. [Amended by Ord. No. 92-6]
(a) Sandwich boards may not be illuminated by any means other
than an ambient light source, such as the sun or a streetlight.
D. Rules for menu board signs.
(1) Location requirements for menu board signs.
(a) Menu board signs shall be affixed to the exterior wall of the
building containing the use.
(2) Configuration requirements for menu board signs.
(a) Menu board sign surface area and its surrounding frame and
structure shall not exceed eight square feet.
(b) Menu board sign shall not extend more than three inches from
the wall on which it is mounted.
(c) Moving signs such as traveling message boards, electronic
message boards and video screens are prohibited.
(d) Anything attached to a menu board sign shall not project
outside the perimeter of the sign face nor project more than
one inch from the sign face.
(3) Material requirements for menu board signs.
(a) Menu board signs may be made of any material.
(4) Illumination requirements for menu board signs.
(a) Menu board signs may not be illuminated by any means other
than an ambient light source, such as the sun or a streetlight.
A. Duty to remove or cover. The owner, occupant or person in charge of
each lot or part of lot shall, within 24 hours after snow has stopped
falling, remove all snow and ice which may have fallen or accumulated
upon the sidewalks abutting the premises and driveway aprons owned,
occupied or cared for by him or her. When snow and ice has so formed
upon any sidewalk that it cannot be removed, the persons herein
referred to shall keep the same sprinkled with sand, salt or an icemelting
compound. Failure to remove or cover the snow and ice as
specified herein will subject the owner, occupant or person in charge of
the premises to the forfeitures provided in § 1-4 of this Code. This
requirement shall not apply to sidewalks exempted by the written Policy
for City for Snow Removal on Sidewalks, adopted by the City of
Watertown Public Works Commission on September 14, 2010.
[Amended by Ord. No. 10-31; Ord. No. 11-17]
B. Street Superintendent to cause removal. If the owner, occupant or
person in charge of each lot or part of lot does not remove or cover all
snow or ice from the sidewalks abutting the premises owned, occupied
§ 457-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-11
1:664
§ 457-12. Use of streets or sidewalks for sale of merchandise.
or cared for by him, as provided in Subsection A herein, and continues
to refuse to remove the snow and ice after a complaint has been issued,
and the party is found to be in violation of Subsection A hereinabove,
then the Street Superintendent shall cause all sidewalks which shall
not have been cleaned or sprinkled with sand, salt or an ice-melting
compound as above prescribed to be so cleaned or sprinkled in his
discretion immediately upon the default of the person whose duty it
is to clean or sprinkle the same. He shall annually render to the City
Clerk/Treasurer an itemized report of all sums disbursed by him for
such cleaning or sprinkling, the description of the premises affected
thereby, and the names of the owners thereof, and the sum so disbursed
shall annually be levied and collected as a special tax upon said
premises unless paid. [Amended by Ord. No. 08-33; Ord. No.
11-17167]
C. Depositing of snow in streets and alleys. No person shall deposit or
cause to be deposited in any public street, alley or roadway in the City
snow taken or removed from property that is privately owned or
occupied, public sidewalks, road right-of-way or driveway aprons
abutting such private property. This subsection shall not apply to any
properties located within the Central City Snow Removal Area, as
defined in § 500-9C(2)(a) of the City's Code. [Amended by Ord. No.
08-33]
D. Violations and penalties. Any person or entity who shall violate any
provision of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than
$50. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. [Amended by Ord. No. 08-33]
A. Sale of merchandise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or foodstuffs, or to
erect or maintain or cause or permit to be erected or maintained, any
booth, bench, table or other structure for the display of goods, wares,
merchandise or foodstuffs on any sidewalk, street, boulevard, alley,
public way or public right-of-way between the private property line and
the established curbline of the roadway or streets of the City.
[Amended by Ord. No. 97-59]
B. Sale of merchandise from vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise,
vegetables or produce, or other foodstuffs from any vehicle, pushcart,
three-wheeled bicycle or other conveyance in or upon any street, public
way, alley or public right-of-way within the City. [Amended by Ord.
No. 97-59]
C. Exceptions. [Amended by Ord. No. 93-22; Ord. No. 10-19]
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-12
1:665
(1) Subsections A and B shall not apply to any person distributing or
selling any agricultural product grown by him or her or homemade
produce made by him or her on the day of the Farmers Market,
which is each Tuesday of every month, during the months of May
through November in the specific area designated under § 428-11
of the Watertown Code.
(2) The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply to the annual
Maxwell Street Day event, conducted under the provisions of
Subsection D below, or to special retail promotions organized by
the Watertown Area Chamber of Commerce or the Watertown Main
Street Program in behalf of the downtown business community and
approved, in writing, by the Mayor. For promotions other than
Maxwell Street Day, any booth, bench, table or other structure for
the display of goods, wares, merchandise or foodstuffs shall extend
not more than 36 inches beyond the private property line.
(3) Permitted food vending on public streets under § 457-185. [Added
2-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1]
D. Maxwell Street Day sidewalk sale. The Watertown Main Street Program
is granted an annual permit to conduct a special event on the sidewalks
and streets of the Central Business District (as that term is defined and
designated in § 550-34 of the Watertown Zoning Code), commonly
known as "Maxwell Street Day," subject to the regulations as set forth
below. [Amended by Ord. No. 89-74A; Ord. No. 95-32; Ord. No.
10-19; 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(1) The Maxwell Street Day event shall extend from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. on the third Thursday in July, or on such other date as
designated by the Mayor and Chief of Police, in writing.
(2) The eastbound and westbound traffic lanes of Main Street shall be
closed to all vehicular traffic during the course of the event.
(3) There shall be no parking allowed on the entire closed portion of
Main Street and on side streets of the Central Business District in
front of participating merchants during the course of the event.
(4) The Watertown Street Department shall provide and remove such
barricades and warning devices as are deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police to allow for the safe flow of traffic northbound and
southbound on the intersecting streets within the Central Business
District and to allow for emergency vehicle access to the closed
portion of Main Street.
(5) The provisions of Subsection A of this section prohibiting the use of
streets and sidewalks for outside sales shall be suspended for the
duration of the special event within the Central Business District,
provided that:
§ 457-12 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-12
1:666
(a) The outside sales activity is either a sidewalk cafe or storefront
display by a contiguously located merchant which does not
extend beyond the frontage width of the business associated
therewith.
(b) Any storefront display or sidewalk cafe shall be limited to the
sale and display of those items of goods, wares, merchandise or
foodstuffs commonly sold or offered for sale in the place of
business associated with the contiguously located merchant.
(c) "Contiguously located merchant" in this section means a
business whose place of business is located on the ground floor
abutting the sidewalk, and which has available to it
immediately adjacent sidewalk space.
(6) As a condition of the issuance of this permit, the sponsor must have
in force adequate liability insurance holding the City and its
employees harmless and to indemnify and defend the City or its
employees against all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense
arising out of or resulting from the activities for which the permit is
granted. As evidence of the sponsor's ability to perform this
condition of the permit, the sponsor shall furnish a certificate of
insurance evidencing the existence of a comprehensive general
liability insurance policy, with the City named as an additional
insured. Adequate liability limits means minimum limits of
$100,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and minimum limits of
$50,000 per occurrence for property damage. The certificate of
insurance shall provide for 30 days' written notice to the City upon
cancellation, nonrenewal or material change to the policy.
(7) The Watertown Area Chamber of Commerce is vested with
exclusive authority over the conduct of this special event,
including, but not limited to, use of sound equipment or public
address systems in the Central Business District, operation of food
stands within the Central Business District which may offer food for
sale to the general public, allocation of space limitations on
contiguously located merchants for use of sidewalks and streets for
display purposes, and a unified, comprehensive advertising
campaign or theme for the event, utilizing placards, banners and
other advertising materials.
E. Main Street Program weekend events. The Main Street Program (MSP)
is granted permission to manage a series of Friday night events from
May through August in downtown Watertown. The Main Street
Program must submit plans for any street closings in sufficient time for
the appropriate City departments to be able to make arrangements for
the safe and efficient closure of any streets. The Mayor, Police Chief and
Fire Chief will need to approve all street closures. [Added by Ord. No.
05-19]
§ 457-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-12
1:667
§ 457-13. Dip netting from bridges prohibited. [Added by Ord. No.
13-30; amended 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 15-40]
§ 457-14. Trains not to obstruct streets.
No railway corporation or person in charge of any locomotive, engine,
railway car, train or trains shall cause or permit said locomotive, engine,
railway car, train or trains, whether standing or in motion, to block any
street crossing in the City for longer than five minutes.
§ 457-15. Depositing of concrete in streets or alleys prohibited.
[Added by Ord. No. 93-58]
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to deposit concrete, concrete
residue or concrete truck cleanings upon any public lands within the
corporate City limits of the City of Watertown, including road rights-of-way,
or to make any deposits in the sanitary sewer or storm sewer systems of the
City of Watertown. Persons or firms convicted of violating the provisions of
(1) The details of the event are to be approved by the Mayor, Police
Chief and Fire Chief.
(2) The provisions of Subsection A of this section are suspended for
each of these events for the period of time beginning one hour
before and ending one hour after the schedule MSP event. The
MSP is responsible for approving the sidewalk events and the
vendors that are involved. In no case shall the tables block
pedestrian traffic, and they shall leave at least four feet of
unobstructed sidewalk.
(3) There shall be no parking in the closed section of the street or
municipal parking lot on which the event is to be held during the
time of the event. The MSP shall be responsible for posting signs in
sufficient time to notify vehicle owners of the closure of the street
or parking lot.
(4) The MSP shall make arrangements for barricades and "no parking"
signs with the appropriate department and ensure that they are
placed in a timely fashion and in such a manner that the general
public is notified.
A. Dip netting prohibited. It shall be unlawful to dip net from any bridge
within the City or actively or passively assist any such activity.
B. Signage. The Park, Recreation and Forestry Department is authorized
and directed to place and maintain suitable posts, signs or markers
designating the areas of prohibition consistent with Subsection A;
however, any failure to place or maintain such posts, signs or markers
shall constitute no legal defense or excuse to any prosecution under the
provisions hereof.
§ 457-12 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-15
1:668
this section shall pay a minimum forfeiture of $500 for a first conviction and
a minimum of $1,000 for second and subsequent convictions.
§ 457-16. Building numbers to be displayed.
§ 457-17. Depositing of yard waste in streets or alleys prohibited.
[Added by Ord. No. 03-30]
§ 457-18. Road debris. [Added by Ord. No. 05-28]
A. The owners and occupants of all stores, houses and other buildings
abutting on any of the streets in the City shall cause to be placed on
their respective stores, houses or other buildings street numbers
according to the plat of said City.
B. Numbers must be plainly visible from the curb of the street upon which
the house fronts and mounted on a contrasting background. The
minimum specifications on three types of house numbers presently
available shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum tile base size of three inches high by two inches wide;
nonilluminated.
(2) Minimum individual figure three inches high; nonilluminated.
(3) Illuminated number 1 1/4 inches high by seven-eighths-inch
wide.168
A. The depositing or placement of any type of yard waste, including grass
clippings, leaves or tree branches or any other yard waste, in the paved
portion of any road or alley is hereby prohibited. The Watertown Public
Works Commission shall be responsible for establishing a written policy
regarding the enforcement of this section. The Watertown Street
Superintendent and Assistant Street Superintendent shall have the
authority to issue citations to persons who violate this section.
B. The penalty for persons violating this section shall be $25 per
occurrence plus court costs and assessments. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
However, this section shall not preclude any appropriate action which
the City may take to restrain or remove a violation of this section.
A. Public policy. It is hereby declared that, in the interests of public safety,
health and general welfare, community appearance and efficiency of
operation, it is unlawful to place, throw, leave, in any way deposit or
permit to be deposited or permit to remain any dirt, rubbish, litter,
debris or material of any kind upon any street, sidewalk or alley within
the City.169
168. Editor's Note: Original § 8.12, Street and alley vacations, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 457-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-18
1:669
§ 457-18.1. Food vending on public streets. [Added 2-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-1]
B. Construction sites. All incidental mud-tracking off site from a
construction site onto adjacent public thoroughfares shall be cleaned
up and removed by the end of each working day using proper cleaning
and disposal methods.
C. Private property. The owner, occupant or person in charge of private
premises who places, causes or permits to remain any of such materials
upon any street, sidewalk or alley in the City shall immediately remove
said materials at no cost to the City.
D. Motor vehicle operator. The operator of any motor vehicle which tracks,
drops or places any materials upon any street, sidewalk or alley in the
City, except from a construction site, shall immediately stop and remove
such materials at no cost to the City. In the event such operator is
performing work under the control or authority of the owner, occupant
or person in charge of the work on private premises, and such operator
causes the deposit of any materials upon any street, sidewalk or alley in
the City, which such operator fails to remove as required in this
subsection, the owner, occupant or person in charge of such work on
such private premises shall remove said materials at no cost to the City.
E. City removal and costs. In the event the materials are not removed from
the street, sidewalk or alley in accordance with the aforementioned
subsections, the City shall cause the removal of such materials and
charge such operator or such owner, occupant or person in charge of
such work the cost of removal. In the event the person charged for such
removal fails to pay such costs within 30 days, it shall be entered on the
tax roll as special tax against such property.
F. Penalty provisions. In addition to the cost of removal, such operator,
owner, occupant or person in charge of such property shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than $50 per occurrence. Each day that such
materials are not removed shall constitute a separate offense under this
section.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MOBILE FOOD CARTS or PUSHCARTS or MOBILE FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT — A restaurant or retail food establishment where
food is served or sold from a movable NSF/ANSI 59 compliant pushcart
which periodically or continuously changes location and requires a
service base to accommodate the unit for servicing, cleaning,
inspection and maintenance.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-18.1
1:670
MOBILE FOOD VENDING TRAILERS or MOBILE FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT — A restaurant or retail food establishment where
food is served or sold from a movable trailer which periodically or
continuously changes location and requires a service base to
accommodate the unit for servicing, cleaning, inspection and
maintenance.
MOBILE OPERATOR — Includes any person, firm or corporation who
owns, leases, contracts or in any other fashion permits a person to
operate upon a City street, sidewalk or municipal parking lot any
mobile food establishment for the purpose of vending, or the person
driving or operating any such vehicle.
MOTORIZED FOOD VENDING VEHICLE or MOBILE FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT — A restaurant or retail food establishment where
food is served or sold from a motorized movable vehicle which
periodically or continuously changes location and requires a service
base to accommodate the unit for servicing, cleaning, inspection and
maintenance.
SIDEWALK — Has the meaning given in § 340.01(58), Wis. Stats.
VEND or VENDING — Offering food for sale from a mobile food
establishment on City-owned streets, sidewalks or parking lots.
Bicycle (two- or three-wheeled) food carts shall not be used as a
mobile food cart or pushcart.
(1)
Mobile food vending trailers shall only be permitted in Cityapproved
municipal parking lots.
(1)
B. Permit required. No mobile operator shall vend from a mobile food
establishment while on City-owned streets, sidewalks or parking lots
unless a permit to do so is obtained from the City Engineer or designee.
An annual permit and fee shall entitle the mobile operator to vend from
a mobile food establishment for the period of July 1 of the application
year through June 30 of the following year. For each additional
individual vehicle utilized by a mobile operator, an additional permit fee
shall be paid. Applicants must include a copy of their service base
license and mobile food establishment license required by the
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
or local agent with licensing authority.
(1) First-time applicants shall be eligible for a fifteen-month food
vending on public streets permit that shall permit the mobile
operator to vend from a mobile food establishment for the period of
April 1 of the application year through June 30 of the following year
at no additional fee.
C. Insurance. No permit shall be issued hereunder to a mobile operator
unless a certificate is furnished to the City evidencing in form
coverages and limits acceptable to the City that the mobile operator is
adequately insured with respect to public liability for personal injury or
§ 457-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-18.1
1:671
death resulting from any one occurrence and on account of any one
accident and property damage insurance; in addition:
(1) The City shall be an additional insured as evidenced on a certificate
of liability insurance:
(2) Upon receipt of a permit under this section, the mobile operator of
a mobile food establishment agrees that it shall defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees and agents from
and against all actions, losses, damages, liability, costs and
expenses of every type and description, including, but not limited
to, attorney fees, to which any or all of them may be subjected by
reason of, or resulting from, directly or indirectly, in whole or in
part, the acts or omissions of the permittee or the permittee's
agents, officers or employees, directly or indirectly arising from the
operation of a mobile food establishment;
(3) A certificate of liability insurance shall contain an
acknowledgement attested by the insurer that prior to
modification, cancellation or termination of the subject policy,
written notice shall be sent to the City Engineer by said insurance
company.
D. Inspections.
(1) Prior to the initial use and operation of a motorized food vending
vehicle, said vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by
a certified mechanic and found to comply with all standards of
safety prescribed by the laws of the state or the City. An inspection
report showing that a vehicle has met the standards of safety
prescribed by law must be presented to the City Engineer or
designee at the time of permit application.
(2) Every motorized food vending vehicle licensed pursuant to this
chapter shall be inspected from time to time, but no less frequently
than annually, by a certified mechanic to ensure the continued
maintenance of safe operating conditions. The operation of any
vehicle which fails to meet the standards of safety established by
law shall be discontinued until such time as the deficiency is
eliminated in the exclusive determination of the City.
(3) All mobile food establishments shall be inspected in accordance
with Ch. ATCP 75, Wis. Adm. Code, Wisconsin Food Code and
Chapter 319 of this Code.
E. Pedestrian sidewalk access. All vending activities from a mobile food
cart or push cart shall be conducted to maintain a minimum width of
three feet of unobstructed public pedestrian walkway adjacent to the
vending site.
F. Park and recreation facilities. See Chapter 398 of this Code.
§ 457-18.1 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-18.1
1:672
G. Restrictions on vending activity.
(1) A mobile operator shall not leave a mobile food establishment
unattended at any time.
(2) A mobile operator shall vend only when the mobile food
establishment is lawfully parked, stopped, or standing.
(3) A mobile operator of a motorized food vending vehicle shall vend
only from the side of the vehicle away from moving traffic and as
near as possible to the curb or outer limit of the street.
(4) A mobile operator shall not vend to any customer situated in the
street.
(5) Mobile food carts or push carts shall only vend on sidewalks or
City-approved municipal parking lots.
(6) Loading and unloading of mobile food carts or push carts shall not
obstruct traffic.
(7) The City Engineer shall establish and make known to mobile
operators all City streets, sidewalks or municipally owned parking
lots that are disapproved for the utilization of vending. The City
Engineer shall take into consideration factors such as the
classification of the street, the amount and character of the traffic
carried thereon, and any special hazards to the public which may
be created by permitting vending activity thereon.
(8) No vending activity shall occur between the hour of 10:00 p.m. and
the hour of 7:00 a.m. next succeeding.
(a) All mobile food establishments shall not be parked and/or
stored on or within any City of Watertown street, sidewalk or
municipally owned parking lot between the hour of 10:00 p.m.
and the hour of 7:00 a.m. next succeeding.
(9) A mobile operator must maintain at least one leakproof waste
container for customer use and shall be responsible for proper and
legal disposal of customer litter or other refuse collected in the
natural course of conducting the activities permitted under this
section. Mobile operators are required to remove or otherwise
properly dispose of all waste, litter or garbage generated by their
operations and patrons on a daily basis, including that which may
be reasonably seen from the location of operation on the ground or
otherwise not in a proper disposal container.
(10) A mobile food establishment or mobile operator shall not obstruct
the ingress or egress from commercial buildings and private
driveways.
(11) A mobile food establishment or mobile operator shall not vend
within 30 feet of the property line of a licensed food establishment.
§ 457-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-18.1
1:673
§ 457-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 1-4. Each violation and each day a violation
(12) A mobile operator shall not operate within 200 feet from a
community event or parade without written permission from the
event permit holder.
(a) A community event is an event licensed or permitted under
Chapter 398 or 428 of this Code.
(13)No mobile operator or mobile food establishment shall use utilities
from the public rights-of-way; this includes, but is not limited to,
reliance on extension cords or water hoses.
(14) Mobile operators or mobile food establishments relying on
generators shall not use or rely on a generator that produces noise
greater than 60 decibels.
(15) All mobile food establishments must have signage posted, in
lettering not less than three inches in height and two inches in
width, in plain view to all patrons that provides the name of the
mobile operator and a valid telephone number.
(16) All state, county, local agents with licensing authority and/or City of
Watertown licenses and/or permits shall be conspicuously
displayed on all mobile food establishments while in operation.
H. Sound amplification devices. No mobile operator while vending shall
use a sound amplification device, bell or horn which is audible for a
distance of more than 50 feet from a mobile food establishment. No
such device shall be used within 300 feet of any church or place of
worship, school, hospital, residential zoning district or municipal
building.
I. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. Failure to comply with all
applicable municipal code(s) or state statute(s) shall result in
immediate denial, suspension or revocation of a mobile operator's food
vending on public streets permit.
J. Appeal. The decision to deny, condition or suspend a permit shall be
reviewable upon appeal pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10 of this
Code.
K. Exemptions. A food vending on public streets permit shall not be
required for any mobile food establishment that is associated with a
public event under Chapter 428 of this Code, events/concessions under
Chapter 398 of this Code, Watertown Main Street Program's Farmers
Market, or Watertown Public Library's Farmers Market so long as the
food vending vehicle is removed within 24 hours of the stated end of the
licensed event.
§ 457-18.1 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-19
1:674
continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. However, this
section shall not preclude any appropriate action which the City may take
to restrain or remove a violation of this chapter.
§ 457-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-19
1:675

ARTICLE II
Utility Accommodations
[Added 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-14]
§ 457-20. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter's Article II, the terms below shall have
the following meanings:
ADMINISTRATOR — The City Engineer or his or her designee.
APPLICANT — A person filing an application for placement or
modification of a utility facility, defined under "utility facilities," in the
right-of-way.
APPLICATION — A formal request, including all required and requested
documentation and information, submitted by an applicant to the City
of Watertown for a permit.
BASE STATION — The same as in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(1), which
defines the term to mean a structure or wireless telecommunications
equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized
wireless communications between user equipment and a
communication network. This definition does not include towers.
CLEAR ZONE — The portion of the right-of-way free of nontraversable
hazards and fixed objects. These areas provide drivers a reasonable
opportunity to stop safely or otherwise regain control of their vehicle
when it leaves the traveled way. The clear zone generally varies with
the type of right-of-way, terrain traversed, road geometrics, and
operating conditions. Chapter 11 of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Facilities Development Manual should be used as the
guide for establishing clear zones.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — Has the same meaning as in 47
C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(3), which defines the term to mean any request
for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base
station, involving collocation of new transmission equipment; removal
of transmission equipment; or replacement of transmission equipment.
EMERGENCY UTILITY WORK — Unforeseen action by a utility deemed
necessary to restore an existing facility to service and/or protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to this chapter and authorizing
the utility permission to work within, use, occupy or cross the right-ofway.
Placement or modification of a utility facility of a design specified
in the permit at a particular location within the right-of-way, and the
modification of any existing support structure to which the utility
facility is proposed to be attached or collocated upon.
§ 457-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-20
1:677
PIPELINE — A utility facility installed to carry or convey a fluid, gas,
or other material, generally underground, including the casing and the
product being conveyed.
PRIVATE UTILITY FACILITIES — Facilities which convey or transmit
the commodities as defined by utility or small wireless facility, but are
owned and operated by an individual(s) or nonutility business and are
not accessible to the public.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — A person having control over a utility
project that is not administered by the City of Watertown.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below the
entire width of an improved or unimproved public roadway, highway,
street, bicycle lane, landscape terrace, shared-use path, side slope, and
public sidewalk over which the City of Watertown exercises any rights
of management and control or in which the City of Watertown has an
interest.
ROADWAY — The traveled way plus shoulders.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — Consistent with 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(1),
means a facility that meets each of the following conditions:
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any structure capable of supporting wireless
telecommunications equipment.
TOWER — Has the same meaning as in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(9), which
defines the term as any structure built for the sole or primary purpose
of supporting any Federal Communication Commission (FCC) licensed
The structure on which antenna facilities are mounted:
(a) Is 50 feet or less in height; or
(b) Is no more than 10% taller than other adjacent structures; or
Is not extended to a height of more than 50 feet or by more
than 10% above its preexisting height, whichever is greater, as
a result of the collocation of new antenna facilities;
(c)
(1)
Each antenna (excluding associated antenna equipment) is no more
than three cubic feet in volume;
(2)
All other wireless equipment associated with the structure,
including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and
any preexisting associated equipment on the structure, is
cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume;
(3)
(4) The facility does not require antenna structure registration;
(5) The facility is not located on Tribal lands; and
The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified by
federal law.
(6)
§ 457-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-20
1:678
or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including
structures that are constructed for wireless communications services,
including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless
services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. This
definition does not include utility poles.
TRAVELED WAY — The portion of the roadway for the movement of
vehicles which includes auxiliary lanes and ramps but excludes the
shoulders. Traveled way usually lies between the edgeline striping.
UNDERGROUND AREAS — Those areas where there are not electrical
facilities or facilities of the incumbent local exchange carrier in the
right-of-way; or where the wires associated with the same are or are
required to be located underground; or where the same are scheduled
to be converted from overhead to underground. Electrical facilities are
distribution facilities owned by an electric utility and do not include
transmission facilities used or intended to be used to transmit
electricity at nominal voltages more than 35,000 volts.
UTILITY — Any corporation, company, individual or association,
including their lessees, trustees, or receivers, or any cooperative
association, town, or City of Watertown owns, operates, manages, or
controls any plant or fixed equipment within the corporate limits of
the City of Watertown for conveyance of communications, wireless
communications, electric power, light, heat, fuel, gas, oil, petroleum
products, water, steam, fluids, sewerage, drainage, irrigation, or similar
facilities. The owners or operators of cable television systems, small
wireless facility, wireless telecommunications facility, publicly owned
fire or police signal systems, traffic and street lighting facilities, or
privately owned facilities which perform and of the utility functions
above.
UTILITY FACILITIES —
TRANSMISSION FACILITY — A utility facility which generally
carries the product from the source to the distribution network.
Additional terms are "communication feeder," "toll," and "trunk
lines."
(1)
DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — A utility facility which distributes the
utility product from a transmission facility to points convenient to
its customers.
(2)
SERVICE FACILITY — A utility facility which serves a single
customer via a connection with a distribution line. Additional terms
for a service line include "lateral" and "drop."
(3)
WIRELESS FACILITY — See "small wireless facility" and "wireless
telecommunications facility."
(4)
§ 457-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-20
1:679
§ 457-21. Introduction.
UTILITY MAINTENANCE — Any use by a utility of labor or materials
for repairs or replacement of parts of an existing utility facility to retain
its use as intended, limited to the work types as further defined herein.
UTILITY OPERATION — Any activity by a utility to assure the function
of an existing utility for its intended purpose.
UTILITY POLE — A structure in the right-of-way designed to support
electric, telephone, and similar utility distribution lines and associated
equipment. A tower is not a utility pole.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — A person that owns,
controls, operates, or manages a wireless telecommunications facility
or portion thereof within the right-of-way.
WIRELESS REGULATIONS — Those regulations adopted pursuant to
§ 457-50D(2)(a) to implement the provisions of this chapter.
WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity that provides wireless
services to end users.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — Equipment at
a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless
communications between user equipment and a communication
network.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A facility at a fixed
location in the right-of-way consisting of a base station, antennas and
other accessory equipment, and a tower and underground wiring, if
any, associated with the base station.
B. Definitions in this section may contain quotations or citations to 47
C.F.R. §§ 1.6100 and 1.6002. In the event than any referenced section is
amended, creating a conflict between the definitions as set forth in this
chapter and the amended language of the referenced section, the
definition in the referenced section, as amended, shall control.
A. Overview of utility accommodation. The City of Watertown maintains
and operates the system under the City of Watertown's jurisdiction to
provide a safe and convenient means for the pedestrian, bicycle, and
vehicular transportation of people and goods, and utility companies
provide essential services to the public. Both the City of Watertown and
utility companies typically provide facilities which consider present as
well as future needs. Cooperation between these two entities is
essential if the public is to be served at the lowest possible cost
consistent with their respective public service needs, obligations, and
interests. Although the City of Watertown strives to accommodate
utility facilities whenever possible, the permitted use and occupancy of
the right-of-way for non-right-of-way purposes is subordinate to the
primary interests and public health, safety, and welfare of the traveling
public.
§ 457-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-21
1:680
B. Purpose of the utility accommodation regulations. The purpose of this
chapter is to prescribe the regulations that shall be met by any utility
whose facility currently occupies, or will occupy in the future, any rightof-
way which the City of Watertown has jurisdiction.
(1) This chapter applies to all public and private utilities as defined in
§ 457-20. It also applies to all existing utility facilities retained,
relocated, replaced, or altered, and to new facilities installed in the
City of Watertown's right-of-way.
(2) Right-of-way facilities (e.g., lighting, traffic signals, changeable
message boards, etc.) operated by the City of Watertown for the
purpose of ensuring pedestrian, bicycle, or motorist safety shall not
be bound by the regulations contain within this chapter.
C. Utility accommodation statutes. The City of Watertown regulates the
use, occupation, and utility accommodation of the right-of-way under §§
66.047, 85.15, 86.07(2), 86.16, 182.017, Wis. Stats. and under
Watertown Municipal Code § 545-23.
D. Utility accommodation. The City of Watertown shall handle requests for
utility accommodations or managing facilities that are already located
in the right-of-way:
(1) Permits. The City of Watertown permits utility facilities in the rightof-
way when:
(a) Such use and occupancy does not adversely affect the primary
functions of the right-of-way or materially impair their safety,
operational, or visual qualities.
(b) There would be no conflict with the provisions of federal, state,
or local laws or regulations or the accommodation provisions
stated herein.
(c) The occupancies would not significantly increase the difficulty
or future cost of right-of-way construction or maintenance.
(2) Additions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the
rights of the City of Watertown to impose restrictions or
requirements in addition to and/or deviations from those stated
herein in any permit where the City of Watertown deems it
advisable to do so. An appropriate explanation for such action
should be provided to the utility.
(3) Alterations. The permitted facilities shall, if necessary, be altered
by the utility to facilitate alteration, improvement, safety control, or
maintenance of the right-of-way as may be ordered after permit
approval. All costs for construction, maintaining, altering, and
relocating the permitted facilities shall be the obligation of the
applicant, unless a specific City of Watertown-executed utility
parcel or agreement otherwise provides.
§ 457-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-22
1:681
§ 457-22. Indemnification.
The applicant and/or permit holder, by accepting a permit under this
chapter, agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City of
Watertown, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents,
representatives, and volunteers (collectively, the "indemnified parties")
from and against any and all suits, actions, legal or administrative
proceedings, claims, demands, damages, liabilities, interest, attorneys' fees,
costs, and expenses of whatsoever kind or nature in any manner caused in
whole or in part, or claimed to be caused in whole or in part, by reason
of any act, omission, fault, or negligence, whether active or passive, of
the permit holder or anyone acting under its direction or control or on its
behalf, even if liability is also sought to be imposed on one or more of the
indemnified parties. The obligation to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless
the indemnified parties shall be applicable even if the liability results from
an act or failure to act on the part of one or more of the indemnified parties.
However, the obligation does not apply if the liability results from the willful
misconduct of an indemnified party.
§ 457-23. General information.
A. Buried line locating notification. Each applicant for a permit to work on
a City of Watertown right-of-way shall provide a reliable line-locate
notification service by either or both of the following means:
(1) If the applicant has membership in a one-call utility notification
service, it shall enter the current telephone number(s) for the
service on the face of each permit application form. The applicant
shall also provide written notification to the Administrator upon or
in advance of any subsequent changes in the one-call contact
information such as cessation of membership, changes in the
contact telephone number(s), etc.
(2) If the applicant lacks membership in a one-call utility notification
service at the time of application for a permit, or has membership
but desires to provide a second resource for line locates, they shall:
(a) Provide operational area maps which accurately specify the
area(s) in which the applicant has lines or a franchise to install
lines. A minimum of one such map shall be furnished to the City
of Watertown. The applicant shall advise the Administrator of
any future changes in its operational area(s) and supply
updated maps showing the current conditions; and
(b) Enter on the face of each permit application form the current
telephone number(s) to be called to obtain specific line locates
from the applicant. The applicant should notify the
Administrator of any change to these telephone numbers.
B. Design responsibility. The utility shall be responsible for the design of
the facility to be installed or adjusted within the right-of-way. The
§ 457-22 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-23
1:682
§ 457-24. Emergency work.
§ 457-25. Abandoned facility.
Administrator shall be responsible for review of the utility's proposal
and for permit approval.
C. Utility facility conditions requirements. All utility facilities shall be kept
in a good state of repair both structurally and from the standpoint of
appearance.
D. Chemical treatment and cutting of trees. See Watertown Municipal
Code, Chapter 484, Trees.
E. Draining wetlands. The installation of privately owned lines or conduits
in the right-of-way for the purpose of draining wetlands is prohibited.
All utility facilities shall comply with Watertown Municipal Code
Chapter 532, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning.
A. Emergency situations may arise when immediate action to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the general public requires utility
operations within the City of Watertown right-of-way that are not in full
compliance with the provision of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be
construed as requiring a utility to delay such emergency repair.
B. Emergency repairs may be performed within the right-of-way when
physical conditions or time considerations prevent application for the
usual permit. However, as soon as feasible, the utility shall advise the
Administrator of the emergency, its plans or actions for alleviating the
dangerous situation(s), and make arrangement for the control and
protection of pedestrians, bicyclists, or traffic affected by its proposed
operations. When this chapter requires a permit for such work, a permit
shall be obtained as soon as possible and any alterations deemed
necessary through the permit approval process shall be made.
A. Aboveground facilities. If a utility discontinues use of an aboveground
facility, the facility shall be entirely removed from the right-of-way
within one year after its use is discontinued unless written approval for
a time extension is granted by the Administrator or a proper permit is
requested and approved by the City of Watertown for sale to another
utility. Abandoned aboveground facilities are deemed to be a nuisance.
In addition to any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, the City
of Watertown may, at its option:
(1) Abate the nuisance and recover the cost from the permit holder or
the permits holder's successor in interest;
(2) Take possession of the facilities; and/or
(3) Require removal of the facilities by the permit holder or the permit
holder's successor in interest.
§ 457-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-25
1:683
B. Underground facilities. Effective September 3, 2019, a record of
underground utility facilities abandoned in the right-of-way shall be
maintained in a utility's permanent files until the facility is completely
removed from the ground. The record should be similar quality and
detail as any other map or plan submitted to the Administrator for
permit approval. A utility shall take the steps it feels is necessary to be
able to provide an approximate location of abandoned facilities in the
future. The approximate location provided by the utility shall be within
a ten-foot-wide corridor (i.e., five feet either side as measured
perpendicular to a facility). If a utility facility is to be abandoned as a
part of a permit for a new facility, it shall be field located and shown on
the permit request for the new facility.
(1) Upon request by the Administrator, each utility and the City of
Watertown requesting the information, shall agree on the method
of transferring the abandoned facility information in accordance
with the mapping capabilities of the utility. A utility shall update the
map annually if requested by the City of Watertown. The utility may
place a disclaimer on the abandonment map such as:
"The locations on this map cannot be relied upon for any purpose
except general information and planning that an abandoned utility
facility is in the right-of-way. The user remains obligated to call
Digger's Hotline at least three working days prior to any
excavation. All utility facilities uncovered in the right-of-way shall
be handled as active or energized until confirmed by a utility
representative that it is an abandoned or temporarily de-energized
facility."
(2) Upon request by the City of Watertown, the utility shall provide a
map (noted above) indicating all facilities abandoned prior to
September 3, 2019 on record, if the utility has maintained such
records.
(3) When the City of Watertown intends to perform work in an area, it
may call the utility to request confirmation of any abandoned
facilities in that area. The utility shall respond to the request within
10 calendar days and shall provide the City of Watertown with a
more detailed record of the abandoned facilities in that area, if
available.
(4) When an unidentified utility facility is exposed or damaged, the City
of Watertown shall call the utility to have a representative visit the
site and identify its facility. The utility should physically respond to
the site, if required, or contact the City of Watertown's
representative within two hours, and in all cases, shall physically
respond to the site within six hours after notification, if required.
(5) The City of Watertown shall not require a utility to physically
remove any abandoned underground facility so long as a
permanent record of it is maintained and if it does not prevent the
§ 457-25 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-25
1:684
§ 457-26. Compliance.
construction or modification of any right-of-way improvement and/
or structure. The utility shall remove any abandoned underground
facility if it poses a public health, safety, and welfare risk to
pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorists. However, abandoned
appurtenant facilities such as manholes and pull boxes shall be
filled in or removed in accordance with the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction," current edition.
C. Structure attachments. Utility facilities abandoned on a structure shall
be removed within 60 days of the abandonment unless otherwise
approved by the City of Watertown. All removal costs shall be the
responsibility of the utility.
A. Authority. The Administrator or his or her designee has the authority to
enforce this chapter and those specific provisions related to individual
utility permits. As part of the administration of this chapter, the
Administrator may:
(1) Adopt regulations governing the placement and modification of
utility facilities in addition to but consistent with the requirements
of this chapter, including regulations governing attachment or
collocation, the resolution of conflicting applications for placement
of utility facilities, and aesthetic standards.
(2) Interpret the provisions of the chapter and the regulations the
utility facility is subject to.
(3) Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for
utility facilities with this chapter.
(4) Collect any fee required by this chapter.
(a) The applicant must provide an application fee and shall be
required to pay all costs reasonably incurred in reviewing the
application, including cost incurred in retaining outside
consultants.
(5) Require, as a condition of completeness of any application, notice
to members of the public that may be affected by the placement or
modification of a utility facility that is subject of the permit
application.
(6) Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an
application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate
and consistent with federal laws and regulations.
(7) Issue notices of incompleteness or requests for information in
connections with any wireless permit application.
§ 457-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-26
1:685
(8) Select and retain an independent consultant or attorney with
expertise in the utility facility to review any issue that involves
specialized or expert knowledge in connection with any permit
application.
(9) Coordinate and consult with other City of Watertown staff,
committees, consultants, and governing bodies to ensure timely
action on all other required permits under this chapter.
(10) Subject to appeal as provided in § 457-26B of this chapter,
determine whether to grant, grant subject to conditions, or deny an
application.
(11) Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon utility
facility permit applications, including issuing written decisions and
entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action on
an application.
B. Appeal to the City of Watertown Common Council. Any person
adversely affected by the decision of the Administrator may appeal that
decision to the City of Watertown Common Council, which may decide
the issues de novo, and whose written decision will be the final decision
of the City of Watertown.
C. Failure to comply. At the Administrator's option, the following measures
may be taken if a utility fails to comply with this chapter or its permit
provisions:
(1) Verbal request for corrective action. The request shall include:
(a) The reason(s) why the present or completed operation is (was)
not in compliance with this chapter or the permit provisions;
(b) What steps shall be taken to correct the situation; and
(c) What additional actions may be taken if § 457-26C(1)(b) is
disregarded [§ 457-26C(2) through 457-26C(7)].
(2) Written reprimand. A written reprimand shall be sent to the utility
for violating this chapter or its permit provisions when the utility
does not comply with the verbal request.
(a) The written reprimand shall contain the same information as
the verbal request and shall serve as documentation for the
violation. The Administrator shall be responsible for writing
and sending the reprimand.
(3) Suspension of work activities. If a responsible person of an
inspected work site fails to comply with a verbal request, the
Administrator may order the suspension of all work activities at the
site.
§ 457-26 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-26
1:686
(a) The Administrator shall then contact an authority of the utility
to explain why the operation was suspended and what action
needs to be taken before work can resume.
(4) Removal of installed facilities. Any facility installed by a utility shall
be in the location shown on the approved permit. If such a facility is
discovered in an unacceptable location and the utility is notified,
the utility shall have two weeks' response time to decide on its
corrective action. If the utility fails to take corrective action, the
Administrator shall take action to have the facility relocated or
removed at the utility's expense.
(a) The permittee shall remove the improperly placed facility and
put it in an approved location. If the utility fails to relocate the
facility, the City of Watertown shall have the facility removed
and bill the permittee for such work.
(5) Permit revocation. When a utility continues to be in noncompliance
with this chapter or its permit provisions, the Administrator may
revoke the utility's permit. The utility may reapply for a permit to
the Administrator when it can demonstrate a good faith effort to
comply.
(6) Public Service Commission (PSC) notification. Continued violations
by a utility of this chapter or its permit provisions may cause the
Administrator to notify the PSC and request its assistance in
correcting the situation.
(7) Withholding approval of future permits. Continued violations by a
utility of this chapter or its permit provisions may cause the
Administrator to withhold approval of permit applications for that
utility until the violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the
Administrator. The severity and number of written reprimands
against a utility may serve as a guide in determining future permit
approval.
D. Procedures. When a utility site is inspected by the Administrator to
determine compliance with this chapter or its permit provisions, the
following procedures may be utilized:
(1) Inspection of work in progress. Upon reaching a work site, the
Administrator shall locate a responsible person and ask to review
and discuss the utility operation. If applicable, a review of a copy of
the permit which the utility or its contractor is required to have
available at the site shall also be performed.
(a) If the Administrator decides that changes to the operation are
needed in order to bring it into compliance with this chapter or
provisions of its permit, then a verbal request is the first
corrective measure that shall be taken.
§ 457-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-26
1:687
§ 457-27. Environmental conditions.
(2) After a permitted operation has been completed, the utility is
required to notify the Administrator that work on the permit is
complete and the job site is subject to an inspection by the
Administrator. If the work was done in violation of this chapter or
the provisions of a utility's permit, then a verbal request is the first
corrective measure which shall be taken. The utility shall have two
weeks' response time to decide on its corrective action.
E. Immediate action (work in progress). When a utility operation or
installation is not in compliance with this chapter or the provisions of its
permit and is adversely affecting public health, safety, and welfare, the
Administrator shall then call the City of Watertown Police Department
to have the utility or its contractor(s), subcontractor(s), or consultant(s)
removed from the City of Watertown's right-of-way. The Administrator
shall also take corrective measures to return the right-of-way to a safe
operating condition.
A. Introduction. This section specifies responsibilities and the procedures
that a utility shall follow when environmental conditions are
encountered in the right-of-way. These conditions include, but are not
limited to archeological sites, historic structures, contaminated soils,
underground storage tanks (USTs), and leaking underground storage
tanks (LUSTs).
B. City of Watertown responsibility. The Administrator shall notify a utility
when its facilities may be affected by a proposed improvement project.
If the utility confirms that its facilities are in the vicinity of the
improvements, the Administrator shall mail the utility at least that
portion of the improvement plan that concerns those facilities. The
Administrator shall also provide any additional and duplicate plan
information needed by the utility to design and lay out the removal,
relocation, or adjustment of the existing utility facilities and the
placement of relocated or additional facilities within the project limits.
This includes furnishing a utility with information regarding any
environmental conditions if site assessments are performed as required
part of the Administrator's project investigation. This information shall
be considered for "informational purposes only" since data may change
from the time an investigation is completed until the time a report is
reviewed.
C. Utility responsibility. The utility shall be responsible to perform a site
assessment for its own facilities. Utilities which obtain a permit from
the City of Watertown shall be solely responsible for surveying the
right-of-way for environmental conditions solely for its own purpose
where utility construction or utility maintenance will occur to
determine if said area is an endangered species habitat. The utility shall
be fully responsible for preservation or mitigation of said habitat in
compliance with regulations promulgated by the Wisconsin Department
§ 457-26 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-27
1:688
of Natural Resources. Areas of concern are habitats for species
specified by the DNR.
(1) The utility shall also be responsible to comply with Watertown
Municipal Code Chapter 532, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning, and Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 116.
D. Site assessments. If contacted, the Administrator will provide any
information it has available on environmental issues under the public
records law.
(1) When a utility needs to do site assessments (investigations), the
procedures listed in the Wisconsin Department of Transportation's
Facilities Development Manual may be used as a guide. Specifically,
Chapter 26 has information on archeological and historic
assessments, and Chapter 21, Section 35, has information
regarding contaminated site assessments.
(2) The City of Watertown recommends that site assessments be
performed by a qualified historian, archeologist, or environmental
consultant if the utility does not employ personnel specifically
qualified for this work.
E. Discovery of environmental conditions. Whether the discovery of
environmental conditions occurs during a site assessment, facility
installation, or maintenance operation, all work shall be suspended
immediately. Failure to do so may result in financial responsibility for
the utility due to subsequent site assessment, mitigation, remediation,
or possible fines. Specifically, if a utility fails to comply with § 457-27E
of this chapter, it may be responsible for a percentage of the costs
depending on how much worse the situation became due to the utility's
action. A checklist has been developed to help the utilities obtain the
necessary information which may be asked of them by site
investigators. The checklist shall be included with the permit
application.
(1) If the sites poses a possible health or safety risk, the City of
Watertown Police and Fire Departments shall be notified
immediately and the utility shall take the necessary steps to
provide for the safety of people and property in the area. After
suspended operations, the utility shall contact the offices listed in
Table A depending upon the type of conditions discovered.
§ 457-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-27
1:689
Table A: Notification Table (Note: Call all that apply)
Utility Discovers Environmental Condition within City of
Watertown Right-of-Way
Category Please Call
Archeological Sites or
Historic Structure
Historic structure State Historic Preservation
Office
(608) 264-6512
Archeological site State Historic Preservation
Office
(608) 264-6507
Burial Burial Site Preservation Office
(608) 264-6507 or (800)
342-7834
Utility project but no City of
Watertown project
City of Watertown Street
Department
(920) 262-4080
City of Watertown projects City of Watertown Street
Department
(920) 262-4080
Contaminated Soils, USTs,
LUSTs, etc.
City of Watertown Street
Department
(920) 262-4080
Local DNR Office1 DNR Regional Office
(608) 275-3266 or (608)
266-2621 or
(608) 743-4800 or (608)
935-3368
Utility projects but no City of
Watertown project
City of Watertown Street
Department
(920) 262-4080
Department project City of Watertown Street
Department
(920) 262-4080
1 Required under Wisconsin law.
§ 457-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-27
1:690
(2) The Administrator will notify the utility when it can resume its
operation.
F. Utility facility placement options. When environmental conditions are
discovered in the right-of-way, the DNR or State Historic Preservation
Office (SHPO) shall determine whether the utility can locate its facility
within the affected area. Based upon their decision, the following may
occur:
(1) The utility entirely avoids the affected area:
(a) The DNR or SHPO mandates that the area shall be left in its
natural state, and no utility facilities shall be allowed in the
area.
(b) The utility decides that it wants to locate in another area and
avoid possible delays to its project due to site assessments,
remediation, mitigation, or the possible decision noted in
§ 457-27F(1)(a).
(2) Utility can locate around or through the affected area:
(a) The DNR or SHPO orders the site to be completely remediated
or mitigated before any utility installation can take place. The
utility would then have a clear corridor in which to locate its
facility.
(b) The DNR or SHPO decides that the area can be left in its
natural state, but any area that is disturbed or affected by the
utility operation (based upon the DNR's or SHPO's assessment)
has to be remediated or mitigated. The utility may also elect to
go around the area, if possible, and avoid remediation or
mitigation after getting approval for a permit revision.
(c) The DNR or SHPO decides that the area can be left in its
natural state, and the conditions do not have to be remediated
or mitigated as long as the utility exercises extreme care to
avoid any significant disruption to the area. In the case of an
archeological or historic site, a utility may be allowed to place
a facility in an area that was already disturbed. In the case of
hazardous materials site, a utility would have to utilize
construction methods that would prevent any contamination
from spreading.
(3) Unless the City of Watertown has taken charge of the remediation
or mitigation process due to a City of Watertown project, a utility
that decides to locate its facility through an affected area, as
described in § 457-27F(2), shall document in its permit application
that it has contacted the DNR or SHPO and has received the proper
authorization to locate in the area along with its proposed
construction methods. The utility will be responsible for all
associated costs.
§ 457-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-27
1:691
G. Financial responsibility. When a utility performs an initial site
assessment on City of Watertown right-of-way, either with a project of
its own or because a City of Watertown project is not required to obtain
environmental information, the utility shall bear the cost of the
assessment. If an environmental site is exposed, a DNR assessment
must be performed. No matter who performed the initial assessment or
even if they were done, a utility that discovers any environmental
conditions shall not be responsible for assessment, mitigation, or
remediation cost provided it had complied with § 457-27E of this policy
and avoids the site by placing its facility in another permitted location.
Table B specifies who may have to pay for assessments, mitigation, or
remediation costs depending on the situation.
Table B: Financial Responsibility
Utility Discovers Environmental Conditions While Working on
City of Watertown Right-of-Way
AND DECIDES TO LOCATE IN THE AFFECTED AREA
Category/Activity Who Pays for the Activity?
Archeological Sites or Historic
Structures
A) Site assessments (identification
or evaluation surveys)1
Utility project but no City of
Watertown project
Utility
City of Watertown project Utility or City of Watertown2
B) Mitigation1
State Historic Preservation
Office order
Utility
No State Historic
Preservation Office order
Utility
Contaminated Soils, USTs, LUSTs,
etc.
C) Site assessments
Utility project but no City of
Watertown project
RP4 or City of Watertown or
Utility3
City of Watertown project RP4 or City of Watertown or
Utility3
D) Remediation
DNR order RP4 or City of Watertown or
Utility3
§ 457-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-27
1:692
§ 457-28. Permit requirements.
Table B: Financial Responsibility
Utility Discovers Environmental Conditions While Working on
City of Watertown Right-of-Way
AND DECIDES TO LOCATE IN THE AFFECTED AREA
Category/Activity Who Pays for the Activity?
No DNR order Utility
1. City of Watertown policy is to not spend available resources for
assessment or mitigation, but rather to preserve archeological
sites and historic structures in place. This is in accordance with
§ 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act.
2. Applicable only when the City of Watertown is required to obtain
environmental information for its project.
3. Specifically, if a utility fails to comply with § 457-27E of this
chapter, it may be responsible for a percentage of the costs
depending upon how much worse the situation became due to the
utilities action.
If the City of Watertown is not the RP4, then a utility which incurs
costs due to encountering contaminated soils, USTs or LUSTs will
have to recover them from the RP4.
4. RP = Responsible party (owner of the source of the hazard as
determined by the DNR).
A. Need for a permit. A utility shall obtain a permit from the City of
Watertown before any use or occupancy of the City of Watertown's
right-of-way is allowed. This includes utilities that want to occupy
existing pole line or duct systems (e.g. CATV attaching to another utility
company's existing poles). Exceptions to this are enumerated in
§§ 457-47 through 457-51.
B. Permit authorization to use and/or occupy right-of-way. By issuance of a
permit, the City of Watertown formally indicates that, subject to all
applicable permit conditions, a specified use and/or occupancy of rightof-
way is not adverse to the right-of-way interests at the time of permit
approval.
(1) The City of Watertown does not warrant that public title to the
right-of-way is free and clear, does not certify that it has sole
ownership, and does not indicate any intention to defend the utility
in its peaceful use and occupancy of said lands.
(2) The permit does not transfer any land, nor give, grant, or convey
any land right, right in land, or easement subject to applicable
statutes.
§ 457-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-28
1:693
§ 457-29. Required information.
(3) Written authorization from the City of Watertown does not relieve
the utility from compliance with all federal and state laws and
codes and local laws and ordinances which affect the design,
construction, materials, or performance of its work. The City of
Watertown authorization shall not be construed as superseding any
other governmental agency's more restrictive requirements.
(4) The utility should retain a copy of the permit in its files during the
entire time the facility is located in, over, or under the City of
Watertown's right-of-way and shall have a copy available at the job
site during construction.
(5) All utility permits issued by the City of Watertown are revocable for
cause as provided herein. Section 457-26 highlights the steps that
may be used by the City of Watertown in order to revoke a permit.
A. General policy. A utility's request to use and occupy the right-of-way
cannot be considered until adequate information is provided regarding
its proposed work. The amount of detail will vary with the complexity of
the installation and the right-of-way involved, but must include the
appropriate permit application form, dimensioned drawings or
sketches, and installation information so that the effect of the right-ofway
operation, pedestrian safety, bicyclist safety, traffic safety, and
visual qualities can be evaluated.
B. Utilities shall only use the application form which is made by the City of
Watertown. Alteration of the permit application form by the applicant is
prohibited and shall be just cause for application rejection or permit
revocation.
(1) The utility must submit both a paper copy and an electronic copy
(in a searchable format) of any application, with an authorized
signature, as well as any amendments or supplements to the
application or response to requests for information regarding an
application, to the Administrator. An application is not complete
until both the paper and electronic copies are received by the
Administrator. The name of the applicant (including any corporate
or trade name), and the name, address, email address, and
telephone number of a local representative shall be included on
each permit application form.
(2) See § 457-30 for annual service connection permit information.
C. Permit limits. The permit application form shall include the limits
(project endpoints) of all proposed work. The permit authorizes only the
described work of and for the applicant indicated on the face of the
permit. The permit shall not grant authority for the present or future
installation of any other facility.
§ 457-28 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-29
1:694
D. Permit drawings. Each permit application shall contain adequate
drawings showing the proposed right-of-way improvement and any
existing utility facilities. The details shall include the dimensions from
the proposed utility installation to the commonly accepted right-of-way
line and edge of the traveled way.
(1) For right-of-way crossings, a cross-section detail showing depth of
bury or overhead clearance is required along with the location of
any bore pits (if needed). A distance reference from the crossing to
the nearest public roadway intersection is also required. Land ties
(e.g. approximate distance from the proposed facility to side road
intersections, municipal boundaries, etc.) shall be submitted with
all permit application drawings.
E. Installation information.
(1) The utility shall provide the following installation information:
(a) This information shall include, but not limited to, a general
description of the location, size, type, nature, and extent of the
utility facilities to be installed or to be adjusted, and the impact
on the utility's existing facilities to remain in place within the
right-of-way.
(b) The Administrator may require a utility to provide a
description of proposed construction procedures, special
traffic control and protection measures, proposed access
points, coordination of activities with the Administrator, or
trees to be removed.
(c) When an attachment to a structure is proposed, the
Administrator shall request additional information. This
information may include, but not limited to, bridge number,
weight of lines, hanger spacing, hanger details, tolerances of
the structure on which it will be attached, and expansion/
contraction details.
(2) See § 457-35 for additional requirements regarding structure
attachments.
F. English units. The City of Watertown is expecting to work exclusively
with English units which shall be used on all permit application forms
and submittals.
G. Certification. A certification by a registered and qualified engineer that
the installation and/or utility facility will meet all applicable tolerances
and safety standards required for the permitted project.
H. Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance is to be furnished to
the Administrator evidencing in form coverages and limits acceptable
to the City of Watertown that the applicant has the capability to cover
§ 457-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-29
1:695
§ 457-30. Annual Service Connection Permit (ASCP).
any liability that might arise out of the presence of the utility facility in
the right-of-way; in addition:
(1) The City shall be an additional insured as evidenced on a certificate
of liability insurance; and
(2) A certificate of insurance shall contain an acknowledgement
attested by the insurer that prior to modification, cancellation or
termination of the subject policy, written notice shall be sent to the
Administrator by said insurance company.
A. General policy. A utility shall obtain a permit for the City of Watertown
before installing any type of service line that requires a connection from
an existing distribution facility within the right-of-way. However, the
City of Watertown recognizes that a utility must respond promptly to its
customers when they request service connections to their homes or
businesses. In order to help expedite the process, a utility may apply for
an annual service connection permit (ASCP) from the City of Watertown
which bypasses the normal permit approval process and electronically
send each proposed service location permit.
(1) This policy does not affect § 457-24, Emergency work. Approvals
for emergency service connections should still be handled by a
phone call to the City of Watertown.
(2) All work described in this policy shall comply with the entirety of
this chapter.
B. Application information. A utility shall use the City of Watertown's
standard permit application to apply for an ASCP which shall be sent to
the Administrator for review. The ASCP shall only be effective during
the calendar year. A copy of the ASCP shall be kept on the job site at all
times.
(1) The Administrator may reject an ASCP application if a utility has
been delinquent in rectifying previous or current installations
which violate this chapter (e.g., site restoration). In addition the
Administrator may suspend or permanently revoke an ASCP due to
violations of this chapter.
C. Coverage. The ASCP shall pertain to service connections only. In
addition, an extension of the existing distribution line up to 300 feet is
allowed to facilitate the installation of the service. Both overhead and
underground short-side (same side of right-of-way and the distribution
line) service connections are allowable. See Figures 2 and 3. Long-side
(opposite side of right-of-way as the distribution service line) service
connections are also allowable, but may be limited to underground
installation. See Figures 4 and 5.
§ 457-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-30
1:696
D. Implementation.
(1) Once an ASCP has been approved by the Administrator, a utility
shall implement the following process to obtain approval for
installing a service connection. A utility shall submit, electronically,
a location sketch of the proposed service for the Administrator to
review at least three business days prior to the start of work. A
copy of the utility's work order may be sufficient for this. The
information provided shall include the:
(a) Utility's ASCP number.
(b) Address of the service connection.
(c) Distance from the nearest intersection to the service line.
(d) Name of the utility and employee who need the Administrator's
reply along with that person's telephone, fax number, or email
address.
(2) An ASCP does not authorize a utility to start work. The
Administrator shall notify the utility within three working days of
receipt of the utility service connection request when it is okay to
proceed with the proposed service work - usually by telephone,
return fax, or email unless another method is specified by the
utility. If the utility does not hear from the Administrator prior to
commencing work, it should call the Administrator.
E. Work restrictions.
(1) If a utility cannot meet all of the conditions listed below, then it
shall obtain a regular permit for that specific service connection.
Under an ASCP, all work shall be done:
(a) Without any interference or disruption to traffic. Exceptions
may be granted for low-volume (500 ADT or less).
(b) Without open cutting the pavement, paved shoulders,
sidewalk, shared-use paths, or medians.
§ 457-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-30
1:697
§ 457-31. Application modification.
The Administrator has the right to modify the utility's permit application
as necessary to protect the right-of-way interests. The modification may
be more restrictive than what was originally proposed. The permit, as
approved, shall embody the conditions to which the utility shall comply
in order to use or occupy the right-of-way. Changes to the permit could
include, but not limited to, changing traffic control plan, utility location due
to conflicts, or utility locations due to field conditions.
§ 457-32. Location requirements.
(c) For long-sided connections, using untrenched construction
techniques only. Any boring machine that is used shall not be
guided from the roadway surface. The use of the median area
is prohibited per § 457-37B - even to check or guide the boring
machine. Boring shall be accomplished no closer to the
roadway than the toe of inslope or back of curb in accordance
with § 457-43B. The bore shall be perpendicular to the
roadway.
(2) Overhead, long-sided service connections may be allowed on lowvolume
(500 ADT or less) roadways during off-peak travel hours.
The use of a law enforcement officer to stop traffic may be
required.
F. Fee. An ASCP shall be assessed a permit fee once per calendar year for
service connections covered under § 457-30C.
A. General location. Utility facilities shall be located in such a manner in
order to minimize the need for later adjustment to:
(1) Accommodate proposed right-of-way improvements.
(2) Permit servicing or expanding such lines without obstruction or
interference to the free flow of pedestrian, bicyclist, or vehicular
traffic within the right-of-way.
(3) Provide adequate vertical and horizontal clearance between an
underground utility facility and a structure or other right-of-way
facility to allow maintenance of all facilities.
(4) Be outside of the 45° cone of support for the footing of all right-ofway
structures.
B. Crossing location. Utility facilities shall cross the right-of-way on a line
as nearly perpendicular to the right-of-way alignment as possible.
Conditions which are generally unsuitable or undesirable for
underground crossing should be avoided. Crossing locations to be
avoided include:
(1) Deep cuts.
§ 457-30 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-32
1:698
(2) Near footings of bridges or retaining walls.
(3) Across roadway intersections at grad or ramp terminals.
(4) At cross drains where the flow of water may be obstructed.
(5) Within basins of an underpass drained by a pump.
(6) In wet or rocky terrain where it will be difficult to attain minimum
bury.
C. Underground longitudinal location. The longitudinal location of
underground utility facilities within the right-of-way shall provide as
much clearance from the traveled way conditions will allow. Such lines
shall be on uniform alignment and be located at or as near as practical
to the right-of-way line.
(1) To maintain a reasonably uniform utility alignment, location
variances may be allowed when irregular-shaped portions of the
right-of-way extend beyond the normal right-of-way limits.
D. Aboveground longitudinal location. The longitudinal location of
aboveground utility facilities shall be outside of the clear zone. Such
lines shall be on uniform alignment and be located at or as near as
practical to the right-of-way line. Exceptions may be granted when no
other location is feasible or when the clear zone extends to the right-ofway
line.
(1) If any aboveground utility facility is within the clear zone or is
determined to be in a location that has a higher than average
accident potential, the Administrator may require:
(a) The utility facility to be of approved yielding or breakaway
construction; or
(b) The utility facility to be protected by a City of Watertownapproved
barrier such as, but not limited to, a beam guard,
crash cushion, etc.
(2) To maintain a reasonably uniform utility alignment, location
variance may be allowed when irregular-shaped portions of the
right-of-way extend beyond the normal right-of-way limits.
E. Existing utilities.
(1) When a utility facility exists within an existing or proposed right-ofway,
it may remain provided it does not adversely affect right-ofway
safety based on sound engineering judgment and economic
considerations of the right-of-way improvement cost and utility
moving cost. The existing facility shall be relocated if:
(a) It conflicts with any construction activities; or
§ 457-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-32
1:699
§ 457-33. Appurtenances.
§ 457-34. Vertical location.
(b) It is located longitudinally under the pavement or shoulder for
a recondition or reconstruction project; or
(c) Is located within a vision triangle of a roadway intersection.
(2) Exceptions may be granted for Subsection E(1)(a) and (b) above
based on sound engineering judgment and economic
considerations.
F. Subsurface utility engineering. The use of subsurface utility
engineering (SUE) to locate buried facilities is approved by the
Administrator. Any utility installation using SUE shall be noted on the
permit application form.
A. General policy. Appurtenant facilities such as pedestals, manholes,
vents, drains, rigid markers, valve and regulator pits, etc., should be
located outside of the clear zone and near or at the right-of-way line.
Manholes, valve pits, etc., should be installed so that their uppermost
surfaces are flush with the adjacent undisturbed surface.
(1) All utility pedestals, cabinets, transformers, and other aboveground
(i.e., not flush with the ground) structures located within the rightof-
way shall be adequately marked. Markers shall be installed and
maintained by the utility owner. The City of Watertown will not be
liable for damage done to aboveground utility structures that are
not adequately marked.
B. Buildings. Buildings shall not be located on the right-of-way. Exceptions
may be granted in cases where the building can be located on City of
Watertown-owned right-of-way. Examples of this include, but are not
limited to, park-n-ride lots, rest areas, remnant parcels, and zero-lot
line zoning districts (e.g., the Central Business Zoning District).
Buildings shall still be located outside of any clear zone, if applicable.
C. Cabinets. Cabinets should not be located on the right-of-way. When
cabinets are allowed on the right-of-way they should be placed at a
location not vulnerable to an errant vehicle and at or as near as
practical to the right-of-way line. Foundations beneath cabinets shall be
flush with the existing ground or proposed ground slope if associated
with a right-of-way construction project.
D. Manholes. Manholes shall not be located in the pavement and should
not be located in the shoulders of heavily traveled roadways.
Exceptions may be made on rights-of-way where manholes are essential
parts of existing lines. New manhole installations shall be avoided at
roadway intersections.
§ 457-32 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-34
1:700
§ 457-35. Installation on structures.
A. Underground. The depth of bury for underground facilities within the
right-of-way shall be a minimum of 24 inches as measured from the
finished ground surface to the top of the facility except under ditch or
swale bottoms where it shall be a minimum of 30 inches at the time of
installation.
(1) The depth of bury for underground facilities crossing the roadway
shall be a minimum of 30 inches as measured from a straight line
connecting the lowest points of the finished ground or pavement
surface on each side of the right-of-way to the top of the facility at
the time of installation.
(2) When a permit is requested by a utility and a future road project is
anticipated, the utility may be required to bury deeper in
accordance with the City of Watertown's plans.
(3) Where minimum bury is not feasible, the facility shall be rerouted
or protected with a casing, concrete slab, or other suitable
measures. In solid rock, the depth of bury may be reduced if
adequate protection is provided. All utilities shall obtain prior
approval from the City of Watertown before burying any facility less
than the minimum depth required.
B. Overhead. Vertical clearance for overhead utility facilities installed
after September 3, 2019, shall comply with all applicable state and
national electrical codes. In all cases, facilities crossing over the rightof-
way shall at no time be less than 17 feet above the high point of the
right-of-way. All preexisting facility clearances before September 3,
2019, are grandfathered under the applicable state and national
electric codes in effect at the original date of installation. Unless
otherwise agreed to by the utility and the City of Watertown, facility
clearances affected by the normal an emergency work activities as
defined in the maintenance section of this chapter, which do not require
a new permit, are also grandfathered.
A. General definitions.
(1) Attachments to right-of-way structures should be avoided.
However, attaching utility lines to right-of-way structures may be
permitted when they do not materially affect the:
(a) Structure design and/or appearance.
(b) Safe operation of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic.
(c) Efficiency of maintenance.
(d) Does not exceed the tolerances of the structure on which it will
be attached.
§ 457-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-35
1:701
§ 457-36. Collocation with utility facilities.
(2) The utility shall be responsible for all City of Watertown costs
associated with such attachments. This includes, but is not limited
to, additional design time, increased deck thickness, and future
bridge maintenance (painting and inspection).
B. Installation location requirements.
(1) When a utility facility is attached to a structure, the installation
shall be located:
(a) Beneath the structure floor.
(b) Inside the outer girders or beams or within a cell.
(c) At an elevation above low superstructure steel or masonry
which would inhibit bridge inspections or repairs.
(2) Utility facility may be located within the right-of-way structure's
deck for new construction or deck reconstruction if the utility
notifies the Administrator in advance of or while the structure is
being designed.
C. Installation openings. The opening created in the bridge abutments to
allow passage of the permitted facility shall be of the minimum size
necessary.
(1) The opening in the abutment around the permitted facility shall be
completely filled to seal opening and effectively preclude the
leakage of any moisture or backfill material through the abutment.
(2) If the utility sleeves the facility through the abutment, the sleeve
shall be tight-sealed into the abutment. Any space between the
sleeve and facility it encloses shall be sealed.
A. Collocation generally. Subject to the provisions of this section,
collocation of utility facilities is generally preferred over new support
structures if it can be accomplished in a way that better compliments
the character of the surrounding area.
B. Collocation with nonmunicipal facilities. Collocation on facilities or
support structures owned by parties other than the City of Watertown is
subject to the following:
(1) Where an existing facility or support structure can potentially
accommodate collocation of a new wireless facility, collocation will
be required unless:
(a) The applicant submits substantial evidence supporting the
unsuitability of the collocation;
§ 457-35 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-36
1:702
§ 457-37. Median installations.
(b) The owner of the existing facility or support structure is
unwilling to accommodate the applicant's equipment and
cannot be required to cooperate; or
(c) The Administrator determines that installing a new support
structure or collocation with a City of Watertown facility is
preferable to collocation with another facility or support
structure.
(2) Authorization for collocation on a facility or support structure
owned by a party other than the City of Watertown will be voided if
the facility or support structure is destroyed, removed, relocated,
or replaced, unless:
(a) The owner of the collocated facility obtains a new utility
accommodation permit; or
(b) The facility or support structure accommodating the
collocation is replaced with a facility or support structure
comparable in size, mass, appearance, and placement, as
determined by the Administrator.
A. General policy. On both crossing installations and longitudinal
installations, poles, guys, or other related facilities shall not be located
in a highway median.
B. Median work. No work shall be performed in the median of any right-ofway
without prior approval from the Administrator. When the median
work is authorized, it shall conform to the following provision unless
otherwise stated within the utility's permit:
(1) The permittee or its contractor shall notify the City of Watertown
Emergency Dispatch Center of the expected beginning and
completion time of work in the median. The phone number has
been included on the permit application.
(2) All equipment, operations, and spoil materials shall be located
within the center area of the median.
(3) No openings, vehicles, equipment, or materials of any type shall be
located within the median overnight.
(4) All vehicles used to conduct the work operation shall be equipped
with conspicuously visible roof-mounted revolving or strobe lights.
These lights shall be in operation just prior to and during the work
operation. Hazard warning lights on the vehicles shall also be
operating.
§ 457-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-38
1:703
§ 457-38. Breakaway construction.
Breakaway or yielding facilities along the right-of-way should be set as far
back as feasible to prevent a pole or other device from falling onto the
traveled way when struck by an errant vehicle.
§ 457-39. Scenic considerations.
A. General policy.
(1) When feasible, the City of Watertown strives to enhance visual
qualities of the right-of-way system by:
(a) The retention and/or planting of trees, shrubs, and other
vegetation.
(b) The selection of special alignments and corridors.
(2) Utilization of rights-of-way by utilities require that the type and size
of its facilities and the manner and extent of its installation shall
not materially impair the scenic quality, appearance, or view of the
right-of-way or adjacent areas.
B. Scenic areas. Areas which have been acquired, set aside or designated
for their scenic or historical quality, such as historic districts/sites,
public parks, recreation areas, rest areas, overlooks, etc., and the rightof-
way which traverses these areas, are in a special category and new
utility installations shall not be permitted except as provided in this
section.
(1) New underground utility installations may be permitted within
scenic areas when the installation does not require extensive
removal or alteration of trees or other natural features visible to
the right-of-way user and does not impair the visual quality of the
lands being traversed.
(2) New overhead installations shall be prohibited at such locations
where there is feasible and prudent alternative to the use of the
scenic areas by the overhead facility. When this is not the case,
installations will be considered only where:
(a) Other locations are unusually difficult, unreasonably costly, or
are undesirable from the standpoint of visual quality.
(b) An underground installation is not technically feasible or it is
unreasonably costly.
(c) The proposed installation can be made at a location (and will
employ suitable designs and materials) which gives adequate
protection to the visual qualities of the area being traversed.
(d) New overhead installations, including support structures,
towers, and utility poles must not be made of wood.
§ 457-38 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-39
1:704
§ 457-40. Construction requirements.
(3) These controls shall also be followed in the location and design of
utility installations that are needed for a right-of-way purpose, such
as for right-of-way lighting, or to serve a rest or recreation area.
C. Height restrictions.
(1) Support structures, towers, and utility poles. The height of a
support structure, tower, or utility pole in the right-of-way may not
exceed the greater of 50 feet above ground level or 10 feet above
the tallest existing support structure, tower, or utility pole
(whichever is lesser) that is in place on the effective date of this
article and that is located in the same right-of-way and within 500
feet of the facility that is the subject of the application.
(2) Small wireless facility. The height of a small wireless facility in the
right-of-way may not exceed the greater of 50 feet above ground
level or 10 feet above the tallest existing support structure, tower,
or utility pole (whichever is lesser) that is in place on the effective
date of this article and that is located in the same right-of-way and
within 500 feet of the facility that is the subject of the application.
(3) No utility structure's height may extend in to the City of
Watertown's Airport Approach Protection Zone.
D. Graffiti removal. All graffiti on facilities shall be removed at the sole
expense of the permit holder within 48 hours after notification from the
City of Watertown.
A. Permit at job site. When the Administrator issues a permit to a utility for
its proposed work, a complete copy of the permit shall be in possession
of the utility's work force, consultant, contractor, or subcontractor at all
times when utility work is being performed within the right-of-way. This
includes the annual service connection permit when appropriate.
B. Use of right-of-way median. Any use of a right-of-way median is
prohibited unless specifically authorized by a permit. See § 457-37B for
specific conditions that shall be met if median work is permitted.
C. Use of temporary guard poles. No guard pole shall be set within the
right-of-way unless specifically authorized by a permit. By definition, a
guard pole is used to prevent aerial lines from falling onto the right-ofway.
Any guard pole permit in the clear zone shall comply with
§ 457-32D.
D. Unexpected field conditions. Any modification of the terms of the
approved permit to meet changed or unexpected field conditions shall
require approval from the Administrator.
E. Blasting. Blasting on the right-of-way is prohibited unless specifically
authorized by a permit.
§ 457-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-40
1:705
§ 457-41. Traffic control.
F. Survey markers. No City of Watertown, county, state, or federal survey
marker (e.g., right-of-way marker, benchmark, etc.) shall be disturbed
unless prior approval has been obtained by their owner(s).
(1) Any Public Land Survey (PLS), Certified Survey Map (CSM), or City
of Watertown survey marker that is disturbed, removed, or
destroyed shall be restored by the utility at its expense under the
supervision of a registered land surveyor (Reference Wisconsin
State Statute § 236.32).
G. Vegetation. No tree or shrub shall be sprayed, cut, trimmed, or
damaged to facilitate the installation of a utility facility unless
specifically authorized by a permit. Vegetation which is proposed to be
damaged or destroyed may have to be replaced at the discretion of the
Administrator. When the removal of a tree is permitted, the stump shall
be removed and the hole properly backfilled or cut flush with the
ground upon approval from the Administrator. At no time shall trees or
shrubs be cut on City of Watertown right-of-way in front of a property
owner's home, yard, business, etc., without approval from the
Administrator.
(1) Utilities should be aware of rare or endangered plant species or
animal and insect species that feed off of native vegetation in the
right-of-way that must be protected or avoided by law. Utilities may
receive assistance in identifying these areas by calling the local
DNR office. The chipping or grinding of trees may be allowed by the
Administrator on a permit-by-permit basis. This includes spreading
the resulting mulch evenly over the right-of-way such as not to
leave mounds or humps or interfere with drainage.
H. Completion notice. Upon completion of permitted work and
restorations, written notice shall be filed with the Administrator within
10 calendar days of the completion date indicated on the face of the
permit application form. A completion certificate will be provided with
permit.
I. Highway signs. A utility shall not remove any highway sign unless
approved in its permit.
A. Authority.
(1) All traffic control for utility work performed on City of Watertown
right-of-way shall abide by:
(a) The current Wisconsin Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) and any supplements thereto.
(b) Section 643 in the current edition of the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation's Standard Specifications for Highway and
Structure Construction.
§ 457-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-41
1:706
(c) Traffic control will be in accordance with appropriate diagrams
found in the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Booklet
titled "Work Zone Safety Guidelines for Construction,
Maintenance, and Utility Operations, current edition."
(d) Specific provision within § 457-41.
(2) The standards set forth in the Wisconsin MUTCD and any
supplements thereto are minimum guidelines, and additional traffic
control shall be used when necessary
B. General policy. All utility work shall be planned and prosecuted with full
regard for safety and to keep interference with right-of-way traffic to a
minimum. On heavily traveled roadways, utility work interfering with
traffic may not be allowed during periods of peak traffic flow. Any such
work allowed shall be planned so that closure of intersecting streets,
road approached or other access points is minimized. No utility work
shall begin until all required warning signs, devices, and methods
adequate to protect the public are in place and fully functional. These
shall be maintained until all utility work is completed.
(1) All operations shall be performed without closing all or obstructing
part of any highway traffic lane unless it is approved by the
Administrator and proper traffic control is specified.
(2) All warning signs shall have reflectorized sheeting which shall
comply with § 643.2.12.2 of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation's Standard Specifications for Highway and
Structure Construction, current edition. Warning signs shall be
removed, covered, turned, or laid flat when workers or workers'
vehicles are not at the job site or when the signs' message is not
relevant. All barricades and barrels shall be reflectorized with Type
H reflective sheeting as a minimum. Cones used during nighttime
operations shall be at least 28 inches in height and reflectorized.
C. Traffic control selection.
(1) Factors. When selecting the appropriate traffic control,
consideration shall be given to such factors as:
(a) Physical characteristics of the road.
(b) Available sight distance.
(c) Traffic volume.
(d) Time of day.
(e) Posted speed limit.
(f) Weather.
(g) Light conditions.
§ 457-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-41
1:707
§ 457-42. Work site safety.
(h) Lane closure may require flagging.
(2) Long term duration. All stationary daytime utility work which takes
longer than one hour to perform should utilize the six traffic control
diagrams. The Administrator may require a more extensive control
plan if any of the following situations occur:
(a) Utility work performed during nighttime hours.
(b) Traffic control which is required overnight to protect the work
zone(s) during nonwork times.
(c) Utility work performed in a continuously moving work zone.
This excludes moving from one stationary work zone to
another.
(d) Utility work which cannot be adequately protected by using the
six traffic control diagrams.
(3) Short-term duration. Daytime utility work that will be completed in
one hour or less usually may not require the use of a formal traffic
control plan or the six traffic control diagrams. The utility is still
responsible for providing traffic control adequate to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(a) As part of this traffic control, all utility vehicles shall have their
high intensity flashing (strobe or revolving) and hazard
warning lights operating. Additional traffic control such as
guard (shadow) vehicles and impact attenuators may also be
utilized.
A. General. The utility is responsible to assure that the work site is secure
against any hazard to the public at all times until all of the work is
completed. Vehicles, equipment, and materials which are in active use
at the work site shall be regulated by the utility as to assure
consistently safe conditions.
(1) Sheeting, shoring, bulkheads, or temporary/permanent concrete
barriers, etc., may be ordered by the Administrator if considered
necessary to protect the right-of-way and the traveling public.
B. Equipment/material storage. Utility hardware or equipment which is
located at the work site but not immediately (same day) use should be
stored in a safe location off of the right-of-way. If this is not practical,
the equipment or material may be stored beyond the clear zone and as
close to the fence or right-of-way line as possible.
C. Vehicle/equipment visibility. Vehicles and equipment shall have their
high intensity flashing (strobe or revolving) and hazard warning lights
operating when they are within the clear zone during work operations.
§ 457-41 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-42
1:708
§ 457-43. Special provisions.
D. Individual conduct. All City of Watertown, utility, and contractor
personnel who are out of their vehicles and within the right-of-way
should wear their retro-reflective safety vests at all times. During
daytime hours only the use of a highly visible, nonreflectorized shirt or
jacket is acceptable in lieu of a safety vest. Colors commonly used for
these garments include, but are not limited to, lime-green and yellowgreen.
A. Trenched construction. Backfill with six inches to one foot of compacted
granular material or sand will be allowed to protect a utility's facility.
After the facility is protected, spoils from the trench excavation or
similar non-organic material shall be compacted in six- to eight-inch
layers to sub-grade so the trench will have similar frost properties as
the adjacent sub-grade material, unless there would be less than 24
inches between the facilities required covered material and the
subgrade elevation; then compacted granular material will be used for
all backfilling.
(1) Open trench construction may be approved if all of the following
conditions prevail:
(a) The pavement condition is at or below PASER rating 5.
(b) The applicant/owner agrees to own the facility, pipe, casing, or
structure being installed and accepts the perpetual
maintenance responsibility of the facility and the excavation in
accordance with this chapter adopted by the City of Watertown
Common Council.
(c) The Administrator may require slurry backfilling of the
excavation if native soils are deemed unacceptable.
(d) Privately owned installations shall be marked and identified at
the right-of-way/property line with signs. These markers shall
be maintained by the owner until the facility is removed or
properly abandoned.
(2) Any trenching, tunneling, or excavating shall be performed in
accordance with the requirements of OSHA and the Wisconsin
Department of Workforce Development an any applicable local
regulations.
(3) The utility shall be responsible for any and all repairs and
maintenance of utility work in the right-of-way (perpetual
responsibility of the utility).
(4) Pavement restoration. Pavement replacement for open-cut
trenches will be in-kind with a minimum of 14 inches of compacted
granular base and four inches of hot mix asphalt installed in two
lifts. Prior to paving, the utility will consult with the Administrator
§ 457-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-43
1:709
§ 457-44. Cleanup and restoration.
on the specifics of pavement replacement, including limits of
restoration and saw cut requirements. The utility shall be
responsible for all future repair and maintenance of pavement.
B. Untrenched construction. Untrenched construction shall be required
for all underground utility crossing of all rights-of-way that have a
paved or concrete surface and are open to pedestrian, bicycle, and
vehicular traffic unless specifically authorized in the permit.
(1) Untrenched installation of utility facilities may be accomplished by
tunneling, driving, coring, and/or dry boring. Wet boring under the
right-of-way shall be prohibited unless specifically authorized in the
permit.
(2) Boring shall result in a close fit to the facility being installed.
Untrenched construction shall, as a minimum, extend beneath the
entire roadway prism (from toe of inslope to toe of inslope or from
back of curb to back of curb). Ground openings or pits for such
work should be located outside of the clear zone and shall not
interfere with the right-of-way drainage.
(3) When specifically authorized by the Administrator, the extent of the
untrenched crossing may be reduced or eliminated where such
construction methods are impractical or physically restricted by
the terrain.
C. Nonmetallic lines. Any nonmetallic pipe, cable, or other kind of utility
line which lacks a continuous and integral metallic component capable
of detection by locating instruments shall be accompanied in is location
by a continuous detectable metallic tracer wire or metallic tape.
D. Casing. Where crossing by underground lines are encased in protective
conduit or duct, the encasement shall extend at least two feet beyond
the toe of the slope or three feet beyond the ditch or swale line. On
curbed sections it shall extend at least outside the outer curbs.
A. Worksite cleanup. All debris, refuse, and waste resulting from the
utility's activities shall be removed from the site and the pedestrian,
bicyclist, or motorist's view unless otherwise provided by the permit.
Burning of cuttings, brush, or other debris shall not be permitted.
(1) All replaced poles shall be completely removed from the right-ofway.
No replaced pole shall be allowed to remain, in whole or in
part, and it shall not be sawed off. The pole's hole shall be properly
backfilled and compacted. All anchor rods shall be removed or cut
off one foot below ground level.
B. Right-of-way restoration. The utility shall be responsible for restoring
the highway and the adjacent right-of-way to its original conditions (as
close as possible) within two weeks after completion of the facility
§ 457-43 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-44
1:710
§ 457-45. Erosion control and post-construction stormwater
management.
The City of Watertown deems that all permitted work is subject to Chapter
288 of the Watertown Municipal Code.
§ 457-46. Specific requirements.
The following §§ 457-47 through 457-51, cover the various specific
requirements relevant to communications, electric, fluids and gases,
wireless telecommunications, and private utility facilities.
§ 457-47. Communications.
installation. Exceptions may be allowed (e.g., in the case of bad
weather) with prior approval from the Administrator. Failure of the
utility to make prompt and satisfactory restorations of the roadway
or adjacent right-of-way may cause the Administrator to arrange for
restoration by others at the utility's expense.
(1) Any curb, gutter, pavement, sidewalk, driveway, gravel base,
ballast, shouldering material, or other right-of-way elements
disturbed by the utility shall be restored to the qualities, grades,
compactions, conditions, etc., in accordance with the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications for
Highway and Structure Construction, current edition. Any
subsequent heavings, settlings, or other faultings attributed to the
permitted work shall be repaired in a manner satisfactory to the
Administrator at the utility's expense.
(2) Any turfed area of the right-of-way disturbed by the utility shall be
restored with topsoil to the depth that existed prior to construction
within the right-of-way and reseeded to perennial grass or sodded
to the satisfaction of the Administrator. Trees or vegetation
damaged or destroyed shall be replaced in-kind unless specified in
the utility's permit. Once replaced, the utility shall also maintain
the turfed areas, trees, and vegetation until they achieve sustained
growth.
(3) If, in the opinion of the Administrator, the permitted work or
facilities are found to obstruct right-of-way drainage, unduly
increase the difficulty of right-of-way maintenance, or in any other
manner adversely affect a right-of-way interest, the utility shall,
upon notice, cure the fault as directed and restore the right-of-way
facility to the satisfaction of the Administrator.
A. Standards. The minimum standards for the design, construction,
operation, and maintenance of communication-type facilities (see
§ 457-50 for wireless telecommunications) shall be those embodied in
the Wisconsin Administrative Code for each of the various utilities and
phases of utility activities covered therein. When the City of
§ 457-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-47
1:711
Watertown's Municipal Codes are more restrictive, they shall govern.
When neither the Wisconsin Administrative Codes nor the City of
Watertown's Municipal Codes apply, the communication facility shall at
least conform with the currently applicable National Electrical Safety
Code.
B. Type of construction. For aboveground (overhead) installations, the
following should be considered:
(1) Single pole. Any longitudinal installations of overhead lines within
the right-of-way should utilize single pole construction.
(2) Joint use. Joint use pole construction should be used:
(a) At locations where more than one utility or type of facility is
involved.
(b) When the right-of-way widths approach the minimum need for
safe operations or maintenance requirements.
(c) When separate installations require extensive removal or
alterations of trees.
C. Down guy locations. Guy wires to ground anchors and other supporting
or bracing devices shall not be placed between a pole and roadway
where they would encroach upon the clear zone unless specifically
authorized by the City of Watertown utilizing breakaway technology.
D. Maintenance activities. Certain maintenance and other type of utility
activities are considered minor in nature and shall be allowed to be
performed in accordance with this policy. However, should any of these
selected maintenance activities to be performed significantly impact
the free flow of traffic on any right-of-way (closure of travel lane,
diversion of traffic, etc.), a permit shall first be obtained from the
Administrator. No additional permit is required for:
(1) Repair or replacement of overhead service wire.
(2) Repair or replacement for overhead cable and terminal hardware
two spans or less.
(3) Replace pole, same location, maximum of two poles per 1/4-mile
section.
(a) Note: Once a new pole is installed, all attached facilities
(electric, telephone, CATV, etc.) shall be transferred to the new
pole in a timely manner. The old pole shall then be completely
removed in accordance with § 457-44A.
(4) Locate buried facilities.
(5) Stake route for proposed buried cable.
(6) Connect and test wiring at buried cable pedestal locations.
§ 457-47 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-47
1:712
§ 457-48. Electric.
(7) Crossarm, bracket, and hardware repair/replacement.
(8) Add anchor, guy, or brace between pole and right-of-way line or no
closer to roadway than pole.
(9) Trench a pole to maintain or increase roadside clearance.
(10) Repair or replace overhead conductor two spans or less.
(11) Line patrolling.
(12) Inspection of manholes (including water removal, cable tagging,
and minor modifications, etc.).
(13) Electrolysis surveys.
(14) Test for location of underground lines.
(15) Paint poles, towers, or crossarms.
(16) Straighten pole, crossarm, or brace.
(17) Test or treat existing pole.
(18) Remove debris from overhead line.
(19) Repair or add grounds.
(20) Resag, reattach, or rearrange conductor.
(21) Repair cable bonding.
(22) Survey lines.
(23) Replace pole tags and signs.
(24) Reinforce existing pole.
(25) Mark location of proposed pole; proposed cable.
(26) Grass cutting or snow plowing.
(27) Trim trees or remove brush for existing line.
(28) Minor repair of lines (installation of buried splices, etc.).
(29) Sign and marker installation/replacement.
(30) Replace/remove line in existing duct.
(31) Surveying and resetting reclosures.
(32) Abandonment of underground facilities shall be done in accordance
with § 457-25B.
§ 457-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-48
1:713
A. Standards. The minimum standards for the design, construction,
operation, and maintenance of electric-type utility facilities shall be
those embodied in the Wisconsin Administrative Code for each of the
various utilities and phases of utility activities covered therein. When
the City of Watertown's Municipal Code is more restrictive, it shall
govern. When neither the Wisconsin Administrative Codes nor the City
of Watertown Municipal Codes apply, the electrical power facility shall
at least conform to the currently applicable National Electrical Safety
Code.
B. Additional permit information. For transmission-type installations, the
permit application form shall specify the proposed operating voltage or
voltages.
C. Type of construction. For aboveground (overhead) installations, the
following should be considered:
(1) Single pole. Joint use single pole construction should be used:
(a) At locations where more than one utility or type of facility is
involved.
(b) When the right-of-way widths approach the minimum needed
for safe operations or maintenance requirements.
(c) When separate installations require extensive removal or
alteration of trees.
D. Down guy locations. Guy wires to ground anchors and other supporting
or bracing devises shall not be placed between a pole and the roadway
where they would encroach upon the clear zone unless specifically
authorized by the City of Watertown utilizing breakaway technology.
E. Maintenance activities. Certain maintenance and other type of utility
activities are considered minor in nature and shall be allowed to be
performed without an additional permit same as § 457-47D. However,
should any of these selected maintenance activities to be performed
significantly impact the free flow of traffic on any right-of-way (closure
of travel lane, diversion of traffic, etc.), a permit shall first be obtained
from the Administrator. No additional permit is required for:
(1) Switching.
(2) Fuse replacement.
(3) Transformer replacement.
(4) Crossarm, bracket, and hardware repair/replacement.
(5) Add anchor, guy, or brace between pole and right-of-way line or no
closer to the roadway than pole.
(6) Trench a pole to maintain or increase right-of-way clearance.
§ 457-48 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-48
1:714
(7) Replace pole, same location, maximum of two poles per 1/4-mile
section.
(a) Note: Once a new pole is installed, all attached facilities
(electric, telephone, CATV, etc.) shall be transferred to the new
pole in a timely manner. The old pole shall then be completely
removed in accordance with § 457-44A.
(8) Repair or replacement of overhead conductor two spans or less.
(9) Line patrolling.
(10) Manhole inspection (including water removal, cable tagging, minor
modifications, etc.).
(11) Electrolysis surveys.
(12) Test for location of underground lines.
(13) Paint poles, towers, or crossarms.
(14) Straighten pole, crossarm, or brace.
(15) Test or treat existing pole.
(16) Clean insulators.
(17) Remove debris from overhead line.
(18) Repair of add grounds.
(19) Resag, reattach, or rearrange conductor.
(20) Sample or test insulating oil.
(21) Repair cable bonding.
(22) Install or remove transformer or regulator.
(23) Survey lines.
(24) Replace outdoor lighting bulbs and cleaning glass.
(25) Repair or replace outdoor lighting control.
(26) Reset time clock or control switch.
(27) Replace pole tags or signs.
(28) Reinforce existing pole.
(29) Mark location of proposed pole/proposed cable.
(30) Grass cutting or snow plowing.
(31) Trim trees or remove brush for existing line.
§ 457-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-48
1:715
§ 457-49. Fluids and gases.
(32) Sign and marker installation/replacement.
(33) Minor repair of lines (splice, etc.).
(34) Replace/remove line in existing duct.
(35) Repair or replace overhead service.
(36) Reading service meters.
(37) Locate buried facilities.
(38) Surveying and resetting reclosures.
(39) Abandonment of underground facilities shall be done in accordance
with § 457-25B.
A. Standards. The minimum standards for the design, construction,
operation, and maintenance of fluid- and gas-type utility facilities shall
be those embodied in the Wisconsin Administrative Code for each of the
various utilities and phases of utility activities covered therein. When
the City of Watertown Municipal Code is more restrictive, it shall
govern. In addition to the Wisconsin Administrative Codes and the City
of Watertown Municipal Code, the utility installations shall at least meet
the following requirements:
(1) Water lines shall conform to the currently applicable specifications
of the American Water Works Association and the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer construction in Wisconsin.
(2) Pressure pipelines shall conform to the currently applicable
requirements of Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations of the Office
of Pipeline Safety.
(3) Liquid petroleum pipelines shall conform to the currently
applicable recommended practice of the American Petroleum
Institute for pipeline crossings under railroads and highways.
(4) Sanitary and storm sewer shall conform to the currently applicable
specifications of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Construction.
B. Irrigation and drainage pipes, ditches, and canals. Irrigation and
drainage facilities installed across the right-of-way generally shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation's specifications as shown in Chapter 16,
Standard Detail Drawings, of the Facilities Development Manual.
Appurtenances which would constitute a hazard to traffic shall not be
permitted within the clear zone and should be located outside of the
right-of-way. Where ditch rider roads are adjacent to ditches or canals
that cross the right-of-way, consideration shall be given to safety, traffic,
§ 457-48 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-49
1:716
operations, and economic features when providing for the continuity of
such roads.
C. Requirements for appurtenances. Vent standpipes are not required for
casings but when used, the vent shall be located and constructed to not
interfere with maintenance of the highway nor be concealed by
vegetation. These pipes should stand near a fence or the right-of-way
line.
(1) If drains are provided for casings, tunnels, or galleries enclosing
carriers of liquids, liquefied gases, or heavy gases, they shall not
outfall into right-of-way ditches or natural watercourses.
D. Special treatment of pipelines.
(1) General policy. Special treatment of pipelines beneath right-of-way
or any median, should not be required provided the pipe would be
installed by jacking and/or dry boring the carrier pipe to an
essentially snug fit.
(2) Special treatment. The Administrator shall require special
treatment such as casing, cathodic protection, thickened wall
carrier pip, coating and wrapping, concrete sleeves, or caps of
particular pipe crossings if, in the determination of the
Administrator, such installation shall be more protective of the
right-of-way or of the public health, safety, welfare, and
convenience of the traveling public. Some examples of location
where special treatment may be required include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(a) Locations where a pipeline (whether crossing or a portion of
pipe paralleling the roadway) would pass in close proximity to
the substructural part of a right-of-way structure. This refers to
pipes underground and not to pipes suspended on a right-ofway
structure, the latter of which should not require special
treatment.
(b) Locations where a pipeline would pass beneath the slope wall
below a right-of-way structure.
(c) Locations where restraints inhibit a pipe from being placed or
remaining at the depth required by code.
(d) Locations where the ground conditions are known to be
particularly unstable.
(e) Locations where restraints inhibit a water pipe from being
placed or remaining below the frost line.
E. Attachment to structures. Pipelines that will be attached to a right-ofway
structure shall not exceed a maximum internal pressure of 150
PSIG. Pipelines carrying pressure in excess of 150 PSIG shall be
§ 457-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-49
1:717
considered only if no other alternative location off the structure is
feasible.
F. Maintenance activities. Certain maintenance and other types of utility
activities are considered minor in nature and shall be allowed to be
performed without an additional permit. However, should any of these
selected maintenance activities to be performed significantly impact
the free flow of traffic on any right-of-way (closure of travel lane,
diversion of traffic, etc.), a permit shall first be obtained from the
Administrator. No additional permit required for:
(1) Leak surveys (vehicle or walk patrol), line patrolling.
(2) Pressure surveys (gauge check or setting of charts).
(3) Odorant checks.
(4) Regulator maintenance (change out, lockup check, spring change,
etc.).
(5) Valve maintenance (activation check, grease, replacement, etc.).
(6) Line purging.
(7) Exposed line survey and maintenance (on bridges, exposed valve
assembly, etc.).
(8) Line locates and facility marking.
(9) Up rating pressure of main (monitoring).
(10) Abandonment of underground facilities shall be done in accordance
with § 457-25B.
(11) Pit (vault) maintenance (water removal, painting, minor
modifications).
(12) Minor cutouts and repair of lines (installation of clamps, welds,
etc.).
(13) Cathodic protection checks and related repair.
(14) Sign and marker installation/replacement.
(15) Relief vent line inspections.
(16) Maintenance and repair of telemetering equipment.
(17) Land surveying.
(18) Painting aboveground facilities.
(19) Grass cutting or snow plowing.
(20) Trim trees or remove brush for existing line.
§ 457-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-50
1:718
§ 457-50. Wireless telecommunications.
A. Purpose. In the exercise of its police powers, the City of Watertown has
priority over all other uses of the right-of-way. The purpose of this
chapter is to provide the City of Watertown with a process for
managing, and uniform standards for acting upon, requests for the
placement of wireless telecommunications facilities within the right-ofway
consistent with the City of Watertown's obligation to promote the
public health, safety, and welfare; to manage the right-of-way; and to
ensure that the public's use is not obstructed or incommoded by the use
of the right-of-way for the placement of wireless telecommunications
facilities. The City of Watertown recognizes the importance of wireless
telecommunications facilities to provide high-quality communications
and internet access services to residents and businesses within the City
of Watertown. The City of Watertown also recognizes its obligation to
comply with applicable federal and state laws regarding the placement
of wireless telecommunication facilities in the right-of-way including,
without limitation, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 151
et seq.), Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation
Act of 2012, Wis. Stat. § 182.017, and Wis. Stat. § 196.58, and this
chapter shall be interpreted consistent with those provisions.
B. Scope.
(1) Applicability. Unless exempted by § 457-50B(2), below, every
person who wishes to place wireless telecommunications facilities
in the right-of-way or modify an existing wireless
telecommunications facility in the right-of-way must obtain a
wireless permit under this chapter.
(2) Exempt facilities. The provisions of this chapter (other than
§§ 457-50I to 457-50L) shall not be applied to applications for the
following:
(a) Installation of a small wireless facility on the strand between
two utility poles, provided that the cumulative volume of all
wireless facilities on the strand shall not exceed one cubic foot,
and provided further that the installation does not require
replacement of the strand, or excavation, modification, or
replacement of either of the utility poles.
(b) Installation of a mobile cell facility (commonly referred to as
"cell on wheels" or "cell on truck") for a temporary period in
connection with an emergency or event, but no longer than
required for the emergency or event, provided that installation
does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing
facilities.
(c) Placement or modification of a wireless telecommunications
facility on structures owned by or under the control of the City
of Watertown. See § 457-50L of this chapter.
§ 457-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-50
1:719
(d) Placement or modification of a wireless telecommunications
facility by City of Watertown staff or any person performing
work under contract with the City of Watertown.
(e) Modification of an existing wireless telecommunications
facility that makes no material change to the footprint of a
facility or to the surface or subsurface of a public street if the
activity does not disrupt or impede traffic in the traveled
portion of a street, and if the work does not change the visual
or audible characteristics of the wireless telecommunications
facility.
C. Nondiscrimination. In establishing the rights, obligations, and
conditions set forth in this chapter, it is the intent of the City of
Watertown to treat each applicant and right-of-way user in a
competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner, to the extent
required by law, while taking into account the unique technologies,
situation, and legal status of each application or request for use of the
right-of-way.
D. Administration.
(1) Administrator. The Administrator, as defined in § 457-20, is
responsible for administering this chapter.
(2) Powers. As part of the administration of this chapter, the
Administrator may:
(a) Adopt wireless regulations governing the placement and
modification of wireless telecommunication facilities in
addition to but consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, including regulations governing collocation, the
resolution of conflicting applications for placement of wireless
telecommunications facilities, and aesthetic standards.
(b) Interpret the provisions of the chapter and the wireless
regulations.
(c) Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications
for wireless permits consistent with this chapter.
(d) Collect any fee required by this chapter.
(e) Require, as a condition of completeness of any application,
notice to members of the public that may be affected by the
placement or modification of the wireless telecommunications
facility that is subject of the wireless permit application.
(f) Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an
application, and extend or shorten deadlines where
appropriate and consistent with federal laws and regulations.
§ 457-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-50
1:720
(g) Issue notices of incompleteness or requests for information in
connections with any wireless permit application.
(h) Select and retain an independent consultant or attorney with
expertise in telecommunications to review any issue that
involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with
any permit application.
(i) Coordinate and consult with other City of Watertown staff,
committees, and governing bodies to ensure timely action on
all other required permits under § 457-50E(2)(i) of this chapter.
(j) Subject to appeal as provided in § 457-50G(4) of this chapter,
determine whether to grant, grant subject to conditions, or
deny an application.
(k) Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon
wireless permit applications, including issuing written
decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the
time for action on an application.
E. Application.
(1) Format. Unless the wireless regulations provide otherwise, the
applicant must submit both a paper copy and an electronic copy (in
a searchable format) of any application, as well as any amendments
or supplements to the application or response to requests for
information regarding an application, to the Administrator. An
application is not complete until both the paper and electronic
copies are received by the Administrator.
(2) Content. In order to be considered complete, an application must
contain:
(a) All information required pursuant to the wireless regulations.
(b) A completed application cover sheet signed by an authorized
representative of the applicant, listing all standard permit
conditions.
(c) If the applicant is a wireless infrastructure provider, the name
and contact information for the wireless service provider(s)
that will be using the wireless telecommunications facility
must also be provided.
(d) A statement of which shot clock or shot clocks apply to the
application and the reasons the chosen shot clocks apply.
(e) A separate and complete description of each proposed wireless
telecommunications facility and the work that will be required
to install or modify it, including but not limited to detail
regarding proposed excavations, if any; detailed site plans
showing the location of the facility and technical specifications
§ 457-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-50
1:721
for each element of the facility, clearly describing the site
and all structures and facilities at the site before and after
installation or modification and identifying the owners of such
preexisting structures and facilities; and describing the
distance to the nearest residential dwelling unit. Before and
after 360° photo simulations must be provided for each facility.
(f) Proof that the applicant has mailed to the owner of all property
within 300 feet of the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility a notice that the applicant is submitting an application
to the City of Watertown for placement or modification of a
wireless telecommunications facility in the right-of-way, which
notice must include the proposed facility location, a
description and scale image of the proposed facility, and an
email address and phone number for a representative of the
applicant who will be available to answer questions from
members of the public about the proposed project.
(g) A copy of the FCC license for the facility or a sworn written
statement from the applicant attesting that the facility will
comply with current FCC regulations.
(h) A radio frequency (RF) propagation study for the proposed
wireless telecommunications facility.
(i) To the extent that filing of the wireless permit application
establishes a deadline for action on any other permit that may
be required in connection with the wireless
telecommunications facility, the application must include
complete copies of applications for every required permit
(including without limitation electrical permits, building
permits, traffic control permits, and excavation permits), with
all engineering completed and with all fees associated with
each permit.
(j) A certification by a registered and qualified engineer that the
installation can be supported by and does not exceed the
tolerances of the structure on which it will be mounted and
that all elements of the wireless telecommunications facility
comply with applicable safety standards.
(k) Payment of all required fees.
(l) If an applicant contends that denial of the application would
prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of service in
violation of federal law, or otherwise violate applicable law, the
application must provide all evidence on which the applicant
relies in support of that claim. Applicants are not permitted to
supplement this evidence if doing so would prevent the City of
Watertown from complying with any deadline for action on an
application.
§ 457-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-50
1:722
(m) If the application is an eligible facilities request, the
application must contain information sufficient to show that
the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request under
47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(3), including evidence that the
application relates to an existing tower or base station that
have been approved by the City of Watertown. Before and after
360° photo simulations must be provided with detailed
specifications demonstrating that the modification does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing
approved tower or base station.
(3) Waivers. Request for waivers from any requirement of this
§ 457-50E shall be made in writing to the Administrator. The
Administrator may grant a request for waiver if it is demonstrated
that, notwithstanding the issuance of the waiver, the City of
Watertown will be provided with all information necessary to
understand the nature of the construction of other activity to be
conducted pursuant to the wireless permit sought.
(4) Fees. Applicant must provide an application fee and shall be
required to pay all costs reasonably incurred in reviewing the
application, including cost incurred in retaining outside
consultants. Fees shall be reviewed periodically and raised or
lowered based on the costs the City of Watertown expects to incur,
with a review commencing by the first anniversary of the effective
date of this chapter.
(5) Public records. Applications are public records that may be made
publicly available pursuant to state and federal public records laws.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the applicant may designate
portions of the application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information by clearly marking
each portion of such materials accordingly, and the City of
Watertown shall endeavor to treat the information as proprietary
and confidential, subject to applicable state and federal public
records law and the Administrator's determination that the
applicant's request for confidential or proprietary treatment of the
application materials is reasonable. The City of Watertown shall not
be required to incur any costs to protect the application from
disclosure.
F. General standards.
(1) Generally. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall meet the
minimum requirements set forth in this chapter and the wireless
regulations, in addition to the requirements of any other applicable
law or regulation.
(2) Regulations. The wireless regulations and decisions on wireless
permits shall, at a minimum, ensure that the requirements of this
chapter are satisfied, unless it is determined that the applicant has
§ 457-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-50
1:723
established that denial of an application would, within the meaning
of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of a
telecommunications or personal wireless services, or otherwise
violate applicable laws or regulations. If that determination is
made, the requirements of this chapter and the wireless
regulations may be waived, but only to the extent required to avoid
the prohibition.
(3) Standards.
(a) Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed and
modified in a manner that:
[1] Minimizes risk to public safety;
[2] Ensures that placement of facilities on existing structures
is within the tolerance of those structures;
[3] Avoids placement of aboveground facilities in
underground areas, installation of new support structures
of equipment cabinets in the public right-of-way, or
placement in residential areas when commercial are
reasonably available;
[4] Maintains the integrity and character of the
neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are
located;
[5] Ensures that installations are subject to periodic review to
minimize the intrusion on the right-of-way;
[6] Ensures that the City of Watertown bears no risk or
liability as a result of the installations;
[7] Ensures that the applicant's use does not inconvenience
the public, interfere with the primary uses of the right-ofway,
or hinder the ability of the City of Watertown or other
government entities to improve, modify, relocate, abandon,
or vacate the right-of-way or any portion thereof, or to
cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation,
or abandonment of facilities in the right-of-way.
(b) No wireless permit shall be issued unless the wireless service
provider applicant has immediate plans to use the proposed
facility or the wireless infrastructure applicant has a contract
with a wireless service provider that has immediate plans to
use the proposed facility.
(c) In no event may ground-mounted equipment interfere with
pedestrian, bicycle or vehicular traffic and at all times must
comply with the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990.
§ 457-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-50
1:724
(4) Standard permit conditions. All wireless permits under this chapter
are issued subject to the following minimum conditions:
(a) Compliance. The permit holder shall at all times maintain
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws,
regulations, and other rules.
(b) Term. A wireless permit issued pursuant to an eligible facilities
request shall expire at the same time the permit for the
underlying existing wireless telecommunications facility
expires. All other wireless permits shall be valid for a period of
five years from the date of issuance unless revoked pursuant to
§ 457-50H(2) of this chapter.
(c) Contact information. The permit holder shall at all times
maintain with the City of Watertown accurate contact
information for the permit holder and all wireless service
providers making use of the facility, which shall include a
phone number, mailing address, and email address for at least
one natural person.
(d) Emergencies. The City of Watertown shall have the right to
support, repair, disable, or remove any elements of the
facilities in emergencies or when the facility threatens
imminent harm to persons or property.
(e) Adverse impacts on adjacent properties. The permit holder
shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse
impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from
the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, or
removal of the facility.
(f) General maintenance. The wireless communications facility
and any associated structures shall be maintained in a neat and
clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans and
conditions of approval.
(g) Relocation. At the request of the City of Watertown pursuant to
§ 457-50I of this chapter, the permit holder shall promptly and
at its own expense permanently remove and relocate any
wireless telecommunications facility in the right-of-way.
(h) Abandonment. The permit holder shall promptly notify the City
of Watertown whenever a facility has not been in use for a
continuous period of 60 days or longer and must comply with
§ 457-50J of this chapter.
(i) Restoration. A permit holder who removes or relocates a
facility from the right-of-way must restore the right-of-way in
accordance with § 457-50K of this chapter.
§ 457-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-50
1:725
(j) Record retention. The permit holder shall retain full and
complete copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals
issued in connection with the facility, which includes, without
limitation, all conditions of approval, approved plans,
resolutions, and other documents associated with the permit or
regulatory approval. In the event the City of Watertown cannot
locate any such full and complete permits or other regulatory
approvals in its official records, and the permit holder fails to
retain full and complete records in the permit holder's file, any
ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an
examination of the missing documents will be conclusively
resolved against the permit holder.
(k) Radio frequency emissions. Every wireless facility shall at all
times comply with applicable FCC regulations governing radio
frequency emissions, and failure to comply with such
regulations shall be treated as a material violation of the terms
of the permit.
(l) Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance is to be
furnished to the Administrator evidencing in form coverages
and limits acceptable to the City of Watertown that the
applicant has the capability to cover any liability that might
arise out of the presence of the facility in the right-of-way; in
addition:
[1] The City shall be an additional insured as evidenced on a
certificate of liability insurance; and
[2] A certificate of insurance shall contain an
acknowledgement attested by the insurer that prior to
modification, cancellation or termination of the subject
policy, written notice shall be sent to the Administrator by
said insurance company.
G. Application processing and appeal.
(1) Rejection for incompleteness. Notices of incompleteness shall be
provided in conformity with state, local, and federal law, including
47 C.F.R. § 1.6003(d), as amended.
(2) Processing timeline. Wireless permit applications (including
applications for other permits under § 457-50E(2)(i) necessary to
place or modify the facility) and appeals will be processed in
conformity with the shot clocks set forth in state, local, federal law,
as amended.
(3) Written decisions. In the event that an application is denied [or
approved with conditions beyond the standard permit conditions
set forth in § 457-50F(4)], the Administrator shall issue a written
decision with the reasons therefor, supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record.
§ 457-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-50
1:726
(4) Appeal to the City of Watertown Common Council. Any person
adversely affected by the decision of the Administrator may appeal
that decision to the City of Watertown Common Council, which may
decide the issues de novo, and whose written decision will be the
final decision of the City of Watertown. An appeal by a wireless
infrastructure provider must be taken jointly with the wireless
service provider that intends to use the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(5) Deadline to appeal.
(a) Appeals that involve eligible facilities requests must be filed
within three business days of the written decision of the
Administrator.
(b) All other appeals not governed by § 457-50G(5)(a), above, must
be filed within 10 business days of the written decision of the
Administrator, unless the Administrator extends the time
thereof. An extension may not be granted where extension
would result in approval of the application by operation of law.
(6) Decision deadline. All appeals shall be conducted so that a timely
written decision may be issued in accordance with the applicable
shot clock.
H. Expiration and revocation.
(1) Expiration. A wireless permit issued pursuant to an eligible
facilities request shall expire at the same time the permit for the
underlying existing wireless telecommunications facility expires.
All other wireless permits shall be valid for a period of five years
from the date of issuance. Upon expiration of the wireless permit,
the permit holder must either:
(a) Remove the wireless telecommunications facility; or
(b) Submit an application to renew the permit at least 90 days
prior to its expiration. The facility must remain in place until
the renewal application is acted on by the City of Watertown
and any appeals from the City of Watertown's decision are
exhausted.
(2) Revocation for breach. A wireless permit may be revoked for failure
to comply with the conditions of the permit or applicable federal,
state, or local laws, rules, or regulations. Upon revocation, the
wireless telecommunications facility must be removed within 30
days of receipt of written notice from the City of Watertown. All
costs incurred by the City of Watertown in connection with the
revocation, removal, and right-of-way restorations shall be paid by
the permit holder.
§ 457-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-50
1:727
(3) Failure to obtain permit. Unless exempted from permitting by
§ 457-50B(2) of this chapter, a wireless telecommunications facility
installed without a wireless permit must be removed within 30 days
of receipt of written notice from the City of Watertown. All costs
incurred by the City of Watertown in connection with the notice,
removal, and right-of-way restoration shall be paid by entities who
own or control any part of the wireless telecommunications facility.
I. Relocation. Except as otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, a
permit holder must promptly and at its own expense, with due regards
for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate any
of its wireless telecommunications facilities in the right-of-way
whenever the City of Watertown requests such removal and relocation.
The City of Watertown may make such a request to prevent the facility
from interfering with a present or future City of Watertown use of the
right-of-way; a public improvement undertaken by the City of
Watertown; and economic development project in which the City of
Watertown has an interest or investment; when the public health,
safety, or welfare require it; or when necessary to prevent interference
with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permit holder shall not be required to
remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way that has been
vacated in favor or a non-governmental entity unless and until that
entity pays the reasonable costs of removal or relocation to the permit
holder.
J. Abandonment.
(1) Cessation of use. In the event that a permitted facility within the
right-of-way is not in use for a continuous period of 60 days or
longer, the permit holder must promptly notify the City of
Watertown and do one of the following:
(a) Provide information satisfactory to the Administrator that the
permit holder's obligation for its facilities under this chapter
have been lawfully assumed by another permit holder.
(b) Submit to the Administrator a proposal and instruments for
dedication of the facilities to the City of Watertown. If a permit
holder proceeds under this § 457-50J(1)(b), the City of
Watertown may, at its option:
[1] Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities;
[2] Require the permit holder, at its own expense, to remove
the facilities and perform the required restoration under
§ 457-50K; or
[3] Require the permit holder to post a bond or provide
payment sufficient to reimburse the City of Watertown for
reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing
the facilities and undertaking restoration under § 457-50K.
§ 457-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-50
1:728
§ 457-51. Private utility facilities.
(c) Remove its facilities from the right-of-way within one year and
perform the required restoration under § 457-50K, unless the
Administrator waives this requirement or provides a later date.
(2) Abandoned facilities. Facilities of a permit holder who fails to
comply with § 457-50J(1) and which, for one year, remain unused
shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed
to be a nuisance. In addition to any remedies or rights it has at law
or in equity, the City of Watertown may, at its option:
(a) Abate the nuisance and recover the cost from the permit holder
or the permit holder's successor in interest;
(b) Take possession of the facilities; and/or
(c) Require removal of the facilities by the permit holder or the
permit holder's successor in interest.
K. Restoration. In the event that a permit holder removes or is required to
remove a wireless telecommunications facility from the right-of-way
under this chapter (or relocate it pursuant to § 457-50I), the permit
holder must restore the right-of-way to its prior conditions in
accordance with the City of Watertown specifications. However, a
support structure owned by another entity authorized to maintain that
support structure in the right-of-way need not be removed but must
instead be restored to its prior condition. If the permit holder fails to
make the restorations required by this § 457-50K, the City of Watertown
at is option may do such work. In that event, the permit holder shall pay
to the City of Watertown within 30 days of billing therefor, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way.
L. Placement on City of Watertown-owned or -controlled structures. The
City of Watertown may negotiate agreements for placement of wireless
telecommunications facilities on City of Watertown-owned or -
controlled structures in the right-of-way. The agreement shall specify
the compensation to the City of Watertown for use of the structures.
The person or entity seeking the agreement shall reimburse the City of
Watertown for all costs the City of Watertown incurs in connection with
its review of and action upon the request for an agreement.
A. General. Private utility-type facilities may be allowed to cross City of
Watertown right-of-way and are not subject to approval by the Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA).
(1) All private utility facilities shall follow the requirements of this
chapter and shall be designed, constructed, operated, and
maintained as described in the specific regulations of this chapter
for communications, electric, fluid or gas lines, wireless
telecommunications, whichever more closely resembles the facility.
§ 457-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-51
1:729
§ 457-52. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is
for any reason held to be illegal or otherwise invalid by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such illegal or invalid
portion shall be severable and shall not affect or impair any remaining
portion of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect.
B. Occupation fees. Private utility installations may be assessed a fee by
the City of Watertown for right-of-way crossing or occupation. The fee
for each installation shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and
may be based upon, but not limited to, the following:
(1) The value of the facility.
(2) Complexity of the installation.
(3) Department review time.
(4) Comparison with the value of private easements adjacent to the
proposed location.
(5) Comparison with fee schedules for other similar utility installation
in Wisconsin and across the nation.
(6) Cost incurred in retaining outside consultants.
C. Additional requirements. Based upon the proposed private utility
installation's potential for damage to the roadway, adjacent right-ofway,
or the environment, the Administrator may require the following to
be submitted with a permit application form:
(1) Evidence of commercial general liability, workers' compensation
and employer's liability, and commercial motor vehicle liability
insurance.
(2) A certificate of insurance which names the City of Watertown as an
additional insured.
(3) Approval from the DNR that the project will have no significant
impact upon the environment.
§ 457-51 WATERTOWN CODE § 457-52
1:730
Chapter 468
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic regulations — See Ch.
500.
§ 468-1. Definition.
"Taxicab" means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of fewer than eight
persons, and not operated on a fixed route. The term shall not include:
§ 468-2. License required.
No owner shall operate or cause to be operated a taxicab within the City
without obtaining a license therefor.
§ 468-3. Application for taxicab license.
A. Taxicabs licensed in other municipalities who use the City streets
temporarily;
B. Rent-a-cars; and
C. Motor vehicles operated as ambulances or funeral cars.
A. Application for a taxicab license to operate one or more taxicabs or an
application to operate additional taxicabs under an existing license
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk/Treasurer upon forms
furnished by him, giving the address from which the business is
conducted, and signed by the owner of the business or his authorized
agent. The application shall also state, for each vehicle to be operated,
the make, model and year of manufacture; the engine number; serial
number; capacity for passengers; and the Wisconsin certificate of title
number and license number.
B. The application shall be submitted by the City Clerk/Treasurer to the
Chairperson of the Licensing Board, who shall set a date for a public
hearing before the Licensing Board to examine the public convenience
and necessity of granting the license. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall
notify the applicant of the time and place set for the hearing.
[Amended by Ord. No. 77-38]
C. Not later than 30 days after the hearing, the Board shall submit to the
Common Council its recommendations as to whether public
convenience and necessity will be served by the granting of the
application. No license shall be granted until the Council shall, by
§ 457-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-3
1:731
§ 468-4. License fees.170
The taxicab license fee shall be as set by the Common Council and provided
under separate fee schedule per year or any fractional part thereof for each
vehicle operated by the same licensee. The license year shall commence July
1 and end June 30.
§ 468-5. Insurance.
§ 468-6. Rates.
Upon application for license, or any renewal thereof, the applicant shall
file with the City Clerk/Treasurer a schedule of fares to be charged. Such
fares shall not be changed during the license year without approval of the
Common Council. No licensee or operator shall charge any rate other than
the established rate.171
resolution, have determined that the public convenience and necessity
will be served by the service proposed in the application for license. The
Council may hold such further hearings and procure such additional
information as it may deem necessary or advisable in making such
determination.
A. No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant deposits with the
City Clerk/Treasurer a policy of liability insurance covering all vehicles
to be included under the license. Such policy shall describe each vehicle
by make, model and serial number; number of passengers capable of
being accommodated therein at one time; and the number of state
motor vehicle license. Such insurance policy shall be issued by a
company licensed to do business in Wisconsin and shall insure against
loss from liability to the amount of $15,000 for the injury or death of one
person in any one accident and in the amount of $30,000 for the injury
or death of more than one person in any one accident and in the amount
of $10,000 for damage to property of others for any one accident due to
negligent operation of such vehicle. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-47]
B. The policy of insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney as to
legal form before it is filed and shall contain a provision that the same
may not be cancelled before the expiration of its term except upon 10
days' written notice to the City.
C. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued in
compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and terminate
all licenses issued for the vehicle covered by such insurance policy,
unless another policy shall have been filed and approved pursuant to
this section and shall be in effect at the time of such cancellation or
termination.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 468-7
1:732
§ 468-7. General regulations.
§ 468-8. Revocation of license. [Amended by Ord. No. 75-8]
A taxicab license may be revoked by the Common Council for a violation of
this chapter, any provision of Chs. 340 to 348, Wis. Stats., the City traffic
ordinances or for any offense affecting the safety and welfare of passengers.
The Licensing Board shall investigate any charges made against a licensee
and conduct a hearing on such charges with notice to the licensee, and if
the Licensing Board recommends revocation of the license, such revocation
shall be recommended to the Council. At the time the revocation is being
considered by the Council, the licensee will have the opportunity to be
heard and to present evidence to the Council.
§ 468-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This
action shall not preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action
to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 476
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 497. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 500.
A. Identification. All taxicabs shall be suitably marked or identified as
such.
B. Subject to traffic regulations. The State Traffic Code172 and the City
traffic ordinances shall apply to the use and operation of taxicabs.
C. Number of passengers limited. No owner or operator shall carry or
permit to be carried in any taxicab more than the number of passengers
specified on the license applicable to the taxicab.
D. Operator not to drink. No person operating a taxicab shall drink any
intoxicating beverage or be under the influence thereof while so
engaged.
171. Editor's Note: Original § 9.17(7), which immediately followed this section, was repealed by
Ord. No. 96-4.
172. Editor's Note: See Chs. 340 to 349, Wis. Stats.,
§ 468-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 476-1
1:733
§ 476-1. Contract authority.
The Chief of Police may enter into contracts for and on behalf of the City of
Watertown for the towing and storage of vehicles. The Chief of Police may
only contract with companies authorized to provide towing services under
the Wisconsin Statutes and the regulations of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation. The Chief of Police may contract with multiple companies,
and the City of Watertown may utilize the services of each company on a
rotational or priority basis.
§ 476-2. Requirements.
Any contract authorized under § 476-1 above shall provide that:
§ 476-3. Fee schedule; additional conditions [Amended by Ord. No.
02-07]
The City shall set the fee schedule to be included in each contract and shall
update the fee schedule as necessary upon the termination of each contract.
The Chief of Police may establish further rules, regulations, specifications
and conditions under which these contracts shall be let.
§ 476-4. Request for towing services.
No police officer or other official or employee of the City may request
towing services and storage of vehicles, pursuant to this chapter or Chapter
497 of this Code, from other than the companies under contract with the
City, unless the owner, driver or property owner specifically requests that
the services of a particular company be utilized.
A. The company have adequate towing equipment and storage facilities
suitable for designation as a police impound facility;
B. The company have personnel available 24 hours a day;
C. The company furnish the City of Watertown with an indemnification
agreement supported by a performance bond and indemnity bond or, in
lieu thereof, a certification of insurance to hold the City harmless from
any claims for damage or theft of the vehicles and personal property
therein contained when the vehicles are towed and/or stored;
D. The company, not the City, be responsible for collecting the cost of all
services provided at the request of the City from the owner or driver of
the vehicle towed and/or stored, except for those vehicles or motor
vehicle accessories towed and/or stored under the provisions of
Chapter 497 (Abandoned and Junked Vehicles) of this Code; and
E. The company will have a lien for towing and storage of vehicles,
pursuant to § 779.415, Wis. Stats.
§ 476-1 WATERTOWN CODE § 476-5
1:734
§ 476-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPANY — Any person, firm, partnership, company, association or
corporation engaged in selling or furnishing towing services and authorized
to provide towing services and storage of vehicles under the Wisconsin
Statutes and regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
POLICE IMPOUND FACILITY — Any building, enclosure or place
designated by the Chief of Police for the storage of impounded motor
vehicles, located on private or public property.
TOWING — Moving a vehicle from one place to another under other than
the vehicle's own power.
TOWING SERVICES — Any act toward the end of towing a vehicle.
VEHICLE — Every device designed to transport either person or property
upon a highway, whether or not self-propelled, and whether or not operable.
This definition also includes equipment, accessories or incomplete parts for
use on a vehicle.
§ 476-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each day
on which a violation of any provision of this chapter occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude use of
any other remedy available to the City to prevent or remove an offending
condition.
Chapter 480
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 10.
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers — See
Ch. 403.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 410.
Public events — See Ch. 428.
§ 480-1. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant or vehicular food vendor to
engage in sales within the City of Watertown without being registered for
that purpose as provided herein.
§ 476-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-2
1:735
§ 480-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic or
patriotic person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting
to be such.
CLERK — The City Clerk/Treasurer of the City of Watertown, Wisconsin.
COMMITTEE — The Site Plan Review Committee.[Added by Ord. No.
05-27]
MERCHANDISE — Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include
merchandise, goods or materials provided incidental to services offered or
sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for
the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — Any person who, for at least six months prior
to the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant:
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any individual who engages in the retail sale
of merchandise at any place in this municipality temporarily, and who does
not intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such
place. For purposes of this chapter, "sale of merchandise" includes a sale
in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the
merchandise constitute the greatest part of value for the price received, but
does not include a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer
of personal property used on the farm.
VEHICULAR FOOD VENDOR — Any person engaged in the business of
selling food products from a vehicle, self-powered or motorized, on the
public streets and sidewalks of the City, including sales persons who use
vehicles to go from place to place or house to house for the purpose of
soliciting sales of food products for future delivery directly to the consumer.
This term shall not include those persons who deliver food products to
restaurants, grocery stores or similar distribution businesses in the normal
course of business, nor shall it include sales persons who solicit sales, at
wholesale, of food products to commercial or institutional entities.
§ 480-3. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
Has continuously operated an established place of business in the local
trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale;
A.
Has continuously resided in the local trade area among the
communities bordering the place of sale and does business from his/her
residence; or
B.
Has shown an intent to establish a permanent presence within the
municipality (e.g., membership in the Watertown Area Chamber of
Commerce or Central Business Association).
C.
§ 480-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 480-3
1:736
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel or dairy products on at least a
monthly frequency to regular customers on established routes.
B. Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such
merchandise.
C. Any person selling agricultural products which the person has grown or
raised in Jefferson or Dodge Counties, Wisconsin.
D. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at the
home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within Dodge or Jefferson County and who delivers such
merchandise in his regular course of business.
E. Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a
home visit by said person.
F. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer.
G. Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of merchandise.
H. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
I. Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided
that there is submitted to the City Clerk/Treasurer proof that such
charitable organization is registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats. Any
charitable organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not
registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from that
statute's registration requirements, shall be required to register under
this chapter.
J. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom
complaint has been made to the City Clerk/Treasurer that such person
is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the City
Clerk/Treasurer proof that such person has leased for at least six
months, or purchased, the premises from which he/she has conducted
business in the market area for at least six months prior to the date the
complaint was made.
K. Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in § 15.01(7),
Wis. Stats.
L. Transient merchants or vehicular food vendors while doing business at
special events authorized by the City Council or any commission,
committee or board thereof having the specific responsibility of
§ 480-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-3
1:737
§ 480-4. Registration. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-22]
authorizing or regulating the special event. [Amended 6-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-16]
M. Persons under 18 years of age who are residents of the City or
surrounding areas of Dodge or Jefferson County, Wisconsin.
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return to the City Clerk/
Treasurer a registration form furnished by the City Clerk/Treasurer,
which shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Age, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the transient merchant represents
or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any.
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
merchandise and any services to be offered to the general public.
(6) Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable.
(7) Make, year, model, color and license number of any vehicles to be
used by the applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(8) Most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where
applicant conducted his/her business.
(9) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this City.
(10) Statement as to whether applicant has been arrested or convicted
for any crime or ordinance violation within the last five years, and
the nature of the offense and the place of conviction.
(11) If the transient merchant will be operating from a fixed location
within the City, the property owner's written permission shall be
obtained.
B. If the transient merchant will be operating from a fixed location within
the City, the applicant shall present to the City Clerk/Treasurer a site
plan of sufficient detail to allow the Site Review Committee to become
familiar with the layout of the operation and which demonstrates
compliance with all of the following:
(1) All display, parking, pedestrian movement and traffic circulation
associated with the activity shall be located on private property.
§ 480-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 480-4
1:738
(2) All display, parking, pedestrian movement and traffic circulation
associated with the activity shall not be located on public
sidewalks, bike paths, public rights-of-way, or other public lands.
(3) All display, parking, pedestrian movement and traffic circulation
associated with the activity shall not be located within traffic
visibility triangles or within parking lot driveways, accessways,
alleys or parking lot driving aisles, or in a manner which otherwise
creates a hazard.
(4) If located adjacent to any area in which motor vehicles are present,
the display area shall be separated from the vehicle circulation
area by a minimum of a forty-inch-high pedestrian barrier limited
to a single six-foot-wide access point, so as to make pedestrian
movements between the display area and vehicles predictable and
limited to a single point of contact.
(5) Lighting shall be limited to a maximum of one footcandle over
ambient.
(6) No amplified sound systems are permitted within the display area.
C. Applicants shall present to the City Clerk/Treasurer for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity, containing a
photograph of the applicant, as may be reasonably required.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures, where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) A copy of any appropriate state license as may be required or an
inspection by the City Public Health Department if the applicant's
business is the sale of food items.
D. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the City Clerk/
Treasurer as his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil
action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service
performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities
of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot be served
personally.173
E. At the time the registration is returned, a fee as set by the Common
Council and provided under separate fee schedule shall be paid to the
City Clerk/Treasurer to cover the cost of processing said registration.
An applicant who is a member of a religious organization selling
religious literature shall be exempt from payment of the fee.174
173. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-4
1:739
§ 480-5. Investigation.
§ 480-6. Appeal.
Any person refused or denied registration may appeal the denial through
the appeal procedure provided by Chapter 10 of the City's Code, pertaining
to administrative review, by filing a written request for such administrative
review with the City Clerk/Treasurer within 10 days of the refusal or denial
of the registration. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall immediately transmit said
appeal to the Licensing Board of the Common Council, which shall then
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give public notice
F. Upon compliance with this section and § 580-5, the City Clerk/
Treasurer shall register the applicant as a transient merchant and date
the entry. Said registration shall expire on the next June 30 after
issuance, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in § 480-5C below.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall refer it
immediately to the Chief of Police, who may make and complete an
investigation of the statements made in such registration.
B. If the applicant is to operate from a fixed location, the application shall
also be sent to the Site Plan Review Committee. The Committee shall
review the proposal and make recommendation for approval, denial or
approval with changes to the application as to layout, access, etc.
[Added by Ord. No. 05-27]
C. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall refuse to register the applicant if it is
determined, pursuant to the investigation under Subsections A and B
above, that the application contains any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been
received against the applicant by authorities in the most recent cities,
villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant
conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime,
statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the
nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in
direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable
provision of § 480-4B above. [Amended by Ord. No. 05-27]
D. If a registration is denied under this section, the Chief of Police and/or
the Committee shall state the specific reasons in writing, and the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall provide a copy of the reasons to the applicant.
[Amended by Ord. No. 05-27]
E. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue to each person, at the time of the
delivery of his approved registration, an identification card or badge
bearing the words "Transient Merchant," a photograph of the person on
the front of the identification card or badge, and the period of time for
which the registration is issued. Each person shall conspicuously
display such identification card or badge whenever he is engaged in
sales pursuant to this chapter, except when so engaged by telephone.
§ 480-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 480-6
1:740
thereof to the parties in interest and determine the same within 30 days of
the date of notice to the persons or parties interested, as more specifically
enumerated in Chapter 10 of this Code.
§ 480-7. Prohibited practices; disclosure requirements.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A transient merchant or vehicular food vendor shall be prohibited
from calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by appointment; calling at any
dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words
"No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or words of similar meaning; calling
at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any
premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other
person having authority over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant or vehicular food vendor shall not
misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements
concerning the quality, quantity or characteristics of any
merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her
identity or the identity of the organization he/she represents. A
charitable organization transient merchant shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of the merchandise being
offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which
the organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a
percentage of the sale price of the merchandise.
(3) No transient merchant or vehicular food vendor shall impede the
free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles.
Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking
regulations shall be observed.
(4) No transient merchant or vehicular food vendor shall make any
loud noises or use any sound-amplifying device to attract
customers unless issued a separate registration therefor under
§ 410-40 of this Code.
(5) No transient merchant or vehicular food vendor shall allow rubbish
or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he/she is
conducting business.
B. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a transient merchant or vehicular food
vendor shall expressly disclose his/her name, the name of the
company or organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the
identity of merchandise or services he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant or
vehicular food vendor or any offer for the later delivery of
§ 480-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-7
1:741
§ 480-8. Records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the City Clerk/Treasurer all convictions
for violation of this chapter, and the City Clerk/Treasurer shall note any
such violation on the record of the registrant convicted.
§ 480-9. Revocation of registration.
§ 480-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person adjudged in violation of any provision of this chapter shall forfeit
not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 per day for each violation plus costs
of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 484
merchandise is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right
to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or
is a cash transaction of more than $25 in accordance with the
procedure as set forth in § 423.203, Wis. Stats.; the seller shall give
the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such
notice shall conform to the requirements of § 423.203(1)(a), (b) and
(c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the transient merchant or vehicular food vendor takes a sales
order for the later delivery of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time
the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement
containing: the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in
advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the
name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or
performance date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is
provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
(4) During any contact with a prospective customer, a transient
merchant or vehicular food vendor shall prominently display the
registration as issued by the City Clerk/Treasurer at all times.
A. Registration may be revoked by the Licensing Board of the Common
Council after notice and hearing, if the registrant made any material
omission or materially inaccurate statements in the application for
registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading
statement or representation in the course of engaging in transient
sales, violated any provision of this chapter or was convicted of any
crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the
registrant's fitness to engage in selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to
§ 480-4D above on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set
for the hearing; such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing
and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
§ 480-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 480-10
1:742
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 10.
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 484-1. Administration.
The Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission shall have exclusive
jurisdiction, authority, control, supervision and direction over all trees,
shrubs or other growth planted or growing upon any public thoroughfare or
public place in the City and the maintenance, care or removal thereof.
§ 484-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOULEVARD and/or MEDIAN STRIPS — Those open lands which divide a
traveled roadway.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any lands owned by the City and used by the public,
including parks, playgrounds, parking lots and any and all other public
lands, as well as streets and their adjacent rights-of-way.
TERRACE — That portion of the street right-of-way lying between the
sidewalk and back of the curb. Where no sidewalk and/or curbing exists,
the terrace shall be determined by a field inspection conducted by the City
Forester or his representative.
TREE — Any tree of a species that has the genetic trait to develop a trunk
diameter or caliper of one inch or greater at a height of four feet above the
surface of the ground.
TREE TOPPING — The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
§ 484-3. City Forester.
A. General powers and duties. The Director of Park, Recreation and
Forestry Department shall be designated the "City Forester" and shall
have the following general powers and duties:
(1) To direct, manage, supervise and control the City street tree
program to include all planting, trimming, spraying, removal,
maintenance and protection of all trees and shrubs on all terraces,
boulevards, median strips, or public property and to supervise
Park, Recreation and Forestry Department personnel in the
§ 480-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-3
1:743
planting, trimming, spraying, removal, maintenance and protection
of trees and shrubs in these areas.
(2) To guard all trees and shrubs within the City, whether on public
property or private property, so as to prevent the spread of disease
or pests.
(3) To maintain, trim or remove all trees or shrubs within the City,
whether on public property or private property, to prevent any such
tree or shrub from overhanging or encroaching upon any
boulevard, median strip, terrace or other public property within the
City so as to eliminate dangerous conditions which may affect the
life, health or safety of person and property at the discretion of the
City Forester.
(4) To protect and guard all trees and shrubs within the City on private
property, other than private property which adjoins or abuts public
property, so as to eliminate dangerous conditions which may affect
the life, health or safety of person or property, only under such
circumstances as are brought to the attention of the City Forester
by a citizen complaint.
(5) To plant, trim, spray, remove, maintain and protect trees and
shrubs on all terraces, boulevards, median strips, or public
property as may be necessary to ensure safety, to protect
interference with public or private utility services lying above or
below ground, to guard traffic/pedestrian visibility, and to preserve
the symmetry and beauty of such grounds.
(6) Such other powers and duties as are provided by the laws of the
State of Wisconsin, particularly § 27.09, Wis. Stats., by ordinance of
the City, and by the written rules, regulations and guidelines of the
Watertown Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission.
B. Specific authority of City Forester to enter private premises.
(1) The City Forester shall have the authority to enter private property
for the purpose of examining, inspecting and physically collecting
test samples of any tree or shrub on the premises for the purpose of
preventing the spread of disease and the purpose of eliminating
dangerous conditions which may affect the life, health or safety of
person or property.
(2) The City Forester or his representative, after giving at least 24
hours' advance notice to the owner or tenant having charge of the
premises, shall have the authority to enter upon private premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of examining and inspecting any
suspected diseased tree or shrub.
(3) In the event entry to private property is denied to the City Forester
by the owner or tenant in charge of the premises under this section,
the City Forester shall have the authority to obtain a special
§ 484-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 484-3
1:744
inspection warrant through the Watertown Municipal Court or
other court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis.
Stats.
C. Specific authority to order removal of trees or shrubs.
(1) No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the City Forester or
any of his or her agents or employees from entering upon any
public or private premises for the purpose of trimming or removing
any tree or shrub which the City Forester has determined to be
diseased or determined to have created a dangerous condition.
(2) If the City Forester or any of his or her authorized agents finds on
examination and/or inspection in or upon any private or public
property any tree or shrub infested with injurious insects or plant
diseases, or if any tree or shrub on private property shall endanger
the public or shall be injurious to private utility services or public
improvements, the City Forester shall notify the owner or person
having charge of such premises, under § 27.09(4) through (7), Wis.
Stats., in writing, at least two weeks prior thereto, of a hearing on
such removal or trimming before the City Forester. The owner or
person in charge of the premises shall have a right to be present at
such hearing and be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After
such hearing, the City Forester shall either abandon such work or
proceed under Subsection C(3) below. If the City Forester shall
cause the work to be done, the costs shall be charged against the
property as a special charge. No damages shall be awarded to the
owner for the value of the destroyed trees or shrubs removed
pursuant to an order entered under this subsection.
(3) Prior to proceeding to perform any work under Subsection C(2),
the owner or person having charge of such premises shall be given
at least 30 days to cause the removal and/or destruction of the tree
or shrub as ordered. The City Forester shall determine the time
specified and shall provide written notice of such time period to the
owner or person having charge of such premises, depending on the
severity of the problem and the scope of correction needed to
remedy the problem. The City Forester may direct the immediate
removal of the tree(s) or shrub(s) without such prior notice if the
City Forester determines that an emergency condition warrants
such action.
(4) Should this order not be complied with within the time specified in
the order, the City Forester shall cause such work to be completed
unless the owner or person in charge of such premises shall have
appealed the order of the City Forester entered under Subsection
C(3).
(5) In the event any tree or shrub is located partially on private
property and partially on public property within the City, any such
tree or shrub is deemed to be solely the responsibility of the City
§ 484-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-3
1:745
§ 484-4. Appeal from order of City Forester.
A person who receives an order from the City Forester and objects to all or
a part thereof may, within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the order to
such person, notify the City Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission and
the City Forester, in writing, of the nature of the objection and of a request
for a hearing thereon. The written order under § 484-3C(3) above shall
be deemed the initial determination and the municipal authority charged
with conducting the review, pursuant to § 10-8B of this Code, shall be the
Watertown Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission. The Commission
shall proceed to conduct a hearing on the appellant's objection, pursuant to
§ § 10-9 and 10-10 of this Code. The City Forester shall be present at such
hearing. The appellant may be represented by counsel. The Commission
may affirm, cancel or modify the order of the City Forester, in its discretion,
to best conform such order to the intent of this chapter.
§ 484-5. Tree trimming.
Forester and the City of Watertown to plant, trim, spray, remove,
maintain and protect the entire tree or shrub. The root system
or the root flare of the tree does not factor in for determination
of the percentage of ownership of any tree or shrub under this
subsection.
(6) In the event any tree or shrub on private property appears to be
located on the boundary line between parcels, in the estimation of
the City Forester, and the adjoining property owners cannot agree
on the percentage of liability for compliance with any order or
remedy for any violation issued by the City Forester, the City
Forester shall proceed under this section. The root system or the
root flare of the tree does not factor in for determination of the
percentage of ownership of any tree or shrub under this
subsection.
(a) The City Forester shall retain a licensed surveyor to conduct a
survey to determine the boundary line between the property
owners' parcels, showing the location of the tree or shrub in
relation to the boundary line and providing a written report of
his or her findings.
(b) The City Forester shall allocate the percentage of liability to
the adjoining property owners based upon the written survey
report submitted for the cost of preparation of the survey and
for compliance with any violation order issued by his or her
office.
A. Trees or shrubs standing on any private property adjacent to a
boulevard, terrace or other public property shall be trimmed and kept
trimmed by the owner of such tree or shrub so as to maintain a clear
space of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk or public property,
except as indicated under Subsection B. The owner of said trees shall
§ 484-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 484-5
1:746
§ 484-6. Contact with electric power lines and conductors.
remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or limbs which constitute
a menace to the safety of the public. The City shall have the right to
prune or trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from streetlights or
interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or
approaching pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. All trees and shrubs on private or public property shall be trimmed and
kept trimmed so as to maintain a clear space of not less than 12 feet
above the roadway, except the Public Works Commission may make
special provisions in exceptional cases.175
C. No person shall authorize any tree or shrub on public property to be
trimmed, cut, removed or topped without permission of the City
Forester.
D. All trees and shrubs on any boulevard, median strip, terrace or other
public property and on private property adjoining public property shall
be trimmed or removed, as necessary, where the foliage obstructs the
streetlight illumination pattern. Such work shall be done by the City
upon the recommendation of the City Forester and at the direction of
the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission.
E. All tree trimming or pruning shall be performed by any person, firm or
organization according to the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) under its Regulation Section A300 (1995), as amended.
F. Clean smooth cuts are to be made so as not to disturb the branch collar
or the branch bark ridge.
G. Dead branches are to be cut back to a healthy lateral branch.
H. No branch stubs shall be allowed.
A. No person shall cause any wire charged with electricity or any wire or
cable used as a conductor to come into contact with any tree located in
or upon any public property.
B. No wire or cable intended to be used as a guy or support wire shall be
anchored, attached or fastened to any tree located in or upon any public
property in the City.
C. Public utility companies or private improvement work affecting trees or
shrubs on any boulevard, median strip, terrace or public property shall
be limited to the actual necessities of the services of the company, and
such work shall be done in a neat and professional manner and
according to the following standards, under the supervision of the City
Forester.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 484-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-7
1:747
§ 484-7. Tree protection permit, regulations.
§ 484-8. Planting regulations on public property.
No person, firm or organization shall plant or allow to grow any tree or
shrub or other growth in or upon any boulevard, median strip, terrace or
public property without permission of the City Forester and in conformance
with the following regulations:
A. In order to provide and preserve a safe and healthy urban forest, all
public agencies, private persons, firms or organizations, or public
utilities contemplating a construction project in or upon any street,
boulevard, median strip, terrace or other public property, prior to the
commencement of construction activities, must obtain a "Tree
Protection During Construction Permit" from the City Engineer or City
Forester and abide by the written policy guidelines issued with the
permit. Application for the permit shall be made on a form to be
provided by the City Engineer's office, subject to review and approval of
the City Forester.
B. All public agencies, private persons, firms or organizations, or public
utilities which are subject to the requirements of a permit under
Subsection A and which perform a construction project in or upon any
street, boulevard, median strip, terrace or other public property are
subject to the following regulations. No person, firm or organization
shall:
(1) Secure any rope, wire, sign, unprotected electrical installation or
other device or material to, around or through a tree or shrub.
(2) Break, mutilate, deface or remove any tree or shrub or permit any
fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious
substance to seep, drain or be emptied on any tree or shrub.
(4) Place cement or other solid substances around the base of any tree
or shrub.
(5) Remove any protective device from a tree or shrub.
(6) Attach any sign or notice on any tree, or fasten any guy wire, cable,
rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree, except that
authorized City employees may post temporary "No Parking" signs
on trees when necessary.
(7) Fail to make reasonable and necessary efforts to protect trees to be
retained during construction of streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
parks and buildings.
A. No tree or shrub shall be planted in the terrace at an intersection of two
streets nearer than 25 feet to either corner measured on the property
§ 484-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 484-8
1:748
§ 484-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule
or regulation made by the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission or the
City Forester hereunder shall be subject to the penalties provided herein or
those penalties set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
line, in compliance with the Watertown Zoning Code setback
requirements in Chapter 550 of this Code.
B. No tree or shrub shall be planted in the terrace nearer than 35 feet to
the next nearest tree, except as approved by the City Forester.
C. No tree or shrub shall be planted in the terrace where the clear terrace
space is less than 4 1/2 feet or as may be otherwise provided by City
Forester.
D. No tree or shrub shall be planted nearer to the back of curb than 1/2 of
the clear space of the terrace.
E. No tree or shrub shall be planted in the terrace nearer than 10 feet to a
water stop box, waterline or sewer line.
F. No softwood tree or any tree that is not hardy for the Watertown area,
as determined by the City Forester, shall be planted in any street
terrace.
G. No tree or shrub shall be planted in the terrace near an ornamental
streetlight when the foliage of the tree will obstruct the streetlight
illumination pattern.
H. No trees or shrubs other than those species listed as small trees in the
City's Approved Species List176 may be planted under or adjacent to any
overhead utility wires where such tree or shrub will be likely to
interfere with such overhead utility wires.
I. No person, firm or organization shall plant or set out a tree or shrub in
or upon any boulevard, terrace or public property unless the tree or
shrub is a species listed in the City's Approved Species List or a species
approved by the City Forester.
J. All trees and shrubs planted in boulevards, median strips, terraces and
on other public property in the City shall be planted according to tree/
shrub planting standards developed by the Park, Recreation and
Forestry Commission and made available to the general public by the
City Forester.
176. Editor's Note: Said list of approved tree species is on file with the Street Department.
§ 484-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-9
1:749
Chapter 497
VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Towing — See Ch. 476.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 497-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is required
by the laws of the State of Wisconsin to have attached thereto a valid,
unexpired registration plate and which:
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is left unattended
in its original parked location on public property for a period of 48 hours
or longer or is left unattended in its original parked location on private
property for a period of 15 days or longer and which:[Amended by Ord.
No. 06-08]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for
towing or transporting people or materials, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers, motorcycles
Is left unattended in its original parked location on private property
for a period of 48 hours or longer without the consent of the owner,
lessee or occupant of such property, or their legally authorized agent;
or [Amended by Ord. No. 01-14]
A.
Is left unattended in its original parked location on public property,
including any portion of a highway, street, municipal parking lot or
public right-of-way within the limits of the City of Watertown, for a
period of 72 hours or longer; or [Amended by Ord. No. 01-14]
B.
Is left unattended on a street, highway or public right-of-way within
the limits of the City of Watertown in such a manner or under such
conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or
proper street maintenance.
C.
Is unable to be safely or legally operated on the roads of the State of
Wisconsin; or
A.
Is wrecked, damaged or substantially dismantled to the extent that such
vehicle is inoperable; or
B.
C. Is incapable of being moved under its own power.
§ 484-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 497-1
1:750
or tractors. "Motor vehicle" does not include snowmobiles, dune buggies,
"stock" or racing cars, or off-road vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES — Any equipment, part or parts of any
motor vehicle.
ORIGINAL PARKED LOCATION — Includes the location at which the motor
vehicle was parked when it was placarded in accordance with § 497-6B as
well as an area within a three-hundred-foot radius of that location.[Added
by Ord. No. 01-14]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association.
POLICE IMPOUND FACILITY — Any building, enclosure or place
designated by the Mayor, Chief of Police or by ordinance or resolution
of the Common Council for the storage of impounded motor vehicles by
the City of Watertown, including privately owned garages, other privately
owned locations designated as a police impound facility or a publicly owned
impound facility.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any other real estate within the City of Watertown
other than that described under the definition of "public property" below.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any real estate owned by the federal or state
government, City of Watertown, Watertown Unified School District or other
political subdivision.
§ 497-2. Junked motor vehicles prohibited.
§ 497-3. Abandoned motor vehicles prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to display, store, keep, park or leave
any junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories upon any public
or private property within the City of Watertown.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, lessee or legally
authorized agent in possession or control of any private property within
the City of Watertown to cause or permit to be stored any junked motor
vehicle or motor vehicle accessories upon said private property.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, after notification has been given to
remove any junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories from any
private property, to move the same to any other private property upon
which such storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other
public property for purposes of storage.
D. The storage of junked motor vehicles on private property or public
property within the City of Watertown is declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as
provided in this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any motor vehicle upon
any public property, street, highway, alley or other public way in the
City of Watertown.
§ 497-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-3
1:751
§ 497-4. Investigation of premises.
Any law enforcement officer or the Building Inspector of the City of
Watertown, upon routine inspection or upon receipt of a complaint, may
investigate a suspected junked motor vehicle, abandoned motor vehicle
or motor vehicle accessories and may gain access to private property to
conduct such investigation in order to record the make, model, style and
identification numbers of any such motor vehicle. In the event access to
any private property is denied by the owner, lessee or occupant thereof,
such law enforcement officer or Building Inspector shall obtain a special
inspection warrant, pursuant to the terms of § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., except
in cases of emergency.
§ 497-5. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle or any motor vehicle
accessories under the following circumstances:
§ 497-6. Removal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles. [Amended
2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 17-3]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on the
private property of another person without the consent of such other
person. Any person on whose property a motor vehicle is abandoned
may file a complaint with the Police Department. Thereafter, the motor
vehicle may be removed by the owner, lessee or legally authorized
agent from such property at said person's expense or it shall be
removed and impounded by the Police Department pursuant to the
terms of this chapter.
C. The abandonment of motor vehicles on private or public property within
the City of Watertown is declared to be a public nuisance which may be
abated or removed and penalties imposed as provided in this chapter.
A. Any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored within an
enclosed building.
B. Any automobile service stations, automotive repair facilities,
automotive body shops, or tire, battery and accessories sales stores, or
other similar business enterprises, provided that such businesses are in
a properly zoned area for such business enterprise, and provided
further that such motor vehicles or motor vehicle accessories are
shielded from public view by adequate landscaping or solid fencing.
C. Any licensed motor vehicle dealers or licensed junkyards or other
storage facilities in a properly zoned area for such business enterprise,
whether or not such motor vehicles or motor vehicle accessories are
shielded from the public view. This exception shall not apply to auto
repair facilities, auto body shops, automobile service stations or tire,
battery and accessory sales stores.
§ 497-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 497-6
1:752
§ 497-7. Storage, notice, reclamation and disposal of abandoned or
junked motor vehicles. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-15]
A. Any law enforcement officer, community service officer or the Building
Inspector of the City of Watertown who has reasonable grounds to
believe that a motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories are junked or
abandoned under the terms of this chapter shall require such motor
vehicle/accessories to be removed or cause the same to be removed and
placed in a police impound facility.
B. A motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories shall not be presumed
abandoned or junked until a bona fide effort is made by a law
enforcement officer, community service officer or the Building
Inspector to notify the owner or operator of the status of the motor
vehicle/accessories. Such notification shall include a bright orange,
self-adhesive vehicle courtesy notice which shall be affixed to the motor
vehicle/accessories. Such vehicle courtesy notice shall indicate the
specific ordinance being violated and the date and time action must be
taken by the owner or operator to prevent impoundment of the vehicle/
accessories.
C. Whenever any law enforcement officer, community service officer or the
Building Inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that a motor
vehicle, attended or unattended, has been left standing or parked upon
any portion of a municipal parking lot, highway, street or right-of-way in
the City of Watertown in such a manner as to constitute an obstruction
to traffic or proper street maintenance, such law enforcement officer,
community service officer or the Building Inspector is authorized to
cause the motor vehicle to be removed and placed in a police impound
facility so as to eliminate such obstruction without notice to the owner
or operator thereof.
D. The law enforcement officer, community service officer or Building
Inspector who caused removal of the motor vehicle or motor vehicle
accessories shall immediately inform the Chief of Police or his designee
of the impoundment and last confirmed location of the motor vehicle/
accessories.
A. Any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories which are deemed
abandoned or junked by the Chief of Police or his designee and not
reclaimed under Subsection D below, or disposed of under Subsection B
below, shall be retained in storage for a minimum period of 30 days
after certified mail notice, as provided in Subsection C below, has been
sent to the registered owner and lienholders of record to permit
reclamation of the motor vehicle/accessories.
B. If the Chief of Police or his designee determines that the towing costs
and storage charges for the minimum period of impoundment would
exceed the value of the motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories, the
motor vehicle/accessories may be junked or sold after the expiration of
the impoundment period, upon determination by the Chief of Police or
§ 497-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-7
1:753
his designee that the vehicle or accessories are not wanted for evidence
or for any other reason, provided that all motor vehicles in excess of 19
model years of age shall be sold or disposed of only by public auction
sale or sealed bid, in accordance with Subsection E of this section.
[Amended by Ord. No. 99-37; Ord. No. 00-20]
C. Within 10 days after the impoundment of a motor vehicle or motor
vehicle accessories, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and at
least 30 days prior to the date of sale of the impounded vehicle/
accessories, the Chief of Police or his designee shall serve a parking
citation by certified mail to the registered owner of record at the
address of said person indicated in the Department of Transportation
registration files for the violation of either § 497-2 or 497-3, having a
forfeiture in the amount equal to the bond forfeiture amount set by the
Watertown Municipal Court, and shall give written notice by certified
mail to the registered owner of record at the address of said person
indicated in the Department of Transportation registration files and
secured lienholders of record, if known, advising such parties of the
following:
(1) The year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the
impounded vehicle/accessories;
(2) The place where the impounded vehicle/accessories are being held;
(3) The right of the registered owner or any lienholder of record to
reclaim the impounded vehicle/accessories pursuant to Subsection
D below;
(4) That the failure of the registered owner or lienholders to exercise
their rights to reclaim the impounded vehicle/accessories under
this section shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title and interest
in the impounded vehicle/accessories and shall be deemed a
consent to the sale of the impounded vehicle/accessories; and
(5) That the registered owner or lienholders of record may contest the
impoundment and proposed disposition of the impounded vehicle/
accessories by appearing at the date and time indicated in said
notice, pursuant to Subsection E below.
D. The registered owner, or other person who can prove he or she is
entitled to possession of the impounded motor vehicle or motor vehicle
accessories, upon presentation of the vehicle title, identification or
other satisfactory evidence, may reclaim the impounded vehicle/
accessories within 30 days of the date of impoundment by presenting
himself or herself at the Watertown Police Department and by paying
the bond forfeiture amount set by the Watertown Municipal Court, plus
the actual cost of towing and a fee as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule per day for storage. The Chief of
Police or his designee shall, at his or her direction, have the discretion
§ 497-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 497-7
1:754
to waive or reduce the applicable storage fee based upon the following
criteria: [Amended by Ord. No. 05-24177]
(1) The financial circumstances of the vehicle owner that may have
rendered him unable to make payment of the fees set forth herein.
(2) An unintentional delay in the receipt of the written notice by the
vehicle owner.
(3) The voluntary forfeiture of the vehicle to the Watertown Police
Department by the vehicle owner.
E. Any person who is the registered owner of any impounded vehicle/
accessories or a lienholder of record thereon may contest the
impoundment, proposed disposition of the impounded motor vehicle/
accessories or costs of impoundment imposed under Subsection D
above by appearing in the Watertown Municipal Court at the time and
on the date indicated in the certified letter described in Subsection C
above to contest the facts and circumstances of such impoundment,
proposed distribution of the impounded vehicle/accessories, or costs
imposed as a result of the impoundment. Any such person shall have the
right to receive the vehicle back by posting a bond equal to the costs
outlined in Subsection D above prior to release of the impounded
vehicle/accessories. No such impounded vehicle/accessories shall be
disposed of under this section or costs imposed under this section until
disposition of the proceeding to contest any of these matters.
F. Any impounded motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories retained in
storage and not reclaimed by the registered owner or lienholders of
record may be sold by public auction with notice as provided below, or
may be sold by public sale calling for the receipt of sealed bids with
notice as provided below, pursuant to § 342.40(3)(c), Wis. Stats.
G. The notice of sale for any sale held pursuant to Subsection F above shall
be a public notice posted at three locations within the City of
Watertown: the Watertown Police Department, the bulletin board at the
office of the City of Watertown Clerk/Treasurer, and the bulletin board
at the City of Watertown Public Library. Such notice shall include the
description of the vehicle, name and last known address of the
registered owner and lienholders of record, if known, as well as the
information contained in the notice sent to the registered owner and
lienholders of record pursuant to Subsection C above and shall be
posted at least 10 days before the date of sale contained in the notice.
H. At such sale, the highest bid received for any such impounded motor
vehicle or motor vehicle accessories shall be accepted. If no bid is
received, the Chief of Police or his designee shall dispose of the
impounded vehicle/accessories at a private sale or shall junk the
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 497-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-7
1:755
§ 497-8. Violations and penalties; responsibility for costs.
impounded vehicle/accessories. Any interested person may offer bids
on each impounded vehicle/accessories to be sold.
I. The sale of a motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories under the
provisions of this section shall forever bar all prior claims thereto and
interests therein, and the Chief of Police or his designee shall supply
the purchaser of the purchased vehicle/accessories with a completed
form enabling the purchaser to obtain a regular certificate of title for
the vehicle.
J. The purchaser of any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories at the
sale conducted pursuant to Subsection F above shall have 10 days to
remove the purchased vehicle/accessories from the police impound
facility, upon the payment of the purchase price as bid, together with a
storage fee as set by the Common Council and provided under separate
fee schedule per day for each day the purchased vehicle/accessories
remain in the police impound facility after the second business day
subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale date, the purchaser
shall forfeit all right, title and interest in the purchased vehicle/
accessories and the same shall be deemed abandoned and may be sold
again.178
K. Any listing of vehicles to be sold pursuant to this section shall be made
available by the Chief of Police or his designee to any interested person
or organization who or which makes a written request therefor, for a fee
not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of producing a copy.
L. Within five days after the direct sale or disposal of a motor vehicle or
motor vehicle accessories, as provided in this section, the Chief of
Police or his designee shall advise the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation of such sale or disposal on a form provided by the
Department.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and
each day on which a violation of any provision of this chapter occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This chapter shall not
preclude the use of any other remedy available to the City to prevent,
abate or remove junked motor vehicles, abandoned motor vehicles, or
motor vehicle accessories, as allowed by law.
B. The owner of any abandoned or junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle
accessories, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the abandonment
and all costs of impounding and disposing of the motor vehicle or
accessories. Any costs recovered from the sale of the impounded
vehicle/accessories shall be offset against the costs of impounding,
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 497-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 497-8
1:756
§ 497-9. Response service fee.
The owner of any private property within the City of Watertown upon which
a junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories have been stored and
have been removed pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for a
response service fee payable to the City of Watertown in the amount of
$150.
Chapter 500
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 240.
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 442.
Streets and sidewalks: encroachments and
obstructions — See § 457-7.
Towing — See Ch. 476.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
497.
storing and disposing of the motor vehicle or accessories. Any costs not
previously paid shall be recovered as a cost of the action and imposed
as an additional cost of the plaintiff in any forfeiture penalty imposed
pursuant to Subsection A above. [Amended by Ord. No. 02-09]
A. Whenever the City of Watertown Police Department determines a
response service fee is owed pursuant to this section, an invoice for the
response service fee shall be sent to the owner of private property upon
which a junked vehicle or junked vehicle accessories were located at
the owner's last known address, along with a notice indicating that the
response service fee is a special charge, listing the services which form
the basis for the special charge; the date the payment is due; the right
of the private property owner to a hearing before the Chief of Police
into the reasonableness of the response service fee; the fact that the
request for a hearing must be made before the date payment is due; and
a warning that any unpaid response service fee will be assessed against
the private property owner's real estate tax roll as a special charge,
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., and Chapter 76, Article III, of the
City's Code.
B. All charges for response service fees are due and payable to the City of
Watertown within 30 days of mailing of the notice required in
Subsection A above, except that if a hearing is requested in a timely
manner the assessment is due within 10 days after an adverse decision
is rendered at such a hearing.
C. If the response service fee is not paid by the property owner under
Subsection B above, the fee shall be assessed against the property
owner's real estate tax roll as a special charge, pursuant to § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats., and Chapter 76, Article III, of the City's Code. [Amended
by Ord. No. 06-09A]
§ 497-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-9
1:757
§ 500-1. State traffic laws adopted. [Added by Ord. No. 84-16;
amended by Ord. No. 95-75; Ord. No. 98-52; Ord. No. 11-05179]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Chs. 194 and 340 to 348, Wis. Stats., describing and defining
regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic; § 941.01, Wis. Stats.,
Negligent operation of vehicle; § 941.30, Wis. Stats., Recklessly
endangering safety; Ch. 23, Wis. Stats., regarding operation of all-terrain
vehicles; and Chs. Trans 150, 177, 254, 255, 305, 308, 325, 326 and 327,
Wis. Adm. Code, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties
to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory
penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are adopted and by reference
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to
be performed or prohibited by any statute or rule incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any further additions,
amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein
are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform
statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of this
state.
§ 500-2. Speed limits.
A. State speed limits adopted. The provisions of §§ 346.57, 346.58 and
346.59, Wis. Stats., relating to the maximum and minimum speed of
vehicles, are hereby adopted as part of this section as if fully set forth
herein, including the modification to temporarily reduce speed limits in
construction zones, as specified in § 349.11(10), Wis. Stats. Where the
speed limits have been modified by the City, as enumerated in
Subsections B and C below, the provisions of Subsections B and C shall
control instead of this subsection. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-23]
B. Speed limits in parks.
(1) The speed limits in Riverside Park shall not be greater than 15
miles per hour while traveling on any public street or roadway
constituting the area of Riverside Park.
(2) The speed limit in Brandt/Quirk Park shall be 15 miles per hour on
the roadways constituting the area of the park, which are the
extension of Carriage Hill Drive north of Endeavor Drive and Lunde
Lane. [Added by Ord. No. 04-23]
C. Enumerated.
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 497-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-2
1:758
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour)
Air Park Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 99-28]
From STH 26 to South
Twelfth Street
35
Allwardt Street
[Added by Ord. No.
96-18]
From Juneau Street to
Hospital Drive
25
Boomer Street
[Added 6-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-21]
From South Church Street
to a point 100 feet east of
Neenah Street and from
South Twelfth Street to
Humboldt Street
Remainder of Boomer
Street
25
35
Dayton Street [Added
by Ord. No. 88-30]
From West Main Street to
West Street
25
Highway 16 Frontage
Road [Added by Ord.
No. 99-45]
From East Main Street to
North Fourth Street (CTH
R)
35
Jefferson Road
[Added by Ord. No.
00-27]
From River Drive to South
Church Street
25
Juneau Street [Added
by Ord. No. 96-18]
From North Fourth Street
to Allwardt Street
25
Milford Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 90-73]
From the City limits to a
point 2,925 feet south of the
south right-of-way line of
South Street
45
Milford Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 90-73]
From the point 2,925 feet
south of the south right-ofway
line of South Street to
a point 600 feet south of the
south right-of-way line of
South Street
35
Milford Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 90-73]
From a point 600 feet south
of the south right-of-way
line of South Street to the
intersection with West
Milwaukee Street
25
North Church Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 79-71; Ord. No.
93-9]
From West Main Street to
West Spaulding Street
25
§ 500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-2
1:759
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour)
North Church Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 79-71; Ord. No.
93-9]
From West Spaulding Street
to a point 1,000 feet north
of West Spaulding Street
30
North Church Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 79-71; Ord. No.
93-9]
From a point 1,000 feet
north of West Spaulding
Street to a point 1,900 feet
north of West Spaulding
Street
45
North Fourth Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 02-33;
7-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-26]
From East Main Street to
50 feet northeast of
Meadowbrook Drive
25
North Fourth Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 02-33;
7-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-26]
From 50 feet northeast of
Meadowbrook Drive to 50
feet northeast of Schumann
Drive
35
North Fourth Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 02-33;
7-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-26]
From 50 feet northeast of
Schumann Drive to the east
City limits
45
North Water Street
[Added by Ord. No.
92-70]
West side, from Highway 16
to Silver Creek Road
35
Oak Hill Road [Added
by Ord. No. 98-17]
From USH 16 Bypass to the
west right-of-way line of
Kuckkan Lane (also being
the City limits)
25
River Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 00-27]
From Boomer Street to
Jefferson Road
25
Silver Creek Road
[Added by Ord. No.
92-69]
From North Water Street to
1,170 feet west on the south
side
35
Silver Creek Road
[Added by Ord. No.
92-69]
From 1,100 feet east of
North Water Street to 1,170
feet west of North Water
Street on the north side
35
§ 500-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-2
1:760
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour)
South Church Street
[Last amended by
Ord. No. 04-22]
From West Main Street
south to a point 820 feet
south of the center line of
Bernard Street
25
South Church Street
[Last amended by
Ord. No. 04-22]
From a point 820 feet south
of the center line of
Bernard Street to Jefferson
Road
35
South Concord
Avenue [Amended by
Ord. No. 76-46; Ord.
No. 12-32]
From its intersection with
Concord Place to the City
limits
25
South Twelfth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
00-07; amended by
Ord. No. 03-34]
From the City limits to a
point 200 feet south of the
south right-of-way of Air
Park Drive
45
South Twelfth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
00-07; amended by
Ord. No. 03-34]
From the point 200 feet
south of the south right-ofway
of Air Park Drive to the
south right-of-way of
Boomer Street
35
State Trunk Highway
16 [Amended by
Ord. No. 92-26; Ord.
No. 02-18]
Starting from a point 475
feet southeast of East Main
Street northwest to its
intersection with State
Trunk Highway 26
45
State Trunk Highway
16 [Amended by
Ord. No. 92-26; Ord.
No. 02-18]
All other portions of State
Trunk Highway 16 within
the corporate limits of the
City of Watertown
55
Summit Avenue
[Added by Ord. No.
13-31]
From City corporate limits
to its intersection with East
Gate Drive
45
Summit Avenue
[Added by Ord. No.
13-31]
From East Gate Drive to a
point 500 feet south of the
south right-of-way line of
Ann Street
35
Summit Avenue
[Added by Ord. No.
13-31]
From a point 500 feet south
of the south right-of-way
line of Ann Street to its
intersection with East Main
Street
25
§ 500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-2
1:761
§ 500-3. Through streets designated. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12]
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour)
Summit Avenue
[Amended by Ord.
No. 73-55]
From Main Street southeast
to Ann Street
25
Summit Avenue
[Amended by Ord.
No. 73-55]
From Ann Street southeast
to City limits
30
Welsh Road [Added
by Ord. No. 91-66;
amended by Ord.
No. 97-53]
From West Main Street to
3,100 feet north
25
West Main Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-17]
From Votech Drive to Welsh
Road
35
West Main Street and
Main Street
[Amended by Ord.
No. 78-39]
From Votech Drive east to
the Highway 16 Bypass
25
West Street [Added
by Ord. No. 85-45;
amended by Ord.
No. 01-2; Ord. No.
07-28]
From Milford Street to
Brook Street
25
West Street [Added
by Ord. No. 85-45;
amended by Ord.
No. 01-2; Ord. No.
07-28]
From Brook Street to
Horseshoe Road
30
D. The statutory speed limits as provided in this chapter shall not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles when operating in an emergency.
A. The following streets in the City, in the interest of public safety, are
hereby designated to be through streets:
Name of Street Location
Arlington Way [Added
by Ord. No. 04-30]
From the south curbline of Steeplechase
Drive to the west curbline of Bridlewood
Lane
Autumn Crest Drive
[Added by Ord. No.
04-40]
From the west curbline of Brookstone Way
to the south curbline of West Street
§ 500-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:762
Name of Street Location
Belmont Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 04-30]
From the east curbline of Chadwick Drive
to the east curbline of Hunter Oaks
Boulevard
Benton Street [Added
by Ord. No. 97-24]
From the south curbline of West Street to
the north curbline of South Street
Boomer Street [Added
by Ord. No. 79-74]
From South Church Street to South Twelfth
Street
Boughton Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
88-68; Ord. No. 99-51]
From the west end of Boughton Street
Bridge to the east City limits, except for the
intersection of Highway 16 Frontage Road
Bridlewood Lane From the south curbline of West Street to
the west curbline of Chadwick Drive
Brookstone Way [Added
by Ord. No. 04-40]
From the north curbline of Crestview Drive
to the west curbline of Benton Street
Cady Street [Amended
by Ord. No. 79-6]
From the west curbline of Dewey Avenue to
the east curbline of North Church Street
except for the intersections with North
Fourth Street and North Second Street
Carriage Hill Drive
[Added by Ord. No.
92-62]
From the north curbline of West Main
Street to the north City limits
Center Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-52]
From the northwest curbline of North
Fourth Street to the north City limits
Chadwick Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 04-30]
From the south curbline of Steeplechase
Drive to the north curbline of Belmont
Drive
Clark Street [Added by
Ord. No. 89-46]
From the west curbline of South Twelfth
Street to the east curbline of River Drive
Clyman Street [Added
by Ord. No. 96-50]
From the east curbline of South Third
Street to the west curbline of South Ninth
Street
College Avenue [Added
by Ord. No. 99-52]
From the north curbline of Western Avenue
to the south curbline of East Main Street
Crestview Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 04-40]
From the west curbline of Benton Street to
the south curbline of Steeplechase Drive
Crestview Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 97-26]
From the east curbline of Maplecrest Lane
to the east curbline of Deer Trail
Dayton Street [Added
by Ord. No. 88-10]
From the intersection of West Main Street
to the north curbline of West Street
Dewey Avenue [Added
by Ord. No. 85-42]
From the north curbline of East Main
Street to the south curbline of Division
Street
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:763
Name of Street Location
East Division Street
[Added by Ord. No.
80-13]
From east curbline of North Fourth Street
to the west end of Boughton Street Bridge
East Leonard Street
[Added by Ord. No.
92-15]
From the east curbline of North Second
Street to the west curbline of Center Street
East Madison Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
88-58]
From the west curbline of North Eighth
Street to the east curbline of North Sixth
Street and from the west curbline of North
Sixth Street to the east curbline of North
Fourth Street and from the west curbline of
North Fourth Street to the west curbline of
North First Street
East Main Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
04-8]
From the east curbline of First Street to the
west curbline of Third Street
East Main Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
04-8]
From the east curbline of Fourth Street to
the east curbline of the Highway 16 Bypass;
automatic traffic signal lights shall be
installed at the intersections of East Main
and First Streets, East Main and Third
Streets, and East Main and Fourth Streets
East and West
Milwaukee Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
86-29]
From the east curbline of South Church
Street to the west curbline of South Third
Street, except for the intersection with
South First Street
Eighth Street From the north curbline of Western Avenue
north to the south curbline of Market
Street
Elm Street [Added by
Ord. No. 98-33]
From the east curbline of Fremont Street to
the west curbline of North Church Street
Fieldstone Way [Added
by Ord. No. 04-40]
From the north curbline of South Street to
the south curbline of Crestview Drive
First Street From the south curbline of Main Street to
the north curbline of Milwaukee Street
Hall Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-52]
From the north curbline of East Main
Street to the south curbline of Boughton
Street
Highland Avenue
[Added by Ord. No.
99-52]
From the north curbline of Boughton Street
to the south curbline of Hill Street
Jefferson Road From the intersection of River Drive to
State Trunk Highway 26
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:764
Name of Street Location
Jefferson Road From the intersection of State Highway 26
to the City limits
Market Street From the east curbline of First Street to the
west curbline of Third Street and from the
east curbline of Fourth Street to the east
curbline of Eighth Street
Mary Street [Added by
Ord. No. 92-67]
From the east curbline of River Drive to the
west curbline of South Twelfth Street
Meadowbrook Drive
[Added by Ord. No.
01-31]
From the north curbline of Allwardt Street
to the south curbline of North Fourth Street
(CTH R)
Milford Street (County
Trunk Highway A)
[Amended by Ord. No.
90-11]
From the south curbline of West Milwaukee
Street to the south City limits, except for
the intersection with Bernard Street
Milford Street [Added
by Ord. No. 72-41]
From the south curbline of West Street to
the north curbline of West Street
Ninth Street From College Avenue south to the north
curbline of Western Avenue
North and South Church
Streets [Amended by
Ord. No. 79-4]
From the City limits to the City limits,
except for the intersections of West Main
Street, West Milwaukee Street and Bernard
Street where traffic signal lights shall be
installed
North Eighth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
81-6]
From the north curbline of Main Street to
the south curbline of Cady Street
North Fifth Street From the south curbline of Cady Street to
the north curbline of Madison Street
North Fourth Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
94-41; Ord. No. 03-48]
From the north curbline of East Madison
Street north to United States Highway 16,
and from United States Highway 16 to the
City limits, except for the intersection with
East Cady Street
North Second Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
78-44]
From the north curbline of Madison Street
to the south curbline of Cady Street and
from the north curbline of Cady Street to
the north City limits
North Sixth Street From the north curbline of Madison Street
to the south curbline of Cady Street
North Third Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
72-37]
From the north curbline of Jones Street to
the south curbline of Jones Street
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:765
Name of Street Location
North Water Street
[Added by Ord. No.
97-73]
From the north curbline of West Main
Street to the south curbline of Highway 16
Bypass, except for the intersection of East
Cady Street
Oakwood Lane [Added
by Ord. No. 97-25;
amended by Ord. No.
99-51]
From the east curbline of Maplecrest Lane
to the west curbline of Milford Street,
except for the intersection of Deer Trail
Oconomowoc Avenue
[Added by Ord. No.
91-100]
From the east curbline of South Concord
Avenue to the intersection of East Gate
Drive
Richards Avenue [Added
by Ord. No. 88-87]
From the south curbline of Western Avenue
to the west curbline of South Concord
Avenue
River Drive [Amended
by Ord. No. 89-20]
From the intersection with Hyland Street
and South Third Street to the intersection
of River Drive and Jefferson Road, except
for the intersection with Boomer Street
Schumann Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 05-35]
From the south curbline of CTH R to the
south curbline of Timber Ridge Trail
South Concord Avenue
[Added by Ord. No.
84-25]
From the south curbline of East Main
Street to the east City limits
South Fifth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-52]
From the north curbline of Western Avenue
to the south curbline of Market Street
South Fourth Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
72-37; Ord. No. 92-49]
From the north curbline of Western Avenue
to the south curbline of Market Street
South Montgomery
Street [Amended by
Ord. No. 88-46]
From the south curbline of West Main
Street to the south curbline of West
Milwaukee Street, which is also the
beginning of Milford Street
South Ninth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
73-8]
From the south curbline of Hart Street to
the north curbline of Hart Street
South Second Street From the north curbline of Clyman Street
to the south curbline of Clyman Street
South Second Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
97-77]
From the north curbline of East Milwaukee
Street to the south curbline of Market
Street
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:766
Name of Street Location
South Sixth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-52]
From the north curbline of Western Avenue
to the south curbline of Market Street
South Street [Added by
Ord. No. 05-10]
From the west curbline of Milford Street to
the east curbline of Chadwick Drive
South Third Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
90-66; Ord. No. 92-47]
From the south curbline of Market Street to
the north curbline of Hart Street, except for
the intersections with Western Avenue and
River Drive
South Water Street
[Added by Ord. No.
83-22]
From the south curbline of West Main
Street to the north curbline of West
Milwaukee Street
Spaulding Street [Added
by Ord. No. 78-59]
Except for the intersections at North
Second Street and North Water Street
Steeplechase Drive
[Added by Ord. No.
04-30]
From the west curbline of Autumn Crest
Drive to the east curbline of Bridlewood
Lane
Summit Avenue From the west curbline of East Main Street
to the City limits
Tenth Street From the north curbline of Wisconsin
Street to the south curbline of Wisconsin
Street
Twelfth Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
72-24; Ord. No. 99-51]
From the south curbline of Western Avenue
south to the City limits
West Cady Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-52]
From the west curbline of North Church
Street to the west curbline of Union Street
Western Avenue
[Amended by Ord. No.
79-29]
From the west curbline of Concord Avenue
to the west curbline of Second Street,
except for the intersection at Third Street
West Main Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
79-3]
West from the center line of Cole Memorial
Bridge to the west City limits, except for
the intersections at Water Street and
Church Street where traffic signal lights
shall be installed
West Milwaukee Street From the west curb of Church Street to the
end
West Street [Added by
Ord. No. 02-31]
From the west curbline of Milford Street to
the west City limits
B. Stop intersections.
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:767
Intersection Corners Restriction
Allermann Drive and
Richards Avenue [Added
by Ord. No. 05-44]
Southeast Allermann Drive shall stop
for Richards Avenue
Allwardt Street and
Highway 16 Frontage
Road [Added by Ord. No.
99-46]
Northeast Allwardt Street shall stop
for Highway 16 Frontage
Road
Allwardt Street and
Hospital Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 00-03]
Southwest Allwardt Street shall stop
for Hospital Drive
Arlington Way and
Steeplechase Drive
[Added by Ord. No.
04-29]
Southeast Arlington Way shall stop for
Steeplechase Drive
Belmont Drive and Hunter
Oaks Boulevard [Added
by Ord. No. 04-29]
Northeast,
southeast,
southwest
and
northwest
All-way stop
Carlson Place and
Franklin Street [Added by
Ord. No. 05-09]
Southeast Carlson Place shall stop for
Franklin Street
Carriage Hill Drive and
Endeavour Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 02-50]
Northwest Southbound traffic on
Carriage Hill Drive shall
stop
Carr Street and South
Tenth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Northeast Carr Street shall stop for
South Tenth Street
Cleveland Street and
Lincoln Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Northwest
and
southeast
Cleveland Street shall stop
for Lincoln Street
Clyman Street and South
Ninth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 96-51]
Northeast
and
southwest
Clyman Street shall stop for
South Ninth Street
Clyman Street and South
Tenth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Southwest Clyman Street shall stop for
South Tenth Street
Cole Street and North
Sixth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 00-08]
Southwest
and
northeast
Cole Street shall stop for
North Sixth Street
Colonial Drive and North
Votech Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 02-49]
Southwest Colonial Drive shall stop for
North Votech Drive
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:768
Intersection Corners Restriction
Colonial Drive and Welsh
Road [Added by Ord. No.
95-3]
Northeast Colonial Drive shall stop for
Welsh Road
Coventry Drive and
Stoneridge Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 05-36]
Northwest Coventry Drive shall stop
for Stoneridge Drive
Coventry Drive and
Wedgewood Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 05-36]
Southeast Coventry Drive shall stop
for Wedgewood Drive
Crestview Drive and
Maple Crest Lane [Added
by Ord. No. 95-47]
Northeast
and
southwest
Crestview Drive shall stop
for Maple Crest Lane
Dakota Street and
Franklin Street [Added by
Ord. No. 03-15]
Northwest Dakota Street shall stop for
Franklin Street
Dodge Street and South
Seventh Street [Added by
Ord. No. 88-18]
Northeast
and
southwest
Dodge Street shall stop for
South Seventh Street
Dodge Street and South
Tenth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Southwest Dodge Street shall stop for
South Tenth Street
Doris Street and Elba
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 96-6]
Northeast
and
southwest
Doris Street shall stop for
Elba Street
East Madison Street and
North Fourth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
94-41]
Northeast
and
southwest
East Madison Street shall
stop for North Fourth Street
East Madison Street and
North Sixth Street [Added
by Ord. No. 94-41]
Northeast,
southeast
and
southwest
East Madison Street shall
stop for North Sixth Street
Emerald Street and
Cleveland Street [Added
by Ord. No. 99-54]
Southwest Emerald Street shall stop
for Cleveland Street
Emmet Street and South
Monroe Street [Added by
Ord. No. 88-14]
Northeast
and
southwest
Emmet Street shall stop for
South Monroe Street
Emmet Street and South
Montgomery Street
[Added by Ord. No.
88-15]
Northeast
and
southwest
Emmet Street shall stop for
South Montgomery Street
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:769
Intersection Corners Restriction
Emmet Street and South
Warren Street [Added by
Ord. No. 88-13]
Northeast
and
southwest
Emmet Street shall stop for
South Warren Street
Fox Creek Drive and
Endeavour Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 94-70]
Northwest Fox Creek Drive shall stop
for Endeavour Drive
Hancock Street and
Cleveland Street [Added
by Ord. No. 99-54]
Southwest
and
northeast
Hancock Street shall stop
for Cleveland Street
Hancock Street and
Garfield Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Southwest
and
northeast
Hancock Street shall stop
for Garfield Street
Hart Street and Randolph
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 91-67]
Southeast Randolph Street shall stop
for Hart Street
Hart Street and South
Tenth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 91-68]
Northeast
and
southwest
Hart Street shall stop for
South Tenth Street
Harvey Avenue and
Thomas Avenue [Added
by Ord. No. 88-11]
Northwest
and
southeast
Harvey Avenue shall stop
for Thomas Avenue
Hazelcrest Drive and
Hunter Oaks Boulevard
[Added by Ord. No.
04-29]
Northeast Hazelcrest Drive shall stop
for Hunter Oaks Boulevard
Hidde Drive and Bayberry
Drive [Added 8-21-2018
by Ord. No. 18-7]
Northeast Bayberry Drive shall stop
for Hidde Drive
Hidde Drive and Hill
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 94-49]
Southeast Hidde Drive shall stop for
Hill Street
Highway 16 Frontage
Road and Boughton Street
(CTH CW) [Added by
Ord. No. 99-46]
Northwest,
southwest,
southeast
and
northeast
All-way stop
Highway 16 Frontage
Road and East Main Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-46]
Northwest
and
northeast
Highway 16 Frontage Road
shall stop for East Main
Street, and westbound
traffic on East Main Street
shall stop for Highway 16
Frontage Road
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:770
Intersection Corners Restriction
Highway 16 Frontage
Road and North Fourth
Street (CTH R) [Added by
Ord. No. 99-46]
Southeast Highway 16 Frontage Road
shall stop for North Fourth
Street
Hill Street and Highland
Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 93-24]
Northwest
and
southeast
Highland Avenue shall stop
for Hill Street
Hill Street and the public
alley situated along the
east side of Riverside Park
Softball Diamond No. 2
[Added by Ord. No.
90-14]
Southeast The alley shall stop for Hill
Street
Hoffmann Drive and
Johnson Street [Added by
Ord. No. 03-15]
Northeast Hoffmann Drive shall stop
for Johnson Street
Humboldt Street and
Clark Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Southwest Clark Street shall stop for
Humboldt Street
Hus Drive and Highland
Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 89-44]
Southeast Highland Avenue shall stop
for Hus Drive
Hus Drive and Hill Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-54]
Northeast Hus Drive shall stop for Hill
Street
Hus Drive and the Hill
Street and Bayberry Drive
intersection [Added by
Ord. No. 93-25]
Northwest Hus Drive shall stop for Hill
Street/Bayberry Drive
Industrial Drive and
Commerce Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 99-39]
Northwest Industrial Drive shall stop
for Commerce Drive
Johnson Street and
Milford Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Southeast Johnson Street shall stop
for Milford Street
Juneau Street and
Allwardt Street [Added
by Ord. No. 99-46]
Northwest Juneau Street shall stop for
Allwardt Street
Kiewert Street and Hidde
Drive [Added by Ord.
No. 94-48]
Northeast
and
southwest
Kiewert Street shall stop for
Hidde Drive
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:771
Intersection Corners Restriction
Kiewert Street and Werner
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 99-54]
Northeast
and
southwest
Kiewert Street shall stop for
Werner Street
Kossuth Street and East
Water Street [Added by
Ord. No. 94-39]
Southwest Kossuth Street shall stop for
East Water Street
Lafayette Street and the
grade crossing of the
Chicago and Northwestern
Transportation Company
(railroad) [Added by Ord.
No. 94-72]
Northeast
and
southwest
Lakeside Terrace and
Franklin Street [Added by
Ord. No. 05-09]
Northwest
and
southeast
Lakeside Terrace shall stop
for Franklin Street
Lisbon Street and Elba
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 93-42]
Northeast
and
southwest
Lisbon Street shall stop for
Elba Street
Lisbon Street and Lowell
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 93-41]
Northeast
and
southwest
Lisbon Street shall stop for
Lowell Street
Livsey Place and Harvey
Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 12-31]
Northeast Livsey Place shall stop for
Harvey Avenue
Louisa Street and North
Votech Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 94-20]
Northeast
and
southwest
Louisa Street shall stop for
North Votech Drive
Louisa Street and Welsh
Road [Added by Ord. No.
95-2]
Northeast Louisa Street shall stop for
Welsh Road
Lounsbury Street and
Prospect Street [Added
by Ord. No. 10-16]
Southwest Lounsbury Street shall stop
for Prospect Street
Maple Crest Lane and
Briar Court [Added by
Ord. No. 08-23]
Southwest
and
northeast
Briar Court shall stop for
Maple Crest Lane
Margaret Street and
Union Street [Added by
Ord. No. 03-11]
Northeast Margaret Street shall stop
for Union Street
Market Street and South
Eighth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 94-41]
Northeast
and
southwest
Market Street shall stop for
South Eighth Street
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:772
Intersection Corners Restriction
Market Street and South
Fourth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 94-41]
Northeast
and
southwest
Market Street shall stop for
South Fourth Street
Market Street and South
Ninth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 98-18]
Southwest Eastbound traffic on Market
Street shall stop for South
Ninth Street
Market Street and South
Third Street [Added by
Ord. No. 94-41]
Northeast
and
southwest
Market Street shall stop for
South Third Street
Memorial Drive and
Highway 16 Frontage
Road [Added by Ord. No.
99-46]
Northeast Memorial Drive shall stop
for Highway 16 Frontage
Road
Memorial Drive and
Hospital Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 99-46]
Northwest,
southwest
and
southeast
All-way stop
Neenah Street and
Franklin Street [Added by
Ord. No. 94-52]
Northwest
and
southeast
Neenah Street shall stop for
Franklin Street
North First Street and
East Madison Street
[Added by Ord. No.
02-28]
Northwest,
northeast
and
southeast
All-way stop
North Fourth Street and
East Cady Street [Added
by Ord. No. 03-49]
Northeast,
northwest,
southwest
and
southeast
Four-way stop
North Fourth Street and
East Madison Street
[Added by Ord. No.
94-41]
Northwest,
southwest
and
southeast
North Fourth Street shall
stop for East Madison
Street
North Montgomery Street
and Elm Street [Added by
Ord. No. 91-37]
Northwest
and
southwest
North Montgomery Street
shall stop for Elm Street
North Montgomery Street
and O'Connell Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-38]
Northeast
and
southwest
O'Connell Street shall stop
for North Montgomery
Street
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:773
Intersection Corners Restriction
North Second Street and
Cady Street [Added by
Ord. No. 86-47]
Northeast,
southeast,
southwest
and
northwest
Four-way stop
North Warren Street and
Margaret Street [Added
by Ord. No. 88-88]
Southeast;
and
northwest
corner of
public
roadway and
Margaret
Street
North Warren Street and
public roadway shall stop
for Margaret Street
North Washington Street
and Rock Street [Added
by Ord. No. 93-26]
Northeast
and
southwest
Rock Street shall stop for
North Washington Street
Oak Street and Elba
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 93-40]
Northeast
and
southwest
Oak Street shall stop for
Elba Street
Oak Street and Lowell
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 93-4]
Northeast
and
southwest
Oak Street shall stop for
Lowell Street
Oak Street and North
Votech Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 94-21]
Northeast
and
southwest
Oak Street shall stop for
North Votech Drive
Oakwood Lane and Deer
Trail [Added by Ord. No.
97-27]
Northeast
and
southwest
Oakwood Lane shall stop
for Deer Trail
Oakwood Lane and
Maplecrest Lane [Added
by Ord. No. 97-2]
Northeast
and
southwest
Oakwood Lane shall stop
for Maplecrest Lane
Ochs Court and Hus Drive
[Added by Ord. No.
95-78]
Northwest Ochs Court shall stop for
Hus Drive
O'Connell Street and
North Monroe Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-54]
Northeast
and
southwest
O'Connell Street shall stop
for North Monroe Street
O'Connell Street and
North Warren Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-54]
Northeast
and
southwest
O'Connell Street shall stop
for North Warren Street
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:774
Intersection Corners Restriction
O'Connell Street and
North Washington Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-54]
Northeast
and
southwest
O'Connell Street shall stop
for North Washington
Street
Pine Ridge Court and
Humboldt Street [Added
12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
15-45]
Southwest Pine Ridge Court shall stop
for Humboldt Street
Pioneer Road and Welsh
Road [Added by Ord. No.
97-74]
Northeast Pioneer Road shall stop for
Welsh Road
Prospect Street and East
Arcade Avenue [Added by
Ord. No. 98-35]
Northwest
and
southeast
Prospect Street shall stop
for East Arcade Avenue
Randolph Street and
Franklin Street [Added by
Ord. No. 05-09]
Northwest
and
southeast
Randolph Street shall stop
for Franklin Street
Ruth Street and North
Concord Avenue [Added
by Ord. No. 01-19]
Northeast
and
southwest
Ruth Street shall stop for
North Concord Avenue
Ruth Street and North
Maple Street [Added by
Ord. No. 98-34]
Northeast
and
southwest
Ruth Street shall stop for
North Maple Street
Ruth Street and Riverlawn
Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 96-23]
Southwest Ruth Street shall stop for
Riverlawn Avenue
South Church Street and
Bernard Street [Added by
Ord. No. 03-13]
Northeast,
southeast,
northwest
and
southwest
Four-way-stop [temporary
four-way stop during the
STH 26 (South Church
Street) reconstruction
project in 2003]
South Church Street and
Jefferson Road [Added by
Ord. No. 03-13]
Northeast,
southeast,
northwest
and
southwest
Four-way-stop [temporary
four-way stop during the
STH 26 (South Church
Street) reconstruction
project in 2003]
South Church Street and
Milwaukee Street [Added
by Ord. No. 03-13]
Northeast,
southeast,
northwest
and
southwest
Four-way-stop [temporary
four-way stop during the
STH 26 (South Church
Street) reconstruction
project in 2003]
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:775
Intersection Corners Restriction
South Church Street and
Stimpson Street [Added
by Ord. No. 03-13]
Northeast,
southeast,
northwest
and
southwest
Four-way-stop [temporary
four-way stop during the
STH 26 (South Church
Street) reconstruction
project in 2003]
South Eighth Street and
Hart Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Northwest South Eighth Street shall
stop for Hart Street
South Eighth Street and
Station Street [Added by
Ord. No. 96-53]
Northwest South Eighth Street shall
stop for Station Street
South Fourth Street and
Market Street [Added by
Ord. No. 92-48]
Southeast
and
southwest
South Fourth Street shall
stop for Market Street
South Montgomery Street
and Bernard Street
[Added by Ord. No.
93-18]
Southeast South Montgomery Street
shall stop for Bernard
Street
South Ninth Street and
Franklin Street [Added by
Ord. No. 86-45]
Northeast
and
southwest
Franklin Street shall stop
for South Ninth Street
South Third Street and
Franklin Street [Added by
Ord. No. 03-15]
Northwest South Third Street shall
stop for Franklin Street
South Third Street and
Market Street [Added by
Ord. No. 92-46]
Northeast
and
northwest
South Third Street shall
stop for Market Street
South Third Street and
River Drive at Hyland
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 89-20]
Southeast South Third Street
northbound shall stop for
River Drive
South Third Street and
Western Avenue [Added
by Ord. No. 86-47]
Northeast,
southeast,
southwest
and
northwest
Four-way stop
South Washington Street
and Emmet Street [Added
by Ord. No. 88-72]
Northwest
and
southeast
South Washington Street
shall stop for Emmet Street
South Washington Street
and Lafayette Street
[Added by Ord. No.
88-12]
Northwest
and
southeast
South Washington Street
shall stop for Lafayette
Street
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:776
Intersection Corners Restriction
South Washington Street
and West Madison Street
[Added by Ord. No.
91-8]
Northwest
and
southwest
South Washington Street
shall stop for West Madison
Street.
Spaulding Street and the
grade crossing of Chicago
and Northwestern
Transportation Company
(railroad) [Added by Ord.
No. 88-92]
Northeast
and
southwest
(Temporary until installing
flashing light signals)
Station Street and South
Ninth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 96-52]
Northeast
and
southwest
Station Street shall stop for
South Ninth Street
Station Street and South
Tenth Street [Added by
Ord. No. 99-54]
Southwest Station Street shall stop for
South Tenth Street
Steeplechase Drive and
Hunter Oaks Boulevard
[Added by Ord. No.
04-29]
Northeast,
southeast,
southwest
and
northwest
All-way stop
Theresa Street and Mary
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 93-27]
Northwest
and
southeast
Theresa Street shall stop
for Mary Street
Utah Street and Stimpson
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 99-54]
Southeast Utah Street shall stop for
Stimpson Street
Vine Street and East
Green Street [Added by
Ord. No. 94-25]
Northwest
and
southeast
Vine Street shall stop for
East Green Street
Vine Street and Lynn
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 94-26]
Northwest
and
southeast
Vine Street shall stop for
Lynn Street
Werner Street and Anne
Street [Added
12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
15-41]
Northeast Anne Street shall stop for
Werner Street
Werner Street and Hill
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 88-47]
Northwest
and
southeast
Werner Street shall stop for
Hill Street
Werner Street and Perry
Street [Added 2-7-2017
by Ord. No. 17-2]
Northeast
and
southwest
Perry Street shall stop for
Werner Street
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:777
Intersection Corners Restriction
West Green Street and
North Monroe Street
[Added by Ord. No.
90-84]
Northeast
and
southwest
West Green Street shall
stop for North Monroe
Street
West Green Street and
North Warren Street
[Added by Ord. No.
90-83]
Northeast
and
southwest
West Green Street shall
stop for North Warren
Street
West Green Street and
North Montgomery Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-20]
Southwest
and
northeast
West Green Street shall
stop for North Montgomery
Street
West Green Street and
North Washington Street
[Added by Ord. No.
93-19]
Northeast
and
southwest
West Green Street shall
stop for North Washington
Street
West Madison Street and
South Monroe Street
[Added by Ord. No.
98-46]
Northeast
and
southwest
West Madison Street shall
stop for South Monroe
Street
West Madison Street and
South Warren Street
[Added by Ord. No.
98-46]
Northeast
and
southwest
West Madison Street shall
stop for South Warren
Street
West Milwaukee Street,
South Montgomery Street
and Milford Street
[Added by Ord. No.
03-33]
Northeast,
southeast
and
northwest
Three-way-stop [temporary
three-way stop during the
STH 26 (South Church
Street) reconstruction
project in 2003]
West Milwaukee Street
and South Water Street
[Added by Ord. No.
03-04]
Northeast
and
southwest
All-way stop [temporary allway
stop during the STH 26
(South Church Street)
reconstruction project in
2003]
Wilbur Street and Elba
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 05-54]
Northeast Wilbur Street shall stop for
Elba Street
Wilbur Street and Lowell
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 05-26]
Northeast
and
southwest
Wilbur Street shall stop for
Lowell Street
Wildflower Lane and
Allermann Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 05-44]
Northwest Wildflower Lane shall stop
for Allermann Drive
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-3
1:778
Intersection Corners Restriction
William Street and Dakota
Street [Added by Ord.
No. 98-3]
Northeast
and
southwest
William Street shall stop for
Dakota Street
William Street and South
Third Street [Added by
Ord. No. 98-8]
Northeast
and
southwest
William Street shall stop for
South Third Street
William Street and
Wakoka Street [Added by
Ord. No. 87-41]
Northeast
and
southwest
William Street shall stop for
Wakoka Street
Wisconsin Street and
South Eleventh Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-54]
Southwest Wisconsin Street shall stop
for South Eleventh Street
Wisconsin Street and
South Seventh Street
[Added by Ord. No.
99-54]
Southwest
and
northeast
Wisconsin Street shall stop
for South Seventh Street
Woodland Drive and
Hospital Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 01-32]
Northeast Woodland Drive shall stop
for Hospital Drive
C. Traffic stop signs shall be placed at the following locations:
Intersection Stop Signs Located on
Boughton Street and Hospital
Drive [Amended by Ord. No.
88-68]
Northeast corner (Boughton Street
shall stop for Hospital Drive)
Campus Street and College
Avenue [Amended by Ord.
No. 91-72]
Northeast corner (Campus Street shall
stop for College Avenue)
Concord Avenue and Richards
Avenue [Added by Ord. No.
73-45]
Northeast and southwest corners
Hoffman Drive and Fairview
Drive [Added by Ord. No.
85-20; amended Ord. No.
99-53]
Northwest corner (Hoffman Drive shall
stop for Fairview Drive)
Humboldt Street and Boomer
Street [Added by Ord. No.
86-20]
Northwest corner (Humboldt Street
shall stop for Boomer Street)
Hyland Street and River Drive
[Added by Ord. No. 79-76]
Southwest corner
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:779
§ 500-4. Yield right-of-way intersections.
The operator of a vehicle, when approaching the following intersections at
which there shall have been installed yield right-of-way signs, shall yield
the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or
which are approaching so closely as to create a hazard of collision and, if
necessary, shall reduce the speed or stop in order to yield the right-of-way:
§ 500-5. One-way streets and alleys.
One-way streets and alleys are designated as follows:
Intersection Stop Signs Located on
Jones Street and Dewey
Avenue [Added by Ord. No.
77-13]
Southwest and northeast corners
North Fifth Street and
Madison Street [Added by
Ord. No. 78-4]
Southeast corner
South First Street and East
Milwaukee Street [Added by
Ord. No. 86-30; amended
by Ord. No. 03-05; Ord. No.
03-55]
Northwest, southwest, southeast and
northeast corners (all-way stop)
South Monroe Street and
Lafayette Street [Added by
Ord. No. 80-51]
Northwest and southeast corner
(South Monroe Street shall stop for
Lafayette Street)
South Third Street and Hart
Street [Added by Ord. No.
83-1; amended by Ord. No.
92-83]
Southeast, southwest, northeast and
northwest corners
Votech Drive and West Main
Street [Added by Ord. No.
77-33]
Southeast and northwest corners
Welsh Road and Evergreen
Drive [Added 10-15-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-21]
Southwest corner (Evergreen Drive
shall stop for Welsh Road)
A. Vehicular traffic shall yield to pedestrians at the crosswalk across West
Main Street immediately west of the Main Street Bridge between First
Street and Water Street. [Added by Ord. No. 76-45]
B. Vehicular traffic northbound on South Church Street to proceed on
Boomer Street. [Added by Ord. No. 13-35]
§ 500-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-5
1:780
Name of Street Location
Direction of
Travel
Unnamed driveway
[Added by Ord. No.
75-33]
350 feet north of Bernard
Street on the east side of
South Church Street
West
Unnamed driveway
[Added by Ord. No.
82-2]
520 feet north of Bernard
Street on the west side of
South Church Street
West
Unnamed driveway 325 feet north of the bridge
crossing the Rock River on
South Church Street, on the
east side of South Church
Street
East
Division Street [Added
by Ord. No. 79-28]
At the intersection with
North Fourth Street, on the
south access from the east
curbline of North Fourth
Street a distance of 140 feet
East
Division Street [Added
by Ord. No. 79-28]
At the intersection with
North Fourth Street, on the
north access from the east
curbline of North Fourth
Street east a distance of 110
feet
West
East Division Street
[Added by Ord. No.
91-98]
From North Fourth Street to
North Second Street
West
East Madison Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
94-41]
From North Eighth Street to
North Sixth Street
West
Eighth Street From Western Avenue to
Main Street
North
Fourth Street [Amended
by Ord. No. 72-36]
From Western Avenue to
Madison Street
North
Jones Street [Amended
by Ord. No. 72-36]
From Fourth Street to Eighth
Street
East
Ninth Street From Market Street to
Western Avenue
South
North Fifth Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
85-26; Ord. No. 94-41]
From Cole Street to Madison
Street
South
North Ninth Street From a point 150 feet north
of the north line of Main
Street to Jones Street
North
§ 500-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-5
1:781
Name of Street Location
Direction of
Travel
North Seventh Street
[Added by Ord. No.
74-49]
Between Main Street and
Madison Street
North
North Tenth Street From Jones Street to Main
Street
South
Riverside Park lower
terrace
Between Anne and Hill
Streets
North
Riverside Park upper
terrace
Between Anne and Hill
Streets
South
Sixth Street [Amended
by Ord. No. 94-41]
From East Madison Street to
East Division Street
North
Sixth Street [Amended
by Ord. No. 94-41]
From Western Avenue to
Jefferson Street
North
South Fifth Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
85-26; Ord. No. 94-41]
From Jefferson Street to
Western Avenue
South
South Second Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
85-25; Ord. No. 94-41;
repealed by Ord. No.
15-38]
South Seventh Street
[Added by Ord. No.
79-37; amended by
Ord. No. 94-41]
From Jefferson Street to
Western Avenue
South
Third Street [Amended
by Ord. No. 72-36]
From Madison Street to
Western Avenue
South
West Division Street
[Added by Ord. No.
92-43]
From Fremont Street to West
Main Street
West
§ 500-6. Parking limitations. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-11]
A. When signs are erected in any block, public road or municipal parking
lot giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
where prohibited, nor shall any person stop, stand or park a vehicle for
longer than the period herein specified. The penalties for violating
these sections shall be in accordance with § 500-13E of this chapter and
successive tickets may be issued for each continuous violation of these
parking limitations.
(1) Fifteen-minute parking.
§ 500-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-6
1:782
(a) On the south side of Dodge Street between South Fourth Street
and South Fifth Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
weekdays. [Amended by Ord. No. 05-31]
(b) On the north side of Jones Street between First and Second
Streets.
(2) No parking in loading zones.
Name of Street Side Location
Cady Street South From the sidewalk a distance of 25
feet east from North Fifth Street
Center Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 10-36]
West From the south curbline of East
Spaulding Street to a point 697 feet,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
school days
Jefferson Street North Beginning at a point 85 feet east of
the east curbline of South First
Street to a point 27 feet east
Jones Street
[Added
4-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-14;
amended
10-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-26]
South From the east curbline of North Fifth
Street to a point 98 feet east,
between 5:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
Monday through Friday on school
days for bus loading
Market Street South From the intersection with South
First Street west to the river
North Ninth
Street [Added
1-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 17-34]
East Beginning at a point 93 feet south of
the south curbline of Jones Street to
a point 25 feet south, between 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday
North Tenth
Street
West From the south curbline of Jones
Street south a distance of 219 feet
between 9:00 a.m. and 10:30 a.m. on
Sunday mornings only
O'Connell Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 03-18]
North From the west curbline of North
Montgomery Street to a point 120
feet west
O'Connell Street South For a distance of 104 feet west of the
west curbline of Water Street
Prospect Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 10-34]
East From the south curbline of East
Spaulding Street to the north
curbline of Lounsbury Street,
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
school days
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-6
1:783
Name of Street Side Location
River Drive
[Added by Ord.
No. 10-40]
East From a point 187 feet north of the
north curbline of Franklin Street to a
point 65 feet further north, between
7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school
days for bus loading
South Fifth
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
10-08]
West Beginning at a point 51 feet north of
the north curbline of Wisconsin
Street to a point 26 feet further
north
South First
Street
East Beginning at a point 83 feet south of
the south curbline of Wisconsin
Street to a point 22 feet south
South First
Street
West For a distance of 75 feet north of the
north curbline of Spring Street
extended
South Ninth
Street [Added
3-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-9]
West From a point 237 feet south of the
south curbline of Dodge Street to a
point 81 feet further south of the
south curbline of Dodge Street
South Water
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
08-08]
West Beginning at a point 72 feet north of
the north curbline of West Madison
Street to a point 40 feet further
north
South Water
Street
[Amended
9-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-15]
West Beginning at a point 76 feet south of
the south curbline of West Main
Street to a point 25 feet southerly
West Main
Street
South From a point 30 feet east of the east
curbline of South Montgomery
Street to a point 34 feet further east
Wisconsin Street North From the west curbline of South
Fourth Street to the west a distance
of 45 feet on Sunday mornings only
(3) Seventy-two-hour parking. The operator or owner of a vehicle shall
not park such vehicle on any public street or in any City-owned
parking lot for longer than 72 consecutive hours.
(4) Two-hour parking, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. [Amended by Ord. No. 01-35]
§ 500-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-6
1:784
Name of Street Side Location
East Cady Street North From a point 115 feet west of the
west curbline of North Second Street
to a point 87 feet further west
East Madison
Street
Between North First and North Fifth
Streets
East Main Street From the east end of the bridge to
Seventh Street, except the entire
block between Third and Fourth
Streets on the south side
Emmet Street North From the west curbline of South
Water Street to the east curbline of
South Washington Street
Jefferson Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-01]
South From the east curbline of South First
Street to a point 78 feet east
Jones Street North Between Second and Fourth Streets
Jones Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 03-45]
South Between North First Street and
North Third Street
Main Street North Between Seventh Street and Ninth
Street
Market Street Between South First and South Fifth
Streets
North Fifth
Street
Between Main and Madison Streets
North First
Street
From Main Street to Jones Street
North Fourth
Street
Between Main and Cady Streets,
except the west side between
Madison and Cady Streets
North Second
Street
Between East Main Street and Cady
Street
North Seventh
Street
West From the north curbline of East
Main Street to the north 100 feet
North Sixth
Street
Between East Main Street and East
Madison Street
North Third
Street
From Main Street to a point 108 feet
north of the north right-of-way line of
Jones Street
North
Washington
Street
From Main Street north to O'Connell
Street
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-6
1:785
Name of Street Side Location
North Water
Street
Between West Main Street and
O'Connell Street
South Fifth
Street, South
First Street and
South Second
Street
Between East Main Street and
Jefferson Street
South First
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
08-35]
East From the south curbline of Jefferson
Street to a point 74 feet south
South Fourth
Street
Between Main and Market Streets
South Sixth
Street [Added
12-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-22]
Between Main Street and Market
Street
South Third
Street
Between Main and Dodge Streets
South
Washington
Street
Between Main Street and Emmet
Street
South Water
Street
Between West Main Street and
Emmet Street
South Water
Street
West From Emmet Street south a distance
of 85 feet
Third Street West From Hyland - River Drive south to
Hart Street
West Main
Street
From Church Street to the bridge,
excluding the north side of the
bridge
(5) Municipal parking lot parking limitations. The following locations
shall be designated as public parking lots with the corresponding
parking restrictions:
(a) The area between South Third Street and South Fourth Street
and facing Market Street, owned by the City and constituting
and known as Market Street Parking Lot. (The west side to be
four-hour parking limit, and the east side of the lot to be tenhour
parking limit.) [Amended by Ord. No. 13-36]
(b) The area between Market Street and East Main Street and
facing South First Street, owned by the City and constituting
§ 500-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-6
1:786
and known as the South First Street Parking Lot. (To be fourhour
parking limit.) [Amended by Ord. No. 13-36]
(c) The area between East Madison Street and Jones Street and
facing North Second Street, owned by the City and constituting
and known as the North Second Street Parking Lot. (To be
four-hour parking limit, except six parking spaces on the north
end to be reserved for City Hall visitors, which are to be twohour
parking limit.)
(d) The area between North First Street and North Second Street,
facing Jones Street, owned by the City and known as the Jones
Street Parking Lot. (To be ten-hour parking limit, with the
entire east side reserved for City employees.)
(e) The area between South Fourth Street and South Fifth Street
and facing South Fourth Street adjacent to Market Street,
owned by the City and known as the South Fourth Street
Parking Lot. (To be ten-hour parking limit.)
(f) The area between North First Street and the Rock River
between Main Street and East Madison Street, owned by the
City and known as the south portion of the North First Street
Parking Lot. (To be four-hour parking limit.) (Handicapped
stalls shall be designated to conform to current ADA
requirements.) [Amended by Ord. No. 13-36; 2-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-6]
(g) The area between North First Street and the Rock River
between East Madison Street and Jones Street, owned by the
City and known as the north portion of the North First Street
Parking Lot. (To be ten-hour parking limit.)
(h) The area on the southwest corner of North Second Street and
Madison Street, known as the North Second Street and
Madison Street Parking Lot. (Twelve parking spaces of the lot
in contiguous series to be two-hour parking limit. The
remaining eight parking spaces to be ten-hour parking limit.)
(Handicapped stalls shall be designated to conform to current
ADA requirements.) [Amended by Ord. No. 13-36;
2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-6]
(i) The first six parking spaces north of Madison Street along the
west side of the area between Fourth Street and Fifth Street
and facing North Fourth Street adjacent to Madison Street,
owned by the City and known as the North Fourth Street
Parking Lot. (To be two-hour parking limit.)
(j) The remaining area of the North Fourth Street parking lot
facing North Fourth Street and adjacent to East Madison
Street, owned by the City and known as the North Fourth
Street Parking Lot. (To be ten-hour parking limit.)
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-6
1:787
(k) The area on the southwest corner of North Fifth Street and
East Madison Street and known as the North Fifth Street
Parking Lot, facing North Fifth Street and adjacent to East
Madison Street and owned by the City. (The six diagonal
parking spaces on the south side of lot to be two-hour parking
limit. The remaining parking spaces to be ten-hour parking
limit.) [Amended by Ord. No. 13-36; 2-18-2014 by Ord. No.
14-6]
(l) The land known as the South First Street and Market Street
Parking Lot between South First Street and the Rock River,
and between Market Street and Jefferson Street, and owned by
the City. (To be ten-hour parking limit.)
(m) The area between South Water Street and the Rock River,
owned by the City and known as the South Water Street
Parking Lot. (The lower lot to be four-hour parking, except for
the southernmost 15 stalls which are to be ten-hour parking,
and the upper lot to be ten-hour parking.) (The southernmost
11 stalls in the upper lot shall be reserved for Library
employees, from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday.)
(n) The area between South Second Street and South Third Street
and facing Market Street, owned by the City and known as the
South Second Street Parking Lot. (To be ten-hour parking
limit.) [Amended by Ord. No. 13-36]
(o) The area on the south side of East Madison Street, between
North Second Street and North Third Street, owned by the City
and known as the East Madison Street Parking Lot. (To be twohour
parking limit.)
(p) All parking spaces located around the Riverside Park
basketball courts in the area bounded on the west by Short
Street, to the north by Anne Street, to the south by Perry Street
and to the east by the property located at 1006 Perry Street.
(Parking prohibited 5:00 p.m. through 8:00 a.m.) [Added by
Ord. No. 03-23]
(6) Thirty-minute parking between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(a) On the east side of North Fourth Street, beginning at a point 25
feet north of the north curbline of Jones Street for a distance of
41 feet north.
(b) On the north side of Jefferson Street, beginning at a point 112
feet east of the east curbline of South First Street to a point 22
feet east.
(7) Thirty-minute parking during school hours.
§ 500-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-6
1:788
(a) On the east side of North Montgomery Street, from a point 136
feet north of the north curbline of O'Connell Street to a point
43 feet further north (two stalls). [Added by Ord. No. 03-17]
(8) School bus parking only during school year. The operator or owner
of a vehicle, other than a vehicle that is a school bus, shall not park,
stand or stop such vehicle during any hour of a weekday in which
school is in regular session: [Amended by Ord. No. 13-04;
3-31-2014 by Ord. No. 14-12]
(a) On the south side of Dodge Street between its intersections
with South Eighth Street and South Ninth Street.
(9) Thirty-minute parking between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; Friday;
between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. [Added 6-6-2017 by Ord. No.
17-16]
(a) On the south side of East Main Street, from a point 122 feet
east of the east curbline of South Second Street to a point 41
feet further east (two stalls).
B. Parking reserved for vehicles of disabled. When official traffic signs,
indicating such restriction, have been erected in the following
designated areas, in accordance with § 500-12 of this chapter, no
person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle upon any portion
of a street, highway or public or private parking facility reserved for
vehicles displaying special registration plates or identification cards or
emblems issued by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, or for
vehicles registered in another jurisdiction by such other jurisdiction,
designating the vehicle as one used by a physically disabled person:
(1) Parking lots.
Parking Lot
Number of Parking
Spaces
Market Street [Added by Ord. No.
09-05]
1
North First Street (south portion) 2
North Fourth Street [Amended by
Ord. No. 09-02]
2
North Second Street [Amended
5-5-2015 by Ord. No. 15-9]
4 (2 in north portion and 2
in south portion)
North Second Street and Madison
Street
1
South First Street [Amended by
Ord. No. 09-03]
1
South Fourth Street 1
South Second Street 1
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-6
1:789
Parking Lot
Number of Parking
Spaces
South Water Street [Amended by
Ord. No. 09-04]
2
Washington Park (641 South Twelfth
Street), to be located at the northeast
corner of the lot [Added by Ord. No.
09-30]
1
(2) Streets.
Name of Street Side Location
Number of
Parking
Spaces
Anne Street North Beginning at a point
6.5 feet east of the
east curbline of
Short Street to a
point 20 feet east
1
Dodge Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 06-14]
North From a point 65 feet
east of the east
curbline of South
Fifth Street to a
point 20 feet further
east
1
East Madison
Street [Added
1-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 17-35]
South Beginning at a point
83 feet east of the
east curbline of
North First Street to
a point 25 feet
further east
1
East Main Street
[Added
7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-20]
West Beginning at a point
62 feet southwest of
the west curbline of
the entrance to the
Middle School to a
point 22 feet further
southwest
1
Labaree Street West Beginning at a point
9 feet north of the
north curbline
extended of Anne
Street to a point 52
feet south
2
§ 500-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-6
1:790
Name of Street Side Location
Number of
Parking
Spaces
Neenah Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 02-20;
amended
12-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-21]
West From a point 284
feet south of the
south curbline of
Clark Street to a
point 22 feet further
south, and from a
point 350 feet south
of the south curbline
of Clark Street to a
point 44 feet further
south
3
North First
Street [Added
1-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 17-36]
East Beginning at a point
25 feet south of the
south curbline of
East Madison Street
to a point 26 feet
further south
1
North
Montgomery
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
03-19]
West From a point 74 feet
north of the north
curbline of O'Connell
Street to a point 20
feet further north
1
North Ninth
Street [Added
10-15-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-23]
East Beginning at a point
28 feet south of the
south curbline of
Jones Street to a
point 40 feet further
south
2
North Ninth
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
10-15]
East From a point 133
feet south of the
south curbline of
Jones Street to a
point 25 feet further
south
1
North Second
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 03-43]
West From a point 37 feet
north of the north
curbline of Jones
Street to a point 20
feet further north
1
North Tenth
Street
[Repealed
10-15-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-22]
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-6
1:791
Name of Street Side Location
Number of
Parking
Spaces
O'Connell Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 02-20;
amended by
Ord. No. 03-20]
North From a point 120
feet west of the west
curbline of North
Montgomery Street
to a point 22 feet
further west
1
South Fifth
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
05-14]
West From a point 97 feet
south of the south
curbline of Western
Avenue to a point 20
feet further south
1
South Fifth
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
05-30]
West From a point 29 feet
south of the south
curbline of Dodge
Street to a point 20
feet further south
1
South Twelfth
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
02-20]
West From a point 677
feet south of the
south curbline of
Carr Street to a
point 44 feet further
south
2
South
Washington
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 07-12]
East From a point 25 feet
north of the north
curbline of Frederick
Street to a point 20
feet further north
1
South
Washington
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
05-49; repealed
6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-7]
South Water
Street [Added
4-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-4]
East From a point 162
feet south of the
south curbline of
West Madison Street
to a point 22 feet
further south
1
§ 500-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-6
1:792
Name of Street Side Location
Number of
Parking
Spaces
South Water
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 02-24;
9-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-14]
West Beginning at a point
52 feet south of the
south curbline of
West Main Street to
a point 24 feet
southerly and from a
point 101 feet south
of the south curbline
of West Main Street
to a point 25 feet
southerly.
2
Spring Street North From a point 105
feet west of the west
curbline of South
Third Street to a
point 18 feet further
west
1
C. Parking limitations in private parking lots. Owners or lessees of public
or private property may permit parking by certain persons and limit,
restrict or prohibit parking as to other persons if the owner or lessee
posts a sign on the property indicating for whom parking is permitted,
limited, restricted or prohibited. No person may leave, park, stop or
stand any motor vehicle on public or private property contrary to a sign
posted thereon. The penalties for violating this section shall be in
accordance with § 500-13E of this chapter.
D. Miscellaneous parking restrictions. [Added by Ord. No. 00-13;
amended by Ord. No. 01-40; Ord. No. 09-31]
(1) Parking on one-way streets. On one-way streets, parking is
permitted on both sides of the street, provided the vehicle is
headed in the direction of the traffic, and in all cases, the inside
wheels shall be within 12 inches of the curb or the edge of the
street.
(2) Parking on two-way streets. On a street where traffic is permitted
to move in both directions simultaneously, a vehicle must be parked
parallel to the edge of the street, headed in the direction of traffic
on the right side of the street, and in all cases the inside wheels
shall be within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the street.
(3) Angle parking. Angle parking is permitted on any street designated
by the Council in Subsection D(4) below which has been marked by
lines and upon which proper spaces have been placed.
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-6
1:793
(4) Angle parking designated. Angle parking is designated and
permitted in the following locations within the City:
(a) On the west side of Harding Street, from a point 64 feet north
of the terminus of Harding Street (three stalls).
(5) All-night parking prohibited. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. it shall be illegal to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle
upon that portion of the following streets within the City:
(a) On the south side of East Main Street, from the western
curbline of South First Street to a point 125 feet west.
[Amended 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-9; 8-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-12]
(b) On the north side of East Main Street between Seventh Street
and Eighth Street.
(6) Marked yellow curbs. No vehicle may park, whether temporary or
otherwise, along any portion of a street clearly designated by a
yellow curb side as a no-parking zone. A violation of this subsection
shall occur when any portion of the parked vehicle extends into the
area marked by a yellow painted curb.
(7) Marked parking spaces. In any municipal lot or parking lot owned
by the Watertown Unified School District or public street in which
the parking spaces have been clearly marked by white or yellow
paint as parking stalls, no vehicle shall park in such a manner that
the vehicle prohibits the use of an adjacent parking stall by another
vehicle, or in such a manner that the tires of the vehicle touch the
painted markings, or in such a manner that the tires of the vehicle
extend into an adjacent parking stall. [Amended by Ord. No.
11-16]
(8) Fire lanes. Fire lanes on public and private property devoted to
public use shall hereby be established, subject to the following
conditions and regulations:
(a) The marking of fire lanes on public or private property devoted
to public use shall be approved by the Fire and Police Chiefs.
(b) The parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire
lanes shall be prohibited at all times.
(c) Fire lanes shall be established on public or private property
devoted to public use where parking of motor vehicles or other
obstructions, because of setback distances or topography, may
interfere with ingress or egress of the Fire Department
vehicles, personnel and equipment for protection of persons
and property, such as shopping centers, bowling lanes,
theaters, hospitals, churches, apartment complexes and
§ 500-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-6
1:794
§ 500-7. Temporary restricted parking. [Amended by Ord. No.
82-14; Ord. No. 03-10]
similar locations, without limitations due to enumeration.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(d) All signs and markings designating fire lanes on private
property shall be approved by the Fire Chief, and the cost shall
be paid for by the property owners. [Amended by Ord. No.
13-05]
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
TEMPORARY RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS — An area on a public
street within the City of Watertown for which parking is restricted by
the Chief of Police or his designee for motor vehicles, trailers or storage
containers for the purposes outlined under this section, and which is
indicated by an official temporary no-parking sign erected pursuant to
the authority granted under this section in a form prescribed by the
Chief of Police.
B. Designation of temporary restricted parking areas. The Chief of Police
or the Street Superintendent of the City of Watertown, or their
designees, is authorized to establish temporary restricted parking
areas on the streets within the City of Watertown for the purposes
outlined under Subsection C below. Application for a temporary
restricted parking area and/or issuance of an official sign must be made
to the Chief of Police by a firm or individual desiring the restricted
parking area to be established in writing and on a form designated by
the Chief of Police. On such form the applicant shall demonstrate the
need for a temporary restricted parking area to be established which is
consistent with the purposes of this section. If appropriate, the
application shall list all vehicles which will be parked in the restricted
parking area and also shall indicate the particular time frame for which
the restricted parking area is to be established.
C. Purposes for establishment of temporary restricted parking area. The
Chief of Police or the Street Superintendent, or their designees, may
establish temporary restricted parking areas for the following purposes
within the City of Watertown:
(1) For vehicles actively engaged in performing construction or repair
work in the immediate vicinity of the restricted parking area.
(2) For vehicles which are necessary for loading, unloading or delivery
of tangible personal property to the adjoining property owners.
(3) For vehicles, trailers or storage containers necessary for storing
equipment and supplies to be used in servicing buildings in the
vicinity of the restricted parking area and where the vehicle is not
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-7
1:795
owned or operated by the owner of the premises or an employee of
a business operating on the adjoining premises.
(4) For movement of traffic during street construction or construction
on adjoining premises, where elimination of parking is necessary to
facilitate the safe movement of traffic, construction equipment or
pedestrians.
(5) For placement of a refuse disposal container or dumpster to service
the adjoining premises in construction or demolition of buildings.
(6) For special events such as neighborhood block parties, street
dances, parades or similar events.
(7) For any other purpose of a temporary nature as is deemed
necessary.
D. Official temporary no-parking signs. The Chief of Police or his designee
is authorized to establish a temporary no-parking sign to be erected to
designate temporary restricted parking areas within the City of
Watertown.
E. Enforcement.
(1) No person may park a motor vehicle in a temporary restricted
parking area unless the application for the temporary restricted
parking area as granted lists the vehicle on the application.
(2) No applicant issued a temporary no-parking sign may alter or use
the sign other than for the temporary restricted area as contained
on the application, nor shall said person or firm use the temporary
restricted parking area in violation of the application as
designated.
(3) The applicant or property owner shall immediately remove all
temporary no-parking signs after the expiration of the temporary
restricted no-parking area and return the same to the Police
Department.
(4) The Chief of Police or his designee may revoke a temporary
restricted no-parking area designation upon violation of any terms
and conditions of this section by the applicant, upon written notice
being given to such applicant at least 24 hours prior to the
revocation becoming effective.
(5) A violation of any of the provisions of this Subsection E shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not more than $15 for each day or fraction
thereof during which the violation of the provisions of this section
remains in effect.
(6) The provisions of this section relating to temporary restricted
parking areas shall take precedence over any other limited parking
§ 500-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-7
1:796
§ 500-8. Heavy traffic routes.
restrictions at such time and place as indicated in the temporary
restricted parking area.
A. Routes established. The following streets in the City of Watertown are
hereby designated as heavy traffic routes under the provisions of
§ 349.17, Wis. Stats.:
Name of Street Location
Air Park Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 01-17]
From State Trunk Highway 26 to South
Twelfth Street
Bernard Street From West Street to South Church
Street
Boomer Street and its south
extension
From South Church Street to the south
City limits
Clark Street [Amended by
Ord. No. 11-18]
From South Twelfth Street to South
Concord Avenue
Commerce Drive From Milford Street to American Way
Dakota Street From River Drive to Hart Street
Dayton Street From West Main Street to West Street
East Cady Street From the Rock River to North Fourth
Street
East Madison Street From North Fourth Street to North
Third Street
East Main Street (STH 19) From downtown Rock River Bridge to
Summit Avenue
East Milwaukee Street From the Rock River to South First
Street
Gateway Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 01-17]
From State Trunk Highway 26 to Air
Park Drive
Hart Street From Dakota Street to South Twelfth
Street
Humboldt Street From Clark Street to Richards Avenue
Lafayette Street From South Church Street to South
Montgomery Street
Market Street From South First Street to South
Fourth Street
Milford Street From West Milwaukee Street
southwest to the City limits
North Church Street (STH
26)
From the north City limits to West
Main Street
§ 500-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-8
1:797
Name of Street Location
North Fourth Street From East Main Street to the north
City limits
North Second Street From East Main Street to Cole Street
North Third Street From East Main Street to East Madison
Street
North Water Street From West Main Street to West Cady
Street
Perry Way From Commerce Drive to the west City
limits
Richards Avenue From Humboldt Street to South
Concord Avenue
River Drive From South Third Street to Stimpson
Street
River Drive [Added by Ord.
No. 03-28]
From Stimpson Street to Boomer
Street. [Temporary heavy traffic route
during the STH 26 (South Church
Street) reconstruction project in 2003.]
South Church Street (STH
26)
From West Main Street to the south
City limits
South Concord Avenue From East Main Street to the east City
limits
South First Street From East Main Street to Western
Avenue
South Fourth Street From East Main Street to Western
Avenue
South Montgomery Street From Lafayette Street to West
Milwaukee Street
South Tenth Street From Western Avenue to Hart Street
South Third Street From East Main Street to Hart Street
South Twelfth Street From Western Avenue to the south City
limits
South Water Street From West Main Street to West
Milwaukee Street
Stimpson Street From River Drive to South Church
Street
Summit Avenue From East Main Street to the east City
limits
United States Highway 16
Bypass
From the east City limits to the north
City limits
West Cady Street From North Church Street to the Rock
River
§ 500-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-8
1:798
Name of Street Location
Western Avenue From South First Street to South
Fourth Street
Western Avenue From South Tenth Street to Concord
Avenue
Western Avenue [Added by
Ord. No. 03-6]
From South Fourth Street to South
Tenth Street. [Temporary heavy traffic
route during the STH 26 (South Church
Street) reconstruction project in 2003.]
West Milwaukee Street From South Montgomery Street to the
Rock River
West Main Street (STH 19) From the west City limits to the
downtown bridge over the Rock River
West Street From Milford Street to the west City
limits
B. Heavy traffic defined. In this section, "heavy traffic" means all vehicles
or combinations of vehicles, other than motor buses, designed or used
for transporting property of any nature and having a gross weight of
more than 12,000 pounds.
C. Trucks prohibited on other than heavy traffic routes. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle as defined in Subsection
B hereof on any street other than the streets designated in Subsection A
hereof, except when necessary for the purpose of obtaining orders and
delivering and moving supplies or other necessary commodities to or
from any place of business or residence fronting on any such streets,
and except when necessary for the purpose of leaving or returning to
the terminal or place of garaging of any such vehicle. When it is
necessary for the operator of such a vehicle to travel upon a street not
designated as a heavy traffic route as designated in Subsection A
hereof, such operator shall leave and reenter such heavy traffic routes
at the point closest to his immediate destination. [Amended by Ord.
No. 95-23]
D. Signs erected. Appropriate signs shall be erected to give notice of the
designation of the streets listed in Subsection A as heavy traffic routes.
E. Seasonal weight limitations; authority. The officer in charge of
maintenance of City streets may, during the period from January 1 to
May 1, impose weight limitations on any City street, except a state or
federal highway, because of the condition of weakness of such street
due to deterioration or climatic conditions. Such limitations shall only
be enforceable when signs are posted informing highway users of the
limitations.
§ 500-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-8
1:799
F. Heavy traffic prohibited by posted signs. The following streets are
hereby designated "no heavy traffic allowed" by the posting of "No
Truck" signs at their termini:
Name of Street Location
Carriage Hill Drive
[Added by Ord. No.
03-01]
From West Main Street to Endeavour Drive
Carr Street [Added by
Ord. No. 10-24]
From South Tenth Street to South Twelfth
Street
Clyman Street From South Third Street to South Tenth
Street
College Street From East Main Street to Campus Street
Corner Street [Added by
Ord. No. 10-20]
From East Main Street to College Avenue
East Milwaukee Street From South Fourth Street to South Seventh
Street
Endeavour Drive [Added
by Ord. No. 03-01]
From Carriage Hill Drive to North Church
Street
Mary Street From River Drive to South Twelfth Street
Mary Street From Theresa Street to Terry Lane
Meadow Street From Dayton Street to South Votech Drive
River Drive From Stimpson Street to Boomer Street
Scot Street [Added by
Ord. No. 08-14]
From West Main Street to Meadow Street
South Ninth Street
[Added by Ord. No.
93-44]
From Western Avenue to Boomer Street
South Votech Drive From West Main Street to Meadow Street
South Washington Street From West Milwaukee Street to Emmet
Street
Stimpson Street From South Church Street to Riverview
Lane
Terry Lane From Mary Street to Clark Street
West Division Street From West Main Street to Fremont Street
William Street [Added
by Ord. No. 96-30]
From Wakoka Street to River Drive
(1) The public right-of-way alley extending between points originating,
at the entrance, the west side of Bonner Street, and at the exit, the
east side of Lowell Street, approximately 120 feet from the south
side of Wilbur Street and approximately 120 feet from the north
side of West Main Street. [Added by Ord. No. 13-29]
§ 500-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-8
1:800
§ 500-9. Parking prohibited in specified places.
G. Authority to require weighing of vehicles. Any police officer having
reason to believe that the gross weight of a vehicle is unlawful or in
excess of the gross weight for which the vehicle is registered may
require the operator of such vehicle to stop and submit the vehicle and
any load it may be carrying to a weighing by means of either portable or
certified stationary scales and may require that such vehicle be driven
to the nearest usable portable or certified stationary scale.
H. Penalties. The penalties for violating this section shall be in accordance
with § 500-13E of this chapter.
A. No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle in any of the
following places. The penalties for violating this subsection shall be in
accordance with § 500-13E of this chapter.
Name of Street Side Location
Anne Street North From Short Street to Labaree Street
Anne Street South For 154 feet east of the east curbline of
Short Street
Ann Street South From the west curbline of Summit
Avenue to the east curbline of East
Water Street
Ann Street West Between Fairview Street and Summit
Avenue
Bernard Street Both Between Church Street and
Montgomery Street
Bernard Street Both Between Milford and West Streets
Bernard Street North From the east curbline of Milford Street
to a point 150 feet east
Bernard Street North From the west curbline of South
Montgomery Street to the west 375 feet
Bernard Street South From the west curbline of South
Montgomery Street west a distance of
70 feet
Boughton Street North From the east curbline of Highland
Avenue east a distance of 70 feet
Boughton Street
(CTH CW)
[Added by Ord.
No. 99-47;
amended by
Ord. No. 04-28]
North From a point 595 feet west of the west
curbline of Highway 16 Frontage Road
to a point 590 feet east of the east
curbline of Highway 16 Frontage Road
Boughton Street North From and including the bridge east to
Labaree Street
§ 500-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:801
Name of Street Side Location
Boughton Street
(CTH CW)
[Added by Ord.
No. 99-47;
amended by
Ord. No. 04-28]
South From a point 595 feet west of the west
curbline of Highway 16 Frontage Road
to a point 735 feet east of the east
curbline of Highway 16 Frontage Road
Boughton Street South Commencing 560 feet east of the east
line of Hospital Drive, continuing east
155 feet
Boughton Street South From the west end of the bridge to the
west curbline of Park View Lane
Boughton Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 02-14]
South From a point 105 feet west of the west
line of Schumann Drive to a point 27
feet further west
Cady Street North From the east curbline of North Second
Street to the west curbline of North
Third Street
Cady Street North Between Third Street and Fourth Street
Cady Street South Between North Fourth and North Fifth
Streets
Cady Street South Between North Second and North
Fourth Streets
Cady Street South From North Second Street to North
Water Street
Carlson Place North From a point 185 feet east of the east
curbline of Lakeside Terrace to a point
20 feet further east
Center Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-50]
East From a point 350 feet north of the north
curbline of North Avenue to a point 115
feet further north
Center Street West Beginning at the west curbline on North
Fourth Street to the northeast a
distance of 145 feet
Center Street
Island
East Beginning at the west curbline on North
Fourth Street to the northeast a
distance of 70 feet
Chenango Street
[Added
7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-19]
East From the north curbline of Hart Street
north to the end of Chenango
approximately 270 feet
Clark Street North From the west curbline of South Twelfth
Street to a point 69 feet west
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:802
Name of Street Side Location
Clark Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 12-18]
North Beginning at a point on the east
curbline of the intersection of South
Twelfth Street with Clark Street a
distance of 510 feet to the east
Clark Street South From the east curbline of South Twelfth
Street to the west curbline of Humboldt
Street
Clark Street South From the west curbline of South Twelfth
Street to a point 132 feet west
College Avenue East From Main Street south a distance of
125 feet
College Avenue
[Amended by
Ord. No. 02-41]
West From Market Street to South Twelfth
Street
College Circle South From the east curbline of College
Avenue east a distance of 162 feet
Dakota Street North From the east curbline of River Drive to
a point 85 feet east
Dakota Street South From the east curbline of River Drive to
a point 53 feet east
Dewey Avenue East Beginning at the north curbline of Ruth
Street to the north a distance of 45 feet
Dewey Avenue East Beginning at the south curbline of Ruth
Street to the south a distance of 45 feet
Dewey Avenue West From Main Street north to Division
Street
Division Street North From the Boughton Street Bridge to a
point 175 feet west (at the Boughton
Street Bridge this street's name
changes to Boughton Street)
Division Street North From North Fourth Street east to a
point 161 feet east of the east curbline
of Hancock Street, and from a point 40
feet west of the west curbline of Dewey
Avenue to a point 170 feet east of the
east curbline of Dewey Avenue
Division Street South From the Boughton Street Bridge to a
point 160 feet west
Division Street South From North Fourth Street east a
distance of 200 feet
Dodge Street South Between Seventh Street and Eighth
Street
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:803
Name of Street Side Location
Dodge Street South Between Third and Fourth Streets
East Cady Street North From the Bridge to 85 feet east
East Cady Street North and
south
From the west curbline of Dewey
Avenue to a point 49 feet west
East Madison
Street
North From a point 65 feet east of the east
curbline of North Seventh Street to a
point 22 feet further east
East Madison
Street
South From the west curbline of North Eighth
Street to a point 50 feet west
East Madison
Street
South From the east curbline of North First
Street to a point 47 feet east
East Madison
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
07-31]
South From the east curbline of North Second
Street to 38 feet east
East Main Street North From the west curbline of North Third
Street west a distance of 37 feet
East Main Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-17]
North From the west curbline of Oakridge
Court to a point 250 feet west of the
west curbline of Oakhill Court
East Main Street South From the west curbline of South
Concord Avenue to a point 150 feet
west
East Main Street South From the east curbline of South Eighth
Street east a distance of 84 feet
East Main Street South Beginning at the west curbline of South
First Street to the west a distance of 60
feet
East Main Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 01-11]
South From the east curbline of South Fourth
Street east a distance of 72 feet
East Main Street South From the north curbline of Summit
Avenue to the south curbline of Fairview
Street
East Main Street South Between Third and Fourth Streets
East Main Street South From U.S. Highway 16 Bypass to
Fairview Street
East Milwaukee
Street and West
Milwaukee Street
North From west curbline of South Fourth
Street to the east curbline of South
Montgomery Street
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:804
Name of Street Side Location
East Milwaukee
Street and West
Milwaukee Street
South From west curbline of South Third
Street to South Montgomery Street
Emmet Street North From the east curbline of South
Montgomery Street to the west curbline
of South Church Street
Emmet Street South Between Water Street and Washington
Street
Endeavour Drive North and
south
From Carriage Hill Drive to North
Church Street
Falcon Court
[Added by Ord.
No. 08-15]
North From the west curbline of South Twelfth
Street to 350 feet west
Frederick Street North From the west curbline of South Water
Street to the east curbline of South
Washington Street
Gateway Drive
[Added by Ord.
No. 13-14]
Both From the east curbline of High Road to
the south curbline of Air Park Drive
Hall Street East Beginning at a point 160 feet north of
the north curbline of Doctors Court to a
point 90 feet north
Hall Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-18]
West From a point 250 feet north of the north
curbline of Doctors Court to a point 75
feet further north
Hart Street North From Eighth Street to the railroad
tracks
Hart Street North From the east curbline of Third Street
100 feet east on Hart Street
Hart Street North A distance of 172 feet east of Third
Street
Hart Street South From Eighth Street to Third Street
Highland Avenue
[Repealed
11-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-25]
Highway 16
Frontage Road
[Added by Ord.
No. 99-47]
East and
west
From the north curbline of East Main
Street to the south curbline of North
Fourth Street (CTH R)
Hill Court Both
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:805
Name of Street Side Location
Hoffman Drive
[Added by Ord.
No. 07-11]
West From the north curbline of the entrance
road for the Wastewater Treatment
Plant to a point 415 feet north and
around the cul-de-sac at the south end
of Hoffman Drive
Hospital Drive East Beginning at a point 285 feet north of
right-of-way line of Boughton Street to a
point 50 feet north
Hospital Drive
[Added
11-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-14]
East From the north edge of driveway to 123
Hospital Drive north 26 feet
Jones Street South From a point 135 feet east of east
curbline of North Sixth Street to a point
32 feet further east
Jones Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 03-44]
South Between North Third and North Fourth
Streets
Kossuth Street East Between Oconomowoc Avenue and
Willow Street
Labaree Street East From Anne Street to North Fourth
Street
Labaree Street
[Added
1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 14-34]
West From a point 40 feet south of the north
curbline of Anne Street extended to a
point 333 feet further south
Lafayette Street South From the west curbline of South Church
Street to a point 47 feet west
Main Street North Between the crosswalk at the
intersection of North Concord Avenue
to a point 85 feet west
Main Street
[Added
8-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-10]
North Beginning at a point 119 feet west of
the western curbline of South First
Street to a point 171 feet further west
(Main Street Bridge)
Main Street
[Added
8-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-10]
South Beginning at a point 125 feet west of
the western curbline of South First
Street to a point 162 feet further west
(Main Street Bridge)
Main Street South Between Seventh and Eighth Streets
Main Street South From the east curbline of Third Street
to the west curbline of Fourth Street
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:806
Name of Street Side Location
Margaret Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-13]
North From the north curbline of North
Church Street to a point 82 feet east
Margaret Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-14]
North From the east curbline of North Warren
Street to a point 126 feet east
Margaret Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 01-13]
South From the east curbline of North Church
Street to the west curbline of North
Water Street
Market Street North Between First Street and Rock River
Market Street South From the west curbline of South First
Street to the Rock River
Market Street West From the Rock River to the east a
distance of 20 feet, the total width of
the right-of-way (60 feet) for the Rock
River Walkway
Memorial Drive
[Added by Ord.
No. 99-47]
North and
south
From the west curbline of Highway 16
Frontage Road to the east curbline of
Hospital Drive
Milford Street East Between Milwaukee Street and the
tracks
Milford Street West From a point 1,350 feet from the south
right-of-way line of South Street to a
point 1,235 feet (total Milford Street
Park frontage)
Milford Street West Between West Milwaukee Street and
Pearl Street
Milwaukee Street North Approximately 75 feet east of
Montgomery Street
Ninth Street West For a distance of 35 feet south of the
Market Street crosswalk
Ninth Street
[Repealed
2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-1]
North Church
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
12-27]
East Beginning at the north curbline of
Margaret Street 53 feet northwest
along the east side of North Church
Street
North Church
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
09-09]
East From the south curbline of West Cady
Street to a point 170 feet south
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:807
Name of Street Side Location
North Church
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 09-07]
East From the north curbline of West Main
Street to the south curbline of
O'Connell Street
North Church
Street
East and
west
From the Chicago and Northwestern
Railroad right-of-way to a point 700 feet
north of the north curbline of West
Spaulding Street
North Church
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 09-08]
West From the north curbline of West Main
Street to a point 190 feet north of the
north curbline of West Cady Street
North Eighth
Street
West From Main Street to Division Street
North Fifth
Street
East From the south curbline of Madison
Street south a distance of 78 feet
North Fifth
Street
West From the north curbline of Madison
Street north 135 feet
North First
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
06-24]
East From the south curbline of Jones Street
to 48 feet south
North Fourth
Street
East From the south curbline of East Cady
Street south a distance of 40 feet
North Fourth
Street
East From the north end of the North Fourth
Street Bridge to a point 74 feet south of
the south end of the bridge railing
North Fourth
Street
West From Jones Street to a point
approximately 88 feet south of the west
bridge railing of North Fourth Street
Bridge
North Fourth
Street
West From the south curbline of Jones Street
south a distance of 45 feet
North Fourth
Street
West Between Madison Street and Jones
Street
North Fremont
Street
West From the north curbline of West Main
Street north a distance of 110 feet
North
Montgomery
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
09-12]
West From the south curbline of North
Church Street to a point 65 feet south
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:808
Name of Street Side Location
North Second
Street
[Amended
11-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-13]
East From a point 139 feet south of the south
curbline of North Avenue to a point 538
feet further south
North Second
Street
[Amended
11-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-13]
West From Cady Street north to a point 232
feet north of North Second Street
Bridge
North Third
Street
West From the north curbline of East Main
Street north a distance of 60 feet
North Water
Street
East From the south curbline of O'Connell
Street to the south a distance of 30 feet
North Water
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
09-39]
East From a point 173 feet north of the north
curbline of West Main Street to a point
25 feet further north
North Water
Street
West From a point 176 feet north of the north
curbline of Margaret Street to a point
20 feet further north
Oconomowoc
Avenue [Added
by Ord. No.
10-25]
North From the east curbline of South
Concord Avenue to the east end of the
Oconomowoc Avenue Bridge, and on the
south side of the Oconomowoc Avenue
Bridge
Omena Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-41]
South From the west curbline of South Church
Street to a point 135 feet west
Park Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-11]
Both From the north curbline of Elm Street
to a point 100 feet north
Perry Street North From the east curbline of Short Street
to the west curbline of Highland Avenue
Perry Street South From the west curbline of Highland
Avenue to a point 200 feet west
Pine Ridge Court
cul-de-sac
[Added by Ord.
No. 07-10]
Around the inside island
Richards Avenue
[Added by Ord.
No. 11-24]
Both From the west curbline of South
Concord Avenue to the east curbline of
Humboldt Street
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:809
Name of Street Side Location
Richards Avenue
[Added by Ord.
No. 07-21]
East From the north curbline of Thomas
Avenue to 104 feet north
Richards Avenue
[Added by Ord.
No. 07-21]
East From the south curbline of Thomas
Avenue to 92 feet south
River Drive
[Added by Ord.
No. 00-14]
East From the south curbline of Dakota
Street to a point 57 feet south
River Drive East From the south curbline of Hyland
Street to a point 232 feet southwest
River Drive East From the south curbline of William
Street to a point 95 feet south
River Drive West From the south curbline of Hyland
Street to a point 113 feet south of the
south curbline of William Street
Riverlawn
Avenue [Added
by Ord. No.
01-1]
East From the north curbline of East Main
Street to a point 78 feet north
Riverlawn
Avenue [Added
by Ord. No.
01-1]
West From the north curbline of East Main
Street to a point 97 feet north
Riverlawn
Avenue
[Amended by
Ord. No. 09-49]
West From a point 286 feet north of the north
curbline of Ruth Street to a point 30
feet further north
South Church
Street
Both From the north curbline of Bernard
Street to the south curbline of
Milwaukee Street
South Church
Street
East From the north curbline of Milwaukee
Street 180 feet north on Church Street
South Church
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
99-30]
East From the south curbline of West Main
Street to the north curbline of Emmet
Street
South Church
Street
East From the south curbline of West Main
Street a distance of 209 feet
South Church
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 03-52]
East and
west
From the south curbline of Bernard
Street to Jefferson Road
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:810
Name of Street Side Location
South Church
Street
West From the north right-of-way line of
Jefferson Road to a point 750 feet north
South Church
Street
West From the crosswalk of West Main Street
a distance of 82 feet south
South Church
Street
West From the north right-of-way line of West
Milwaukee Street to a point 230 feet
north
South Eighth
Street
East From Main Street to Western Avenue,
except parking is allowed on Sundays
between Market and Dodge Streets on
the east side
South Eighth
Street [Added
10-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-27]
West From a point 175 feet south of the south
curbline of Dodge Street to a point 125
feet further south
South Eighth
Street
West From the south curbline of East Main
Street to the south 112 feet
South Fifth
Street
East From the south curbline of Market
Street to the north curbline of Jefferson
Street
South First
Street
East For a distance of 32 feet north of the
north curbline of Dodge Street
South Fourth
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 04-37]
East From Dodge Street to Spring Street
South Fourth
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
04-39]
West From East Milwaukee Street to Western
Avenue
South Fourth
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 04-38]
West From the south curbline of Market
Street to a point 84 feet south of the
south curbline of Spring Street
South
Montgomery
Street
East From the north curbline of West
Milwaukee Street to a point 64 feet
north
South Seventh
Street
East Between Main Street and Market Street
South Seventh
Street
East From the south curbline of Market
Street to the south curbline of Jefferson
Street
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:811
Name of Street Side Location
South Third
Street
East Approximately 60 feet south of Clark
Street
South Third
Street
East Between Dodge Street and Western
Avenue
South Third
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
01-15]
East From the south curbline of Hart Street
to the north curbline of William Street
South Third
Street
East From the Soo-Milwaukee Railroad to
the north curbline of Hyland Street
South Third
Street
East and
west
From the south curbline of Western
Avenue to the north curbline of Bailey
Street
South Third
Street
West From the south curbline of Bailey Street
to a point 270 feet north of the north
curbline of Hyland Street, and from a
point 223 feet north of the north
curbline of Hyland Street to the north
curbline of Hyland Street.
South Third
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
01-16]
West From the south curbline of Hart Street
to 62 feet south
South Twelfth
Street
East From the north curbline of Clark Street
to a point 106 feet north
South Twelfth
Street
East Beginning at a point 210 feet north of
the north curbline of Mary Street to a
point 360 feet north
South Twelfth
Street
East From the north curbline of Western
Avenue to a point 300 feet north
South Twelfth
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
03-54]
East From the south curbline of Western
Avenue to the Canadian Pacific Railroad
South Twelfth
Street
West From the north curbline of Clark Street
to a point 125 feet north
South Twelfth
Street
West Between Railroad Street and Mary
Street
South Twelfth
Street
West From the north curbline of Western
Avenue to 151 feet north
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:812
Name of Street Side Location
South Water
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 11-09;
11-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-30;
4-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-5]
East From a point 45 feet north of the north
curbline of West Madison Street to a
point 162 feet south of the south
curbline of West Madison Street
South Water
Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 11-09;
11-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-30;
4-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-5]
East From the north curbline of West
Milwaukee Street to a point 35 feet
north of the north curbline of Lafayette
Street, except for the loading zone at
415 South Water Street, which is 105
feet north of the north curbline of West
Milwaukee Street
South Water
Street
East and
west
From the south curbline of West
Milwaukee Street to the north curbline
of Frederick Street
South Water
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
11-10]
West From the north curbline of Lafayette
Street to the south curbline of West
Madison Street
South Water
Street
[Amended
11-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-30]
West From the north curbline of West
Milwaukee Street to the north curbline
of Lafayette Street
Spaulding Street South Commencing at the southwest corner of
the intersection with Prospect Street
west a distance of 90 feet
Stimpson Street North From the west curbline of River Drive
for a distance of 100 feet
Stimpson Street North From the west curbline of Utah Street
to a point 84 feet west of the west
curbline of South Church Street
Stimpson Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-40]
South From the west curbline of River Drive to
a point 85 feet west
Stimpson Street South From the west cubline of Utah Street to
a point 110 feet west of the west
curbline of South Church Street
Third Street East From Hart Street to Hyland Street
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:813
Name of Street Side Location
Third Street West Between Clyman Street and the
Milwaukee Railway Tracks
Union Street East From the south curbline of North
Church Street south 225 feet
West Street
[Added
12-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-43]
Both From the west curbline of South Water
Street to a point 50 feet west
West Cady Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 09-10]
North From the east curbline of North Church
Street to a point 180 feet east
West Cady Street North For a distance of 50 feet east and west
of the intersection with North Water
Street
West Cady Street South From the east curbline of North Church
Street to a point 121 feet east
West Main Street North From the center line of the Chicago and
Northwestern Railroad tracks to the
west 138 feet and to the east 142 feet
West Main Street North From the west curbline of Fremont
Street to the west 368 feet, and from
the east curbline of Fremont Street to
the east 120 feet
West Main Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 12-26]
North Beginning at the east curbline of Isaac
Walton Street, 340 feet east along the
north side of West Main Street
West Main Street North From the west curbline of Montgomery
Street to the west 72 feet, and from the
east curbline of Montgomery Street to
the east 85 feet
West Main Street North From the west curbline of North Church
Street to the west 112 feet
West Main Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 99-21]
North From the east curbline of North Church
Street to the west curbline of North
Washington Street
West Main Street North From the west curbline of North Votech
Drive to the west a distance of 610 feet
West Main Street North From the Soo Railroad underpass to the
west 227 feet, and from the Soo
Railroad underpass to the east 930 feet
West Main Street South From the center line of the Chicago and
Northwestern Railroad tracks to the
west 100 feet and to the east 128 feet
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:814
Name of Street Side Location
West Main Street South From a point 50 feet east of the east
right-of-way line of Fremont Street to
the west 565 feet
West Main Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 00-30;
amended by
Ord. No. 02-61;
Ord. No. 04-33]
South From a point 382 feet east of the east
curbline of Fremont Street extended to
a point 71 feet further east
West Main Street South From the west curbline of Montgomery
Street to the west 106 feet, and from
the east curbline of Montgomery Street
to the east 45 feet
West Main Street South From the Soo Railroad underpass to the
west 244 feet, and from the Soo
Railroad underpass to the east 478 feet
West Main Street South From the west curbline of South Church
Street to the west 105 feet
West Main Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 99-29]
South From the east curbline of South Church
Street to a point 75 feet east
Western Avenue North From the west curbline of Concord
Avenue west 888 feet
Western Avenue North and
south
A distance of 85 feet east from the east
curbline of South Third Street and a
distance of 65 feet west from the west
line of South Third Street
Western Avenue South From the west curbline of Concord
Avenue to the east curbline of Harvey
Avenue
Western Avenue South From the west curbline of Harvey
Avenue to a point 74 feet west
Western Avenue South From the west curbline of Richards
Avenue to a point 70 feet west
Western Avenue
[Added by Ord.
No. 01-34]
South From the east curbline of Richards
Avenue to a point 69 feet east
William Street North From the east curbline of River Drive to
the west curbline extended of Neenah
Street
William Street North Between Wakoka and Third Streets
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:815
Name of Street Side Location
William Street
[Added
3-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-5]
South From a point 265 feet east of the east
curbline of Wakoka Street to a point 145
feet further east
B. Parking prohibited at specified times. No operator of any vehicle shall
park such vehicle in any of the following places at the times specified.
The penalties for violating this subsection shall be in accordance with
§ 500-13E of this Code.
Name of
Street Side Location Hours/Days
Carriage Hill
Drive
East and west From Oak Street
to Endeavour
Drive
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Center Street
[Added by
Ord. No.
10-37]
East From the north
curbline of North
Avenue to a point
14 feet north of
the north curbline
of East Spaulding
Street
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school
days
Country Lane
[Added by
Ord. No.
03-47]
North and
south
From Carriage
Hill Drive to
Sweetbriar Lane
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
September
through May
East Main
Street
North From the west
curbline of Hall
Street southwest
a distance of 185
feet
7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. daily
East Main
Street
North Beginning at a
point 63 feet east
of the east
curbline of North
Fourth Street to a
point 19 feet east
3:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m. daily, except
Sundays
East Main
Street
South Beginning at a
point 28 feet west
of the west
curbline of South
Third Street to a
point 29 feet west
3:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m. daily, except
Sundays
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:816
Name of
Street Side Location Hours/Days
East Main
Street [Added
7-18-2017 by
Ord. No.
17-21]
West Beginning west
curbline of the
entrance to the
Middle School to
a point 62 feet
further southwest
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school
days
Lounsbury
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
10-38]
North From the east
curbline of North
Second Street to
the west curbline
of Prospect Street
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school
days
Lounsbury
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
10-39]
South From the west
curbline of
Prospect Street to
a point 76 feet
west
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school
days
Prospect Street
[Added by
Ord. No.
10-35]
East From the north
curbline of
Lounsbury Street
to the south end
of the street
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school
days
Prospect Street
[Added by
Ord. No.
10-33;
amended by
Ord. No.
13-10]
West From the south
curbline of East
Spaulding Street
to the north
curbline of
Lounsbury Street
7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school
days
South First
Street [Added
by Ord. No.
07-09]
East From the north
curbline of East
Milwaukee Street
to the north 66
feet
6:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon, Monday
through Friday
South Twelfth
Street
East From the north
curbline of Sunset
Avenue to the
north 625 feet
2:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
Sunset Avenue North From the east
curbline of
Twelfth Street
east 260 feet
7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
(1) In the Riverside Park volleyball courts' parking lot, located in the
area between Hill Court and Hill Street within the confines of
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:817
Riverside Park, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on all days, except during the course of the annual Fourth of July
celebration and the annual River Days celebration.
C. Parking prohibited in winter months.
(1) Declared snow emergency. No owner or operator of any vehicle
shall park upon any public street, parking area among or within
right-of-way or alley between November 1 and April 30, inclusive,
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during a declared
snow emergency. A snow emergency may be declared by the Chief
of Police or the Chief's delegate not later than 7:00 p.m. of the
evening the snow emergency is to take effect. Such declaration
shall be evidenced by express and logged notification being
provided to the Police Department dispatchers by the Chief of
Police or the Chief's delegate. The snow emergency shall be in
effect for 48 hours after being declared, measured from the initial
11:00 p.m. time, and may be extended for additional twenty-fourhour
increments if notice is so provided by published notice in the
local newspaper. A declared snow emergency shall go into effect for
enforcement purposes upon either of the following conditions
having been met: [Amended 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 17-13]
(a) Published notice of the declared snow emergency in the local
newspaper on the day prohibited parking begins and, if
possible, published notice broadcast through local radio or
cable television; or
(b) If timely newspaper publication is not possible and, at 9:00
p.m. on the evening prohibited parking begins, actual weather
or street conditions are such that an ordinary person of
reasonable care and prudence would know or ought to know
that snowplowing will become necessary.
(2) Scope of declaration. A declared snow emergency shall apply to
every public street and alley throughout the duration of the
declared emergency unless a modified enforcement area is
declared, as herein described:
(a) The Central City Snow Removal Area, as depicted in the
map,180 generally surrounds the downtown area and is
identified as an area requiring extraordinary measures insofar
as snow removal and pickup is concerned due to the lack of
adequate off-street snow storage capability.
(b) Each initially declared snow emergency shall be for a period of
48 hours pursuant to Subsection C(1) above. If the
determination is made by the Street Superintendent or his
designee that, during the second twenty-four-hour period of
180. Editor's Note: The Central City Snow Removal Area Map is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:818
the declared snow emergency, plowing operations will only
be necessary within the Central City Snow Removal Area,
he shall notify the Chief of Police or his designee as to his
determination. Once notified, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall ensure that notice of the modified snow
emergency is published in the local newspaper, accompanied
by the Central City Snow Removal Area Map, and, if possible,
that notice be broadcast through local radio or cable television.
(c) In the event a snow emergency is extended for a period of 24
hours pursuant to Subsection C(1) above, the extension may be
for the entire City or for the Central City Snow Removal Area,
depending on actual or anticipated weather and street
conditions, subject to the notice requirements in Subsection
C(2)(b) above.
(3) Posted streets and alleys. In addition to the provisions of
Subsection C(1), no owner or operator of any vehicle shall park on
any street or alley when signs are posted indicating that snow is
being or is going to be removed from such street or alley.
(4) Posted public parking lot. It is the declared policy of the City Street
Department to clear the public parking lots within the City by 12:00
noon of the day following the removal of snow from the adjoining
streets or alleys. The Street Department shall post 1/2 of any such
lot, if necessary, so that only part of the lot may be used during a
snow emergency. When the remaining 1/2 of the lot is cleared, the
signs shall be switched to enable the Department to clear the other
half of the lot. No owner or operator of any vehicle shall leave or
have any vehicle parked upon any portion of the lot eight hours
after the lot has been so posted.
(5) It shall be a defense to a citation issued under this section:
(a) If the owner or someone on behalf of the owner notifies the
Police Department, prior to being cited, that the vehicle is
mechanically disabled and identifies the owner's name, the
year and make of the vehicle, the license plate number, the
location of the vehicle and the nature of the disability, and
removes the vehicle within 48 hours thereafter; or
(b) If the defendant shows, by evidence that is clear, convincing
and satisfactory, that exigent and extraordinary circumstances
existed to excuse the violation.
(6) Any vehicle that is parked in violation of this section that has been
ticketed and remains parked at the same location for 24 or more
hours thereafter may be ordered by the Police Department to be
towed from the street, alley or parking lot at the owner's risk.
[Amended by Ord. No. 05-23; Ord. No. 05-38]
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:819
(7) Removal and disposal of vehicles. In the event that it is necessary
for the Police Department to tow an offending vehicle pursuant to
Subsection C(6), such vehicle shall be retained in storage and
disposed of in accordance with § 497-7 of this Code. [Added by
Ord. No. 05-25; amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(8) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Subsection C
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 and not more
than $100. Each violation and each day on which a violation of any
provision of this Subsection C occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended by Ord. No. 08-03]
(9) The owner of any motor vehicle towed pursuant to Subsection C(6)
herein, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the abandonment
and all costs of impounding and disposing of the motor vehicle. Any
costs recovered from the sale of the impounded vehicle shall be
offset against the costs of impounding, storing and disposing of the
motor vehicle. Any costs not previously paid shall be recovered as a
cost of the action and imposed as an additional cost of the plaintiff
in any forfeiture penalty imposed pursuant to Subsection C(8)
above.
D. Bus stops designated. Bus stops are hereby established at the following
locations within the City:
(1) On the east side of Hall Street beginning at a point 280 feet north
of the north line of Doctors Court and continuing to a point 720 feet
north of the north line of Doctors Court, which bus stop is to be
designated as a "No Parking" area between 2:30 p.m. and 3:30
p.m., Mondays through Fridays, by suitable markings.
(2) The penalties for violating this subsection shall be in accordance
with § 500-13E of this chapter.
E. Parking of overweight vehicles, truck tractors and semitrailers.
(1) Definitions.
(a) The definitions of "semitrailer," "tractor-semitrailer
combination" and "truck tractor" are those set forth in
§ 340.01(57), (67r) and (73), Wis. Stats., respectively.
(b) For the purposes of this section, "registered gross weight"
shall mean the weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles
as shown on the title for the vehicle.
(2) Parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator
of a semitrailer, truck tractor, tractor-semitrailer combination, or
any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a registered gross
weight of 12,000 pounds or more to park, stop or stand said vehicle
or vehicles on City streets or alleys within the City limits of the City
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:820
of Watertown in any of the following places, except for the purpose
of loading or servicing residents in the area:
(a) In any City-owned parking lots.
(b) In any area which is primarily residential.
(c) In any area that is primarily commercial or business.
(3) Penalties. The penalties for violating this subsection shall be in
accordance with § 500-13E of this chapter.
F. High profile vehicle parking.
(1) Definitions. The definition of a "high profile vehicle" shall be any
motor vehicle whose body exceeds six feet in height, as measured
from the road surface to the highest point on that vehicle,
excluding antennas. It includes, but is not limited to, pickup trucks,
vans, sport utility vehicles, box trucks and mini buses.
(2) Parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator
to stop, stand or park any high profile vehicle in any parking space
in the following places:
(a) On the south side of Bernard Street, from a point 70 feet west
of the west curbline of South Montgomery Street to a point 60
feet further west.
(b) On the east side of South First Street, from a point 103 feet
north of the north curbline of Wisconsin Street to a point 29
feet further north. [Added by Ord. No. 00-09]
(c) On the east side of North Church Street, from the south
curbline of Margaret Street to a point 70 feet south.
[Amended by Ord. No. 09-19]
(3) Penalties. The penalties for violating this subsection shall be in
accordance with § 500-13E of this chapter.
G. Parking on boulevards prohibited.
(1) No parking of motor vehicles, utility trailers, house trailers, boats,
motor homes, recreational vehicles, or other similar vehicles shall
be allowed on boulevards between the surfaced roadway and
sidewalk, or the right-of-way line in the event there is no sidewalk,
within the City of Watertown, except during declared snow
emergencies. The provisions of this section do not apply to the
paved portions of boulevards in nonresidential districts, as
designated in the Watertown Zoning Code, nor do they apply to
existing driveways so long as the parked vehicle does not block an
existing sidewalk or extend into the roadway.
(2) Penalties. The penalties for violating this subsection shall be in
accordance with § 500-13E of this chapter.
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:821
H. Parking of trailers, motor homes and mobile homes. [Added by Ord.
No. 01-37]
(1) Definitions.
(a) The definitions of "camping trailer," "dual purpose motor home,
"fifth-wheel recreational vehicle," "mobile home," "motor
home" and "trailer" are those set forth in the Wisconsin
Statutes in § 340.01(6m), (15p), (18m), (29), (33m) and (71),
respectively.181
(b) For the purposes of this subsection, the term "parked" shall
mean placed or left standing for any period of time.
(c) For the purposes of this subsection, the term "stored" shall
mean parked for a period in excess of 72 consecutive hours.
(2) Storage prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator
of a camping trailer, dual purpose motor home, fifth-wheel
recreational vehicle, mobile home, motor home, or trailer to store
or allow to be stored said property or vehicle on City streets, alleys
or in any municipal parking lots within the City limits of the City of
Watertown in any of the following places:
(a) In any area which is zoned residential; or
(b) In any area that is zoned commercial or business.
(3) Occupancy prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or
operator of a truck camper, boat, bus, camping trailer, dual purpose
motor home, fifth wheel mobile home, mobile home, motor home,
or trailer to allow such vehicle or property to be occupied or used
for living or housekeeping purposes or for the housing or keeping
of animals on any City street, alley or municipal parking lot.
I. Parking of trailers prohibited; disposition. [Added 6-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-20]
(1) Parking of trailers detached from motor vehicles is prohibited on all
City streets and public areas. This subsection shall not apply to
stopping or standing for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers
while the motor vehicle remains operator-attended as necessary to
move it in case of an emergency or to avoid obstructing traffic.
"Trailer," "stopping," "parking," "motor vehicle," "standing" or any
synonymous term shall have such meaning as prescribed under Ch.
340, Wis. Stats., where and as necessary to give effect to the
purpose of this section.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 500-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-9
1:822
§ 500-10. Prohibited turns.
(2) Parking of a trailer attached to a motor vehicle is prohibited on all
City streets and public areas where such parking is continuous in
excess of 48 hours. For all purposes of application and enforcement
hereunder, a trailer shall be considered parked continuously in a
single location unless it is moved by lawful means no less than 300
feet from and beyond any initially observed location.
(3) Exceptions. Exceptions by permit to this section are prescribed
under § 457-7 of this Code or by privilege or right as provided for or
mandated under Wisconsin State Statutes.
(4) Disposition. Any trailer determined by a law enforcement officer to
be parked contrary to this section may be removed, impounded and
disposed of pursuant to and in a like manner as prescribed for a
motor vehicle under Chapter 497 of this Code.
A. The operator of a vehicle may not make a U-turn upon a highway at any
of the following places: [Amended 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-25]
(1) At any intersection at which traffic is being controlled by a traffic
officer unless instructed by the officer to make a U-turn.
(2) In mid-block on any street in a business district.
(3) In mid-block on any through highway in a residence district.
(4) On any street adjacent to any school when children are present.
B. No person shall back his vehicle into an intersection at which turns are
prohibited by Subsection A(1) for the purpose of turning the vehicle so
as to proceed in the opposite direction upon the highway.
C. In this section, mid-block means any part of a street or highway other
than an intersection.
D. Left turns prohibited. No person shall make a left turn at any of the
following places:
(1) Westbound traffic on Main Street shall be prohibited from making a
left turn south onto Third Street between 2:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
on all days except Sundays and holidays.
(2) Southbound traffic on State Trunk Highway 26 shall not make a left
turn into the driveway south of the intersection with Bernard
Street.
(3) Southbound traffic on State Trunk Highway 26 shall not make a left
turn into the first driveway south of the intersection with West
Main Street on the east side of the street (Walgreens). [Added by
Ord. No. 99-48]
§ 500-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-10
1:823
§ 500-11. Authority to designate safety zones, loading zones and
lanes for traffic.
§ 500-12. Erection of official traffic signs and signals.
§ 500-13. Violations and penalties.
(4) Northbound traffic on State Trunk Highway 26 shall not make a left
turn into the first driveway north of the intersection with West
Milwaukee Street on the west side of the street (Auto Zone).
[Added by Ord. No. 00-04]
(5) Westbound traffic on Gateway Drive shall not make a left turn south
onto South Church Street (STH 26). [Added by Ord. No. 02-02]
A. The Council may cause to be designated by marker or markers certain
places on highways as safety zones, or erect and maintain islands of
safety, and regulate and control traffic with respect to such safety zones
and islands of safety.
B. The Common Council may cause to be placed markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct a
different course from that specified in § 346.31, Wis. Stats., to be
traveled by vehicles turning at the intersection.
C. The Council may cause to be marked lanes for traffic upon any roadway
and may designate specific lanes for slow-moving traffic or for traffic
moving in a particular direction.
A. Street Superintendent authorized to procure and erect signs and
signals. The Street Superintendent shall procure, erect and maintain
appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to
the rules of the State Department of Transportation, giving such notice
of the provisions of this chapter as required by state law. Signs shall be
erected in such locations and manner as the Street Superintendent
shall determine will best effect the purposes of this chapter and give
adequate warning to users of the street or highway.
B. Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Street Superintendent shall
have the authority granted by § 349.09, Wis. Stats., to order the
removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or
displayed in violation of this section or § 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any charge
imposed on a premises for removal of such an illegal sign, signal or
device shall be reported to the Council at its next regular meeting for
review and certification.
A. Forfeiture penalty. The penalty for violation for any provision of this
chapter shall be forfeiture as hereinafter provided, together with the
costs of prosecution, the penalty assessment imposed by § 757.05, Wis.
Stats., and the jail assessment imposed by § 302.46(1), Wis. Stats.,
where applicable. Payment of the judgment may be suspended by the
§ 500-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-13
1:824
sentencing judge for not more than 60 days. Any person who shall fail
to pay the amount of the forfeiture, costs of prosecution and penalty
imposed for violation of any provision of this chapter may, upon order
of the court entering judgment therefor, be imprisoned until such
forfeiture, costs and assessments are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
B. Other sanctions. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of
the sentencing court to exercise additional authority granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of the
defendant, to suspend the registration of any vehicle or refuse
registration of any vehicle owned by the defendant, to order the
defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation or attend traffic
safety school, or to require the defendant to perform community
service, in addition to payment of a monetary forfeiture or in lieu of
imprisonment.
C. Forfeitures for uniform state offenses.
(1) Forfeitures for violations of any state regulation set forth in the
Wisconsin Statutes and adopted by reference in § 500-1 of this
chapter shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be
imposed for violations of the comparable state statute, including
any variations or increases for subsequent offenses.182
(2) The forfeitures allowed for deposit in lieu of appearance and
stipulation of no contest shall be the amounts of the deposits set
forth in the bond schedule adopted pursuant to § 23.66, 345.26,
778.25(3) or 778.26(3), Wis. Stats., except as follows:
(a) The deposit schedule for any violation of this chapter or state
codes adopted herein may be set by the Municipal Judge,
subject to the approval in resolution form by the Common
Council, in an amount not to exceed the maximum penalty for
the offense, including any penalty assessment which would be
applicable under § 757.05, Wis. Stats., and the jail assessment
imposed by § 302.46(1), Wis. Stats., plus the costs of
prosecution.
(b) The provisions for a statutory penalty in the form of a fine and/
or a term of imprisonment contained in any offense adopted in
this chapter from a state code are hereby specifically excluded
from adoption hereunder, and in lieu thereof a forfeiture may
be imposed upon the defendant pursuant to this section.
D. Forfeitures for nonmoving violations.
(1) Forfeitures for uniform state-wide parking, stopping and standing
offenses. Forfeitures for violations of the offenses described in
§§ 346.505 and 346.51 through 346.55, Wis. Stats., inclusive,
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 500-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-13
1:825
§ 500-14. Enforcement.
adopted by reference in § 500-1 of this chapter shall be in
accordance with Subsection E below. [Amended by Ord. No.
05-39]
(2) Forfeitures for snow parking offenses. Minimum and maximum
forfeitures for violations of the offenses described in § 500-9C of
this chapter shall be as set forth in § 500-9C(8). [Amended by
Ord. No. 05-39; Ord. No. 08-03]
(3) Forfeitures for other parking violations. Forfeitures for violation of
all other nonmoving offenses as described in §§ 500-6 through
500-9 of this chapter shall be in accordance with Subsection E
below. In the case of overtime parking, each separate period of time
after the issuance of the first citation during which a violation
occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense and
subject the owner of the vehicle to an additional citation for each
separate offense.
E. Other violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter for which a penalty is not established in Subsections A through
D of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10 nor
more than $200, together with the costs of prosecution and the penalty
assessment imposed by § 757.05, Wis. Stats., and the jail assessment
imposed by § 302.46(1), Wis. Stats., where applicable.
A. Enforcement procedure. This chapter shall be enforced according to
§ 66.0114, Ch. 800 and §§ 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
B. Deposit. Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a
deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police
station or at the office of the Clerk of Court or by mailing the deposit to
such places.183
(1) The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall notify
the arrested person, orally or in writing, that:
(a) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, he
will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and
submitted to a forfeiture plus costs not to exceed the amount of
the deposit; or
(b) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation,
and if the court does not accept the deposit as a forfeiture, he
will be summoned into court to answer the complaint.
(2) The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with
the deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 500-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-14
1:826
Conference. The deposit shall include court costs and suit tax.
[Amended by Ord. No. 74-48]
(3) The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue
the arrested person a receipt therefor as required by
§ 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
(4) If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer
shall require the alleged offender to deposit not less than the
maximum forfeiture permitted under this chapter.
C. Stipulation of no contest. Any person charged with a violation of this
chapter, except §§ 346.62(1) and 346.63(1), Wis. Stats., may make a
stipulation of no contest pursuant to § 345.27, Wis. Stats., which must
be received at the office of the Police Department or Clerk of Court
within 10 days of the date of the alleged violation. Such person shall at
the time of entering into the stipulation make the deposit required
under Subsection B if he has not already done so. A person who has
mailed or filed a stipulation under this subsection may, however, appear
in court on the appearance date and may be relieved from the
stipulation for cause shown as required in § 345.37, Wis. Stats.
[Amended by Ord. No. 74-48]
D. Enforcement procedure for nonmoving offenses.
(1) A person charged with a nonmoving traffic violation may deposit or
mail the amount of the forfeiture to the Police Department within
10 days of the date the citation was issued.
(2) If the forfeiture stated on the citation pursuant to the Municipal
Bond Schedule is not paid within 10 days of the offense, or if the
person charged with a nonmoving traffic violation does not enter a
"not guilty" plea in person or in writing within 10 days of the
offense, the forfeiture stated on the citation shall be increased by a
sum of $10.
(3) After 10 days from the date of the offense, the Watertown Police
Department will mail a notice ("first notice"), advising: "Failure to
respond to this notice within 10 days of the notice date, additional
action will be taken leading to additional penalties and the possible
suspension of your vehicle registration by the State of Wisconsin."
(4) If the forfeiture is not paid within 10 days after the mailing of the
first notice, or if the person charged with a nonmoving traffic
violation does not enter a "not guilty" plea in person or in writing
within 10 days of the mailing of the first notice, the forfeiture shall
be increased from the amount stated on the citation pursuant to the
Municipal Bond Schedule, as increased pursuant to the above
Subsection D(2), and shall be increased by an additional $15.
(5) After 10 days from the mailing of the first notice, the Watertown
Police Department will mail a notice ("final notice"), advising:
§ 500-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-14
1:827
§ 500-15. School crossing guards. [Added by Ord. No. 74-23]
No operator of a vehicle shall fail or refuse to stop for a crosswalk guard or
school crossing guard when, in the performance of his or her duties, he or
she so directs by use of hand, metallic or lighted signs or signals.
§ 500-16. School bus warning lights. [Added by Ord. No. 97-23]
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 346.48(2)(b)2, Wis. Stats., as adopted
by reference in § 500-1 of this chapter, school bus operators may use
flashing red warning lights in residential and business districts when pupils
or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at locations at
which there are no crosswalk or traffic signals so that pupils must cross the
street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded.
Chapter 508
WASTEWATER FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Department — See Ch. 193.
Building construction codes — See Ch. 253,
especially § 253-11.
Compulsory connection to sewer and
water — See Ch. 319, Art. I.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 419.
Streets and sidewalk openings — See Ch. 457.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 512.
"Failure to respond to this notice within 10 days of the notice date,
additional action will be taken leading to additional penalties and
the possible suspension of your vehicle registration by the State of
Wisconsin."
(6) If the forfeiture as increased pursuant to this section is not paid
within 10 days of the mailing of the final notice, or if the person
charged with a nonmoving traffic violation does not enter a "not
guilty" plea in person or in writing within 10 days of the mailing of
the final notice, the Police Department shall send a notification to
the Department of Transportation requesting the suspension or
revocation of vehicle registration. Upon mailing of that notice to
the Department of Transportation, the forfeiture will be increased
by an amount of $20 in addition to the prior increases outlined
above in Subsection D(2) and (4), respectively. [Added by Ord. No.
89-26]
§ 500-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 500-16
1:828
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 508-1. Scope.
§ 508-2. Purpose.
A. This chapter shall apply to the City of Watertown wastewater facilities,
as hereinafter defined in § 508-3, and all appurtenances thereof.
B. This chapter shall also apply to all storm and sanitary sewers, building
drains, building sewers, and private interceptor sewers existing or to be
constructed in the City of Watertown.
A. Sewer use.
(1) The General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403)
promulgated as a result of the Federal Clean Water Act
amendments of 1977 (Public Law 95-217), as amended, have
resulted in a program to improve the quality of our nation's waters.
(2) The City of Watertown has already made and will continue to make
a substantial financial investment in its wastewater facilities to
achieve the goals of the Act.
(3) Therefore, it is the purpose of Article II of this chapter to regulate
the construction and use of all sewers and drains connected to the
sewer systems and wastewater facilities of the City of Watertown.
Pursuant to its authority under Chs. 281 and 283 and §§ 66.0821
and 62.18, Wis. Stats., the City of Watertown adopts herein
pretreatment rules and regulations to provide for the use of the
Watertown wastewater facilities by industries served by it without
damage to the physical facilities; without impairment of their
normal function of collecting, treating and discharging wastewater;
without the discharge by the City's Wastewater Treatment Plant of
pollutants which would violate the discharge allowed under its
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit
and the applicable rules of all governmental authorities with
jurisdiction over such discharges; without limiting the opportunity
to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludges from the City's
Wastewater Treatment Plant; and to recover from users of the
wastewater treatment facilities, on an equitable basis and separate
from all other fees and charges recovered by the City, the share of
the operation and maintenance cost of the City's industrial
pretreatment program attributable to such users.
B. Sewer service charge.
(1) In order to adequately provide for the collection, treatment,
purification and disposal in a sanitary manner of wastewaters in
the City of Watertown, Wisconsin, said City has heretofore
§ 508-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-2
1:829
constructed wastewater facilities, including necessary sewers and
pumping stations and wastewater treatment plant.
(2) In order to pay part of the cost of said municipal wastewater
facilities the City has heretofore issued general obligation bonds.
(3) It is necessary that additional wastewater facilities be constructed,
including the upgrading of the existing plant, and additional
general obligation bonds were issued by the City of Watertown to
pay part of the cost of said additional works.
(4) It is necessary that the rates and charges for the use of the services
provided by the municipal wastewater facilities of said City be
revised, established and increased to pay the cost of operating and
maintaining the wastewater facilities and the debt service on
outstanding bonds for payment of the City's share of cost of
improvements as hereinafter provided.
(5) Therefore, it is the purpose of Article III of this chapter to recover
from users of the wastewater facilities, on an equitable basis, the
share of the wastewater facilities costs attributable to such users
and to provide funds for the operation and maintenance, debt
service, replacement and improvement of the wastewater facilities.
C. Excess capacity sewer service charge. [Added by Ord. No. 01-29,
effective 1-1-2002; amended by Ord. No. 12-14]
(1) In order to adequately provide for the collection, treatment,
purification and disposal in a sanitary manner of wastewater within
the City of Watertown, Wisconsin, said City has heretofore
constructed wastewater treatment facilities, including necessary
sewers and pumping stations and wastewater treatment plant.
(2) The City has previously adopted Article III of this chapter to
provide for the operation and maintenance, debt service,
replacement and improvements of the wastewater treatment
facilities from current users of such sewer services.
(3) Increased land development within the service area of the City of
Watertown and the Wastewater Treatment Plant Utility of the City
of Watertown has caused the need to establish a mechanism for the
imposition of sewer service charges upon such new land
development to finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing,
upgrading, expanding and constructing additional wastewater
treatment facilities, including the necessary sewers, pumping
stations, and modifications to the wastewater treatment plant,
which are necessary to accommodate such new land development.
(4) The City has conducted a study and assessment to establish the
amount, implementation schedule, and rational basis for imposition
of the excess capacity sewer service charge, which has been
summarized in the Wastewater Facilities Plan Report (September
§ 508-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-2
1:830
§ 508-3. Definitions.
2000), prepared by Applied Technologies, and the Report on
Connection Fees (February 2001), prepared by Virchow Krause &
Company, LLP, on file in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer for
the City of Watertown and on file in the office of the Water Systems
Manager.
(5) In order to assure that the new land development bears an
appropriate share of the capital costs necessary to provide
wastewater treatment facilities within the City of Watertown and
its service area required to serve the need for sewer services
arising out of this new land development, it is necessary to adopt an
excess capacity sewer service charge.
(6) Therefore, it is the purpose of Article IV of this chapter to recover
from the owners/developers of new land development within the
City of Watertown, on an equitable basis, pursuant to § 66.0821,
Wis. Stats., an excess capacity sewer service charge to provide
wastewater treatment facilities to such new land development.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
AMMONIA NITROGEN (NH3-N) — A measure commonly used for
testing the quantity of ammonium ions derived naturally from ammonia
and returned to ammonia via organic processes in water or waste
liquids. It is a measure used mainly for quantifying values in waste
treatment and water purification systems, as well as a measure of the
health of natural and man-made water reserves. It is measured in units
of mg/l (milligrams per liter).[Added by Ord. No. 12-14]
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (WDNR).
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — May be
any of the following:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
(3)
The manager of one or more manufacturing facilities, provided the
manager is authorized to make decisions that govern the operation
of the facility, make major capital investment recommendations,
(4)
§ 508-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-3
1:831
BILLABLE FLOW — The total number of gallons utilized to determine
the unit cost of billing for wastewater facilities services.
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at
20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter, as determined in accordance
with standard laboratory procedures as set out in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
CAPITAL COSTS — All reasonable and necessary costs and expenses
incurred by the City in planning, designing, financing and constructing
wastewater facilities, including but not limited to costs and expenses
for obtaining necessary permits, licenses, approvals and grants for
design and construction, fees for legal and consulting services and
acquisition.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — See "national categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standards."
CITY — The Common Council of the City of Watertown, Wisconsin, or its
duly authorized representative. Common Council shall mean the duly
elected Mayor and Alderpersons of the City of Watertown, Wisconsin.
COD (denoting chemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter
present in water or wastewater, expressed in milligrams per liter, as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set
out in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater.
COMMERCIAL USER — For the purpose of the user charge system,
a user engaged in the purchase or sale of goods or transaction of
business or which otherwise renders a service.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria and any additional pollutants
identified in the City of Watertown's WPDES permit, where the
Watertown Wastewater Treatment Plant is designed to treat such
initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure long-term
compliance with environmental laws, ensure the necessary systems
are established to gather complete and accurate information for
the report, and where authority to sign documents has been
delegated to the manager according to the corporation's
procedures. [Added 1-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1]
§ 508-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-3
1:832
pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required
by the City of Watertown's WPDES permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample consisting of several effluent
portions collected during a specific time period and combined to make
a representative sample.
CONNECTION — Any point where wastewater is discharged to a
private interceptor main or the wastewater facilities. Each sewer
service charge recipient, as defined in § 508-11A, shall be considered
(as a minimum) to be one connection.
DEBT SERVICE — The principal and interest necessary to pay bond
indebtedness.
DISCHARGE — The releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying or dumping of a pollutant into the waters of the
state or onto the land or into wells from which the pollutant might flow
or drain into said waters, and shall include the release of any pollutant
into the City's wastewater facilities.
DOMESTIC USER — Those establishments of which its related
occupants, if any, are usually considered as domestic service and whose
discharge consists of liquid waste or liquid-borne waste resulting from
the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food and/or
consisting of human excrement and similar sanitary wastes from each
separate house, apartment, flat or other living quarters occupied by a
person or persons constituting a distinct household.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall consist of one or more rooms connected
together in the same structure and constituting a separate independent
unit for the permanent residential occupancy by humans, with facilities
for such humans to sleep and eat.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term
may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
FEDERAL GRANT — The total amount of funding paid by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency to the City of Watertown for
the construction of the 1978 wastewater facilities improvements.
FLOW — The quantity of billable flow expressed in gallons or cubic feet.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes resulting from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage or sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables and condemned
foods.
GENERAL MUNICIPAL FLOW — The total wastewater flow discharged
to the wastewater facilities, minus the flows from industrial users, other
municipalities, and contract users. "General municipal flow" includes
flow from domestic users, commercial users, institutional users and
governmental users. General municipal flow, based on the design of the
§ 508-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-3
1:833
wastewater treatment plant, is further defined as flows containing fiveday
BOD concentrations no greater than 175 mg/l, suspended solids
concentrations no greater than 170 mg/l, total phosphorus
concentration no greater than six mg/l and ammonia nitrogen
concentrations no greater than 25 mg/l.[Amended by Ord. No.
12-14184]
GENERAL MUNICIPAL USER — Any user discharging wastewater to
the general municipal flow other than industrial users, municipalities,
and other contract users. This category of user includes as
subcategories:
GOVERNMENTAL USER — Includes those establishments whose
function is the administration and/or execution of governmental
programs as well as the offices of executives, legislative bodies and
agencies which provide general support services for government.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum
pump tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant, including nonbiodegradable dissolved solids.
INDUSTRIAL USER — In general, a person who discharges, causes
or permits the discharge of non-general municipal flow into the
wastewater facilities.[Amended by Ord. No. 12-14]
(1) Domestic users.
(2) Commercial users.
(3) Institutional users.
(4) Governmental users.
For the purpose of the industrial cost recovery system, "industrial
user" means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the
wastewater facilities which discharges a process flow greater than
25,000 gallons per day, discharges a process BOD, suspended
solids, total phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen concentration
greater than in general municipal flow (BOD: 175 mg/l; SS: 170 mg/
l; TP: six mg/l; and ammonia nitrogen: 25 mg/l), or has wastewater
constituent concentrations significantly different from those in
general municipal flow.
(1)
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 508-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-3
1:834
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting
from any industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or
from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources,
including cooling water and the discharge from wastewater
pretreatment facilities.
INFILTRATION and INFLOW — That portion of the wastewater
facilities flow which cannot be identified as billable flow.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Those establishments engaged in activities
of a noneconomic nature, frequently being the performance of service
for the general public (health, education, social), and not classified as a
governmental or commercial user in this chapter.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
LOAD — The quantities of wastewater constituents such as BOD,
suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen or other
constituents as expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) or pounds per
twenty-four-hour day (lbs/day).[Amended by Ord. No. 12-14]
Process flow is the actual flow discharged minus the measured
sanitary facilities flow or 25 gallons per on-site employee shift
per day, whichever result achieves the lesser sanitary flow.
(a)
Process BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia
nitrogen are the actual pounds of BOD, suspended solids, total
phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen discharged minus the
pounds of BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and
ammonia nitrogen measured from the sanitary flow or the
estimated pounds of BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus
and ammonia nitrogen determined by multiplying the sanitary
flow (used in process flow calculation) by 8.34 and by the
average domestic concentration of BOD, suspended solids,
total phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen (BOD: 175 mg/l; SS:
170 mg/l; TP: six mg/l; and ammonia nitrogen: 25 mg/l),
whichever result achieves the greater process BOD, suspended
solids, total phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen.
(b)
For the purpose of the user charge system, "industrial user" shall
mean a manufacturing or process facility engaged in a productive
or profit-making venture (generally Division D of the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual).
(2)
Inhibits or disrupts the wastewater facilities, their treatment
processes or operations, or their sludge processes, use or disposal;
and therefore,
(1)
Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the wastewater
facilities' WPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sludge use or
disposal in compliance with Chs. 281 and 283, Wis. Stats.
(2)
§ 508-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-3
1:835
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which applies to a specific
category of industrial users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source, if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
NONINDUSTRIAL USER — For the purpose of the industrial cost
recovery system, a user of the wastewater facilities considered to be
governmental or determined to be discharging primarily segregated
domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
OTHER WASTES — Other substances except sanitary wastes and
industrial wastes.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the wastewater facilities
into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is
a cause of a violation of any requirement of the wastewater facilities'
WPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association,
society, corporation, municipal corporation, governmental unit or
group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in moles per liter of solution and indicates the degree of alkalinity
or acidity, with a pH value of 7.0 being the neutral point.
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located;
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.
(3)
§ 508-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-3
1:836
PLUMBING CODE — The Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS
382 and City of Watertown Code Chapter 419, Plumbing.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
domestic wastewater, garbage, wastewater sludge, munitions, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal
and agricultural waste discharged into water. This definition shall
include holding tank wastes.[Amended by Ord. No. 12-14]
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or
in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the
wastewater facilities. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment, other than a categorical
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRIVATE INTERCEPTOR MAIN SEWER — A privately owned building
sewer not directly controlled by public authority. "Privately owned"
means single ownership by an individual, firm or corporation.
PROCESS WATER — Any water used in the manufacturing, preparation
or production of goods, materials or foods.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer owned or operated by the City.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries wastewater and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — The total of the user charge system and
debt service charges to be assessed to each user.185
SEWER SYSTEM — Pipeline or conduits, pumping stations, force
mains, and all devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for
collecting or conducting wastewater to the point of ultimate disposal.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
(1)
Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the wastewater
facilities (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which
(2)
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 508-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-3
1:837
SLUG — Any discharge of wastewater which exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour flows during normal operation or more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration of any wastewater
constituent, or which causes interference to the wastewater facilities.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STATE — The State of Wisconsin.
STORM SEWER (sometimes termed "storm drain") — A sewer which
carries stormwater and surface water and drainage but excludes
wastewater other than approved unpolluted cooling or process water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Water Systems Manager of the City of
Watertown, Wisconsin, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — A measure of both inorganic and organic
forms of phosphorus. Phosphorus can be present as dissolved or
particulate matter measured in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.[Added by Ord. No. 12-14]
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA
under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act or other acts.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Clean water uncontaminated by industrial
wastes, other wastes, or any substances which render such water
makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the wastewater facilities; or is designated as
such by the City, on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater
facilities operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement. [Amended 1-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1]
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
Subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the wastewater facilities operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
wastewater facilities may at any time, on their own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an industrial user in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial
user is not a significant industrial user.
(3)
§ 508-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-3
1:838
unclean or noxious or impure so as to be actually or potentially harmful
or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, to
domestic, commercial, industrial or recreational use, or to livestock,
wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which a user unintentionally and
temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth
herein due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user, and
excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation thereof.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge
of wastewater into the Watertown wastewater facilities.
USER CHARGE SYSTEM — The method by which the annual debt
service, operations, maintenance and replacement costs for the
wastewater facilities will be recovered.
WASTEWATER — The liquid-carried waste products from whatever
source derived, together with such groundwater infiltration and surface
water as may be unintentionally present.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 508-9J of this
chapter.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — Individually or collectively, all parts and
facilities of the sewer system and wastewater treatment plant.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — Any facility, appurtenant
structures, or arrangement of devices used for the treatment of
wastewater.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WISCONSIN POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(WPDES) PERMIT — The written authorization of the state to discharge
from the Watertown Wastewater Treatment Plant into the Rock River.
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
mg/l milligrams per liter
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS total suspended solids
§ 508-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-3
1:839
U.S.C. United States Code
WPDES Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
§ 508-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-3
1:840
ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
§ 508-4. Use of public sewers required.
§ 508-5. Private wastewater disposal.
§ 508-6. Building sewers and connection.
A. State or federal permits. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City,
any wastewater or other polluted waters, or unpolluted waters, except
where appropriate state and/or federal permits have been obtained by
the discharger.
B. Private disposal. Except as provided in the Plumbing Code, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain private waste disposal facilities.
C. Mandatory connection. The owner of any building or property which is
located within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City,
and from which wastewater is discharged shall be required to connect
to a public sewer at his expense as per Chapter 319, Article I, of this
Code, after service of official notice to do so, contingent upon available
capacity of the downstream wastewater facilities.
D. Connection order. In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public
sewer in compliance with a notice given under Subsection C of this
section, or where a health hazard exists as determined by the City
Public Health Department, the City may undertake to have said
connection made and shall assess the cost thereof against the
benefitted property, and said assessment shall be a special assessment
against said property. Said special assessments shall be collected in the
same manner as other special assessments. Such assessments, when
levied, shall bear the same interest as sanitary sewer assessments.
A. Private disposal connection. Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of § 508-4 of this chapter, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of the State Plumbing Code.
B. Operation of private disposal system. The owner shall effectively
operate and continuously maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary, satisfactory and effective manner at all times, at
his own expense.
C. Compliance with state, federal and local ordinances. The provisions of
this section shall be in addition to any requirements established by
applicable federal, state or local ordinances and shall not relieve any
liability or obligation imposed by such laws and regulations.186
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 508-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-6
1:841
§ 508-7. Sanitary sewer and storm sewer construction.
A. Construction of connections; ordinances and codes. No person, unless
authorized, shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter or disturb any public sewer, private interceptor main sewer or
appurtenance thereof, except in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the applicable City ordinances and the Plumbing Code. All
such work requires permits from the City Inspection Division.
B. Expense to owner and City liability. All costs and expenses incidental to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by
the owner. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from
any loss or damage to the public sewer that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of a building sewer.
C. Construction procedures and materials. The size, slope, alignment,
materials of construction of a building sewer and the method to be used
in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the
trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of Water
Environment Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 and
applicable American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
standards shall apply.
D. Connection elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, such building drain shall be provided with a lifting
device approved by the Plumbing Inspector and discharged to the
building sewer.
E. Unpolluted water exclusion. No persons shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer as provided by the Plumbing Code.
A. Street opening permit and excavation bond. No person shall open any
public right-of-way for the purpose of connecting to any public sewer or
appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer, which permit shall not be issued unless an excavation bond is
posted with the Plumbing Inspector. No City personnel and no person
having a contract with the City of Watertown for doing any work on any
public right-of-way shall be required to obtain a written permit or post
an excavation bond. Method of excavation, backfilling and other work in
connection with the excavation shall conform to the requirements of the
City and/or all applicable provisions of the City ordinances.
§ 508-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-7
1:842
§ 508-8. Use of public sewers.
B. City inspection and approval of plans. No person shall construct storm
or sanitary sewers in the City without first obtaining the City's written
approval of the plans and specifications (except building drains or
building sewers). All storm and sanitary sewer installation is subject to
inspection during construction by the City Engineer or his authorized
representative. No such sewers shall be considered to be part of the
public sewer system unless accepted by the City Engineer.
C. Construction methods and materials. The size, slope, alignment,
material of construction, and methods to be used in excavation, placing
of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling and other work in connection with
the construction of sewers shall conform to the requirements of the City
Engineer's office.
D. Warranty of work. Work done by the Wastewater Department or by a
private contractor for wastewater shall be warranted for one year from
the completion of work. This warranty shall not apply to any damages
caused or repairs made necessary by a homeowner's negligence.
[Added by Ord. No. 10-29]
A. Unpolluted water exclusion. [Amended by Ord. No. 00-26]
(1) Purpose. In adopting this subsection, the Watertown Common
Council finds that the discharge of clear or unpolluted water from
roofs, surfaces, groundwater sump pumps, footing tile, swimming
pools, subsurface drainage, unpolluted cooling or process water, or
other natural precipitation into the City sewerage system will, and
has on numerous occasions in the past, flood and overload the
sanitary sewerage system to such an extent as to cause significant
and grave damage to the property of large numbers of City
residents. Such damage is caused by the backup of sewage into the
living quarters of residents and, in addition to other damage,
creates a hazard to health. The Common Council, therefore, finds it
essential to the maintenance of health, to the minimization of
damage to property, and to meet applicable state regulations that
the provisions of this subsection be strictly enforced to avoid
emergencies in the future.
(2) Definition and regulation. No water from any roof, surface,
groundwater sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool, subsurface
drainage, unpolluted cooling or process water, or other natural
precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewerage
system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures which
require, because of infiltration of clear or unpolluted water into
basements, crawl spaces and the like, a sump pump discharge
system shall have a permanently installed discharge line, which
shall not at any time discharge clear or unpolluted water into the
sanitary sewerage system except as herein provided. A permanent
installation shall be one which provides for year-round discharge
§ 508-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-8
1:843
capability to either the outside of the dwelling, building or
structure, or is connected to the City storm sewer, or discharges
through the curb and gutter to the street. It shall consist of a rigid
discharge line without valving or quick connections for altering the
path of discharge.
(3) Disconnection. If it is determined by City personnel that any
person, firm or corporation is causing clear or unpolluted water to
enter into the City sanitary sewerage system, within 60 days after
such inspection the property owner shall disconnect and/or remove
the same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewerage
system shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike
manner, as provided by the Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator
or his designated agent.
(4) Inspection.
(a) Every person owning a building that discharges into the City
sanitary sewerage system shall allow an employee of the City
of Watertown Wastewater Treatment Plant, or his designated
representative, to inspect the building to confirm that there is
no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary
sewerage system. In lieu of having the City inspect his
property, any person may furnish a certificate from a licensed
plumber, certifying that his property is in compliance with this
subsection.
(b) Any person refusing to allow his property to be inspected or
refusing to furnish a plumber's certificate within 14 days of the
date the City employees or their designated representatives
are denied admittance to his property shall immediately
become subject to the surcharge herein provided. Any property
found to violate this subsection shall make the necessary
changes to comply with this subsection and furnish proof of the
changes within 60 days.
(5) Sump pump inspections. Each sump pump connection identified
may be reinspected on a yearly basis in conjunction with yearly
water meter inspections.
(6) Surcharge. A surcharge of $100 per month is hereby imposed and
added to every sewer billing 60 days after inspection to owneroccupied
properties which are not in compliance with this
subsection. A surcharge of $100 per month is hereby imposed and
will be billed monthly 60 days after inspection to the owners of
properties not owner-occupied (rentals) which are not in
compliance with this subsection. All properties found during yearly
reinspection to have violated this subsection shall be subject to the
one-hundred-dollar-per-month penalty for all months between the
last inspection and the current inspection. [Amended by Ord. No.
01-45]
§ 508-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-8
1:844
(7) Temporary connection to sanitary sewer. If a determination is made
that a property owner is discharging clear or unpolluted water into
the sanitary sewer, upon recommendation by the Public Works
Commission the property owner may be allowed to continue to
discharge clear or unpolluted water into the sanitary sewer during
the winter months (November 1 to April 1) if there is no storm
sewer on the abutting street. The purpose of this exception is to
prevent the discharge of water onto the City street which would
produce the accumulation of ice and result in hazardous driving
conditions.
B. Disposal of unpolluted water. Stormwater and all other unpolluted
water shall be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet. The
discharge of unpolluted water into a natural outlet or storm sewer shall
comply with applicable state and federal regulations.
C. General discharge prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
will interfere with the operation or performance of the wastewater
facilities. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the City's
wastewater facilities, whether or not the user is subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the
following substances to the City's wastewater facilities:
(1) Any substance which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the
wastewater facilities, including but not limited to waste streams
with a closed cup flash point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the
test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides, and any other substance which the City, the
state or the EPA has notified the user is a fire or explosion hazard to
the system.
(2) Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers
or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, disposable
diapers, glass grinding or polishing wastes, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, bones,
entrails, sanitary napkins, paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
other paper products, grass clippings, gas, beer or distillery slops,
residues, chemical or paint residues and bulk solids.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than
9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater facilities.
§ 508-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-8
1:845
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the City's Wastewater Treatment Plant, or exceed the
limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
(5) Any substance which results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the wastewater facilities in a quantity that may
cause a public nuisance or hazard to life or acute worker health and
safety problems.
(6) Any substance which may cause the City's Wastewater Treatment
Plant's effluent or any other product of the wastewater treatment
plant, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
In no case shall a substance discharged to the wastewater
treatment plant cause the wastewater treatment plant to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, or the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(7) Any substance which will cause the wastewater treatment plant to
violate its WPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
wastewater treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction
into the wastewater treatment plant which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.)
unless the wastewater treatment plant is designed to accommodate
such temperature.
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration so as to
constitute a slug and/or may cause interference to the wastewater
treatment plant.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Water Systems Manager in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
§ 508-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-8
1:846
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(13) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° and 140° F. (0° and 60° C.).
D. Specific pollutant limitations.
(1) The following are the maximum concentrations acceptable for
discharge into the City of Watertown sewer system:
Recommended Pollutant Limitations
Pollutant
Concentration
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.15
Cadmium 0.50
Chromium 2.6
Copper 1.5
Cyanide 2.3
Lead 0.5
Mercury <0.0002
Molybdenum 0.1
Nickel 3.5
Selenium 0.24
Silver 5.0
Zinc 5.0
(2) Effluent limitations promulgated by federal or state authorities
shall apply in any instance where they are more stringent. Dilution
of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these
requirements shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
E. Hauled wastes. The City may allow wastewater which is hauled via
truck or other conveyance to be discharged to the wastewater facilities.
All discharges, including trucked or hauled pollutants, to the sewer
shall be as regulated by a sewer use permit/written agreement. Prior to
such discharge, the City may require a written report from the hauler
describing the quantity, source of wastewater, laboratory analysis of the
pollutants/constituents, and other information as deemed necessary by
the City. The City shall require that written permission and discharge
conditions be issued by the City to the hauler prior to discharge of any
hauled wastewater.
§ 508-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-8
1:847
F. Interceptors. Grease, oil or sand interceptors shall be provided in
accordance with § 419-8P of this Code. Those businesses required by
state law to have a grease trap and which fail to maintain them by
clearing them out regularly when full shall be fined $300 per event.
Each business shall keep a maintenance log on its grease traps.
G. Preliminary treatment facilities. Where preliminary treatment, flowequalization
facilities or interceptors are provided for any wastewater,
they shall be effectively operated and maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective condition by the owner at his expense and
shall be available for inspection by the authorized representatives of
the City at all reasonable times.
H. Monitoring facilities. The City may require to be provided and operated,
at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of the user's wastewater(s). The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises,
but the City may, when such a location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample
room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling
and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether
constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City's requirements
and all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
When required, construction shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the City.
I. Inspection and sampling.
(1) The City shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the City or its
representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The City,
approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the City, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing
their specific responsibilities. In all cases where tests are
conducted by the City for the purpose of checking to determine if a
§ 508-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-8
1:848
§ 508-9. Pretreatment regulations.
previously found violation of this chapter has been corrected, the
cost of such tests shall be charged to the user and added to
the user's sewer service charge. In those cases where the City
determines that the nature or volume of a particular user's
wastewater requires more frequent than normal testing, the City
may charge such user for the tests, after giving the user 10 days'
written notice of its intention to do so, and the cost thereof shall be
added to the user's sewer service charge. Where industrial wastes
are discharged into a public sewer, for the purpose of determining
sewer service charges, the user, at its own expense, shall sample
and analyze its discharge and report the test results to the City
in accordance with the requirements of the sewer service charge
portion of this chapter. All such tests shall be as ordered by the City
and shall be conducted by qualified personnel and in accordance
with applicable standards. Measurements of strength and volume,
for the purpose of determining sewer service charges, shall be
made in accordance with § 508-19 of this chapter.
(2) A minimum of four grab samples will be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other
pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples must be obtained
through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where
feasible. The wastewater facilities may waive flow-proportional
composite sampling for any industrial discharger that
demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible. In such
cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional
composite sample techniques or through a minimum of four grab
samples where the discharger demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
J. Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the City and any industrial concern whereby an individual
waste of unusual strength or character, not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards, may be accepted by the City for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, in accordance
with applicable ordinances and any supplemental agreement with the
City.
K. The Water Systems Manager may require yearly reports by dischargers
that discharge industrial waste and toxic and hazardous substances to
the City's Wastewater Treatment Plant. Reports would include but not
be limited to flow and organic or inorganic compounds that may be
present due to the industrial activity at that location.
A. General discharge prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
will interfere with the operation or performance of the City's
wastewater facilities. These general prohibitions apply to all such users
§ 508-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:849
of the City's wastewater facilities, whether or not the user is subject
to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. No user may
contribute to the City's wastewater facilities any of the substances
listed in § 508-8C.
B. National categorical pretreatment standards. National categorical
pretreatment standards as promulgated by the EPA pursuant to the Act
shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories.
Regulated dischargers shall be in compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standards in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(b). Upon the
promulgation of the categorical pretreatment standards for a particular
industrial subcategory, the categorical pretreatment standards, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in
that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed
under this chapter. The Water Systems Manager shall notify all affected
users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
C. Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. Where the
City's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of
pollutants limited by categorical pretreatment standards, the City may
apply to the approval authority (United States Environmental
Protection Agency/Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources) for
modification of specific limits in the categorical pretreatment
standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of
a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant in the influent to
the wastewater treatment plant to a less toxic or harmless state in the
effluent, which is achieved by the wastewater treatment plant in
samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in
40 CFR 403.7(d)(2) promulgated pursuant to the Act. The City may then
modify pollutant discharge limits in the categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled
and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained.
D. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
E. City's right of revision. The City reserves the right to establish by
ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the wastewater facilities if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in § 508-2A of this chapter.
F. Excessive discharge. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of
process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the limitations contained in the categorical pretreatment standards or
in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the City or state.
(Comment: Blending may be an acceptable means of complying with
some of the prohibitions set forth in § 508-8C, e.g., the pH prohibition.)
The wastewater facilities may impose mass limitations on industrial
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:850
users which are suspected of using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
G. Conversion of standards. The conversion of standards between
production-based limits, daily limits and concentration limits shall be as
specified in 40 CFR 403.6(c).
H. Regulatory actions. If wastewater containing any substance prohibited,
exceeding prescribed limits or violating restrictions imposed by this
chapter is discharged into the wastewater facilities, the City shall take
all actions necessary to:
(1) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater;
(2) Require an industrial user to demonstrate that in-plant
modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such
substances so as to be in conformance with this chapter;
(3) Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flowequalization
necessary to ensure complete compliance with this
chapter;
(4) Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to
pay all the additional cost or expense incurred by the City for any
damages caused by excess loads imposed on the wastewater
facilities; and
(5) Take such other remedial action, including discontinuation of
service, as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve
the purpose of this chapter.
I. Accidental discharges.
(1) Facilities required. Each industrial user shall provide protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. No user
which commences discharging to the City's wastewater facilities
after the effective date (September 1, 1991) of this chapter or
earlier shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the
wastewater facilities until accidental discharge procedures have
been approved by the Water Systems Manager. All existing users
shall complete such a plan within 90 days after the effective date of
this chapter. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures by the Water Systems Manager shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility
as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Notification of accidental discharge. In the case of an accidental
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:851
telephone and notify the City of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume. Furthermore, such industrial user shall take immediate
action to contain and minimize the accidental discharge to the
wastewater facilities so as to prevent interference with and/or
damage to the wastewater facilities and notify the City of the
corrective actions. Within five days following the accidental
discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the Water Systems
Manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater facilities, fish
kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this section or other applicable
law.
(3) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place, advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a
dangerous discharge to occur, or who may suffer from such a
discharge, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(4) Slug control plan. The wastewater facilities will evaluate at least
once every two years whether each significant industrial user
needs a plan to control slug discharges. If the wastewater facilities
determine that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain,
at a minimum, the following elements:
(a) A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges.
(b) A description of stored chemicals.
(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the wastewater facilities
of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a
prohibition under § 508-8C, with procedures for follow-up
written notification within five days.
(d) The necessary procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of
storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(e) Industrial users shall immediately notify the Water Systems
Manager of any discharge that could cause problems at the
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:852
POTW (publicly owned treatment works), such as any slug
loading in violation of § NR 211.10(2), Wis. Adm. Code, or of
any changes at the facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge and the need for a slug control plan as required
by § NR 211.235(4)(a), Wis. Adm. Code. [Added 1-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-1]
(5) Notification of hazardous waste discharge. Each industrial user
shall notify the wastewater facilities, the EPA Region V Waste
Management Division Director, and the DNR Bureau of Solid Waste
Management in writing of any discharge into the wastewater
facilities treatment system of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
(a) Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).
If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of
such waste per calendar month to the wastewater facilities, the
notification shall also contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the
industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream
discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of
the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications
must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences.
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the hazardous waste notification
requirements during a calendar month in which they discharge
15 kilograms or less of nonacute hazardous wastes. Discharge
of any quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40
CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification.
J. Wastewater discharge permits.
(1) General permits.
(a) All industrial users that discharge toxic pollutants or are
capable of discharging toxic pollutants to the wastewater
facilities or other industrial users, at the discretion of the City,
shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit.
(b) Existing industrial dischargers which will require a permit
after changing their wastewater volume and/or characteristics
shall submit a permit application at least 90 days before the
proposed process wastewater is discharged to the sewerage
system. A one-hundred-eighty-day baseline report may be
submitted with the permit application to provide some of the
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:853
data required for the permit application. New dischargers shall
submit estimates for those required items where actual data
is not yet available. The permit application shall be signed by
an authorized representative of the industrial discharger and
certified by a qualified engineer.
(2) Permit application. Industrial users required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the City
an application in the form prescribed by the City and accompanied
by a permit fee as specified in Subsection J(8) of this section. New
or existing industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the
City's wastewater facilities or, for existing industrial uses, within 90
days of change of their discharge flow.
(a) In support of the application, the industrial user shall submit,
in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
[1] Name, address and location (if different from the address).
[2] Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number according
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of
Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.
[3] Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but
not limited to those mentioned in §§ 508-8 and 508-9 of
this chapter, as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA
pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40
CFR Part 136, as amended.
[4] Time and duration of wastewater contribution.
[5] Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any.
[6] Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
[7] General description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises, including all materials which
are or could be discharged.
[8] The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any city, state or national
categorical pretreatment standards and a statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:854
additional operation and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
categorical pretreatment standards.
[9] If additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance will be required to meet the categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements,
the industrial user shall submit the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than
the compliance date established for the applicable
categorical pretreatment standard; the following
conditions shall apply to this schedule:
[a] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in
the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements
(e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.). No increment shall
exceed nine months.
[b] Not later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the
Water Systems Manager, including, as a minimum,
whether or not the industrial user complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if
not, the date on which the industrial user expects to
comply with this increment of progress; the reason for
delay; and the steps being taken by the industrial user
to return the construction to the schedule established.
In no event shall more than nine months elapse
between such progress reports to the Water Systems
Manager.
[10] Each product produced, by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production.
[11] Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
[12] Number of employees and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
[13] Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:855
(b) The City will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue a
wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and
conditions provided herein.
(3) Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of
national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements, the wastewater discharge permit of industrial users
subject to such standards or requirements shall be revised to
require compliance with such standards within the time frame
prescribed by such standards. Where an industrial user subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements has not previously submitted an application for a
wastewater discharge permit as required by this subsection, the
industrial user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national
categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements;
in addition, the industrial user with an existing wastewater
discharge permit shall submit to the Water Systems Manager
within 180 days after the promulgation of applicable national
categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements
the information required by Subsection J(2)(a)[8] and [9].
(4) Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges, and fees established by the City. Permits
may contain the following:
(a) The schedule of charges and fees as listed in Subsection J(8)
for the wastewater to be discharged to the publicly owned
treatment works (POTW).
(b) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(c) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(d) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities.
(e) Requirements for installation and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities.
(f) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests, and reporting schedule.
(g) Compliance schedules.
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:856
(h) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports [see Subsection J(7)].
(i) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge, as specified by the City, and
affording the City access thereto.
(j) Requirements for notification to the City of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the POTW.
(k) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per
§ 508-10A.
(l) Requirement that, if an industrial user monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the wastewater facilities, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in reports and
submitted to the wastewater facilities.
(m) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(5) Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a period of five years.
The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days
prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing permit. The
terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
by the City during the term of the permit as limitations or
requirements identified in §§ 508-8 and 508-9 are modified or as
other just causes exist. The industrial user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
[Amended by Ord. No. 06-19]
(6) Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a
new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed
operation without the approval of the City. Any succeeding owner
or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit.
(7) Reporting requirements for permittee. All industrial users subject
to categorical pretreatment standards shall, at a minimum, comply
with the reporting requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.12,
including but not limited to baseline monitoring reports, periodic
compliance reports, and compliance date reports.
(a) Compliance date reports. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment requirements or, in the case of a
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:857
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the City's wastewater facilities, any user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements shall submit to the Water Systems
Manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of
all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements and the average and maximum
daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which
are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements. The report shall state whether
the applicable categorical pretreatment and pretreatment
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional operation and maintenance and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial user into
compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and pretreatment requirements. This statement
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified to by a registered professional
qualified to certify the report.
(b) Periodic compliance reports. Any industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements, after the compliance date of such categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements or, in
the case of a new source, after commencement of the
discharge into the City's wastewater facilities, shall submit to
the Water Systems Manager during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently in the categorical
pretreatment standards or by the Water Systems Manager, a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment requirements. In addition, this
report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the
reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow. At the
discretion of the Water Systems Manager and in consideration
of such factors as local high- or low-flow rates, holidays, budget
cycles, etc., the Water Systems Manager may agree to alter the
months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
[Amended 1-5-1016 by Ord. No. 16-1]
[1] The Water Systems Manager may impose mass limitations
on industrial users which are using dilution to meet
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements or in other cases where the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. Reports of
permittees shall contain all results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the
nature and concentration, or production and mass, where
required by the Water Systems Manager. The reports
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:858
required in this section shall be based upon data obtained
through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, which data is
representative of conditions occurring during the
reporting period. The frequency of monitoring by the
discharger shall be as prescribed in Ch. NR 211, Wis. Adm.
Code.
[2] Sampling and analysis shall be performed to identify the
concentration or mass of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process according to the
requirements of the applicable categorical pretreatment
standard and the control authority. Both daily maximum
and average values shall be reported. Samples shall be
representative of daily operations. A minimum of four grab
samples per day shall be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. All
other samples shall be twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composites, except when the industrial user demonstrates
to the control authority's satisfaction that flowproportional
sampling is infeasible. When flowproportional
sampling is infeasible, the industrial user may
use time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling if the industrial user has shown to the control
authority's satisfaction that these methods provide
representative samples of the effluent being discharged.
Where alternative sampling is authorized by the control
authority, the samples shall be representative of the
discharge, and the decision to allow alternative methods
shall be documented in the industrial user's file. Multiple
grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period
may be composited prior to analysis, provided appropriate
protocols specified in Ch. NR 219, Wis. Adm. Code, and in
EPA and department guidance are followed. Samples for
cyanide, total phenols and sulfides may be composited in
the laboratory or in the field. Samples for volatile organics
and oil and grease may be composited in the laboratory.
Other samples may be composited using approved
methodologies as authorized by the control authority.
[3] Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established in § NR 219, Wis. Adm. Code,
and/or established by the Administrator pursuant to
Section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part
136, and amendments thereto, or with any other test
procedures approved by the Administrator. (Comment:
Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a sampling and
analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:859
"Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of
Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April 1977,
and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and
analytical procedures approved by the Administrator.)
[4] These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis
performed in the period covered by the report and
performed in accordance with the techniques described in
40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR
Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
Administrator determines that the sampling and analytical
techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136 are inappropriate
for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures suggested by the wastewater
facilities or other persons, approved by the Administrator.
This sampling and analysis may be performed by the
wastewater facilities in lieu of the significant
noncategorical user. Where the wastewater facilities itself
collects all the information required for the report, the
noncategorical significant industrial user will not be
required to submit the report.
(c) Notification of changed discharge. All industrial users shall
promptly notify the wastewater facilities in advance of any
change in their industrial operations which may have an effect
upon the waste and wastewaters generated or any substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous
wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial
notification under this Subsection J. In such event, the
wastewater facilities may add to, change or modify the
conditions of the permit in accordance with this Subsection J.
(d) Certification statement. All wastewater discharge permit
applications and industrial user reports must contain the
following certification statement and be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user:
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:860
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons
who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is
to the best of my knowledge and belief true, accurate and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."
(8) Charges and fees. The City may adopt charges and fees for the
recovery of costs for the implementation of the City's pretreatment
program established herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by the pretreatment regulations and are separate from all
other fees chargeable by the City. These charges and fees may
include the wastewater discharge permit fee, sampling charge, and
laboratory analysis charge. These charges and fees shall be
assessed to the industrial users through the Water Systems
Manager and be collected by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(a) Permit fee. The City will charge the industries that are
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit per this
Subsection J a permit fee as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule.187
(b) Sampling charge. The City will assess the industries a
sampling charge for sampling their wastewater with City
equipment and manpower. The sampling charge, per site, is as
set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule per sampling day for twenty-four-hour composite
samples or per grab sample.188
(c) Laboratory analysis charge. The City will assess the industries
a laboratory analysis charge to recover the City's expenses for
analyzing industrial wastewater samples for specific
pollutants. The charges for toxic organic pollutants and toxic
inorganic pollutants will be determined by the commercial
laboratory retained by the City to perform the analyses.
(d) Additional costs. Additional costs as established by the City will
be charged to industries on a case-by-case basis for the
following items:
[1] Fees for filing appeals.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:861
[2] Fees for consistent removal (by the City) of pollutants
otherwise subject to categorical pretreatment standards.
[3] Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained therein.
(9) Records retention. All dischargers subject to this chapter shall
retain and preserve for no less than three years any records, books,
documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all
summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical
analyses made by or in behalf of a user in connection with its
discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the
subject of any enforcement or litigation activities brought by the
City pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the user
until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of
limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.
(10) Revocation of permit. Any user which violates the following
conditions of this chapter or applicable state and federal
regulations is subject to having its permit revoked in accordance
with the procedures of § 508-10 of this chapter:
(a) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
(b) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations
or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring.
(d) Violations of conditions of the permit.
K. Pretreatment.
(1) Required facilities. Industrial users shall provide necessary
wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and
shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment requirements within the time limitations
as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations or
pretreatment requirements. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be acceptable to
the City before construction of the facility. The review of such plans
and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City prior to
the industrial user's initiation of the changes. All records relating to
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:862
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements shall be made available to officials of
the EPA or approval authority upon request.
(2) Annual publication. A list of industrial users which, at any time
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment requirements shall be annually
published in the local newspaper. The notification shall also
summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during
the same twelve-month period. A significant industrial user has
been in significant noncompliance if any of the criteria in
Subsection K(2)(a) to (g) apply. A nonsignificant industrial user has
been in significant noncompliance if criteria in Subsection K(2)(c),
(d) or (h) apply: [Amended 1-5-1016 by Ord. No. 16-1]
(a) Sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements of the
industrial user's wastewater for any of the same pollutant
taken during a six-month period exceeded by any magnitude
the daily maximum limit or the average of any numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including an
instantaneous limit;
(b) Thirty-three percent or more of all the measurements of the
industrial user's wastewater for any of the same pollutant
taken during a six-month period equaled or exceeded the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including an
instantaneous limit, multiplied by either 1.4 for BOD, TSS and
fats-oil-grease; 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH; or
exceeded a pH limit by 0.4 standard units;
(c) The control authority has reason to believe that the industrial
user has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference, pass-through or endangerment of the
health of POTW personnel or the general public because of a
violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement;
(d) The industrial user discharges a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the
environment or has otherwise resulted in the POTW's exercise
of its emergency authority to halt or prevent a discharge;
(e) The industrial user failed to meet, by 90 days or more, a
milestone date contained in a compliance schedule within a
local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction or attaining compliance;
(f) The industrial user has failed to provide within 45 days of a
deadline a required report containing all required monitoring
results and other information, such as a baseline monitoring
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:863
report, ninety-day compliance report, periodic self-monitoring
report or report on adherence with a compliance schedule;
(g) The industrial user has failed to accurately report
noncompliance; or
(h) The control authority has determined that any other violation
or group of violations by the industrial user has adversely
affected the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(3) Industrial user bypass provisions.
(a) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams
from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
(b) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage
to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss
of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does
not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(c) An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does
not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be
violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to
assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of Subsection K(3)(e) and (f).
(d) If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the wastewater facilities at least
10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(e) An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
wastewater facilities within 24 hours from the time it becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the industrial user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration
of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
(f) Bypass is prohibited, and the wastewater facilities may take
enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass,
unless:
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:864
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods
of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
[3] The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Subsection K(3)(e).
(g) The wastewater facilities may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the wastewater
facilities determines that it will meet the three conditions
listed in Subsection K(3)(f).
L. Residuals generated. Sludges, floats, skimmings, etc., generated by an
industrial user or a commercial pretreatment system shall not be
placed into the City's wastewater facilities. Such residuals shall be
contained, transported and disposed of by haulers in accordance with
federal, state and local regulations.
M. Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public and
governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that
the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the
user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of
a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the Wisconsin pollutant discharge elimination
system (WPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment program; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information.
N. Amalgam management at dental offices.
(1) This subsection applies to all dental offices that place or remove
amalgam. If work in a dental office is limited to work that does not
involve placing or removing amalgam, such as orthodontics,
periodontics, oral and maxillofacial surgery, endodontics or
prosthodontics, then this subsection does not apply.
(2) All dental offices shall implement best management practices for
amalgam as established by the Wisconsin Dental Association.
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-9
1:865
(3) Within the shortest reasonable time, but not later than January 1,
2009, every vacuum system where amalgam is placed or removed
shall include an amalgam separator that meets the criteria of the
International Standards Organization (ISO 11143). Dental offices
shall install, operate and maintain the amalgam separator
according to instructions provided by the manufacturer. The
amalgam separator shall have a design and capacity appropriate
for the size and type of vacuum system.
(4) On or before January 1, 2008, each dental office shall submit a
report to the Water Systems Manager that certifies the
implementation of the best management practices required by
Subsection N(2).
(5) On or before June 30, 2008, each dental office shall provide a
schedule to the Water Systems Manager for the installation of the
amalgam separator required by Subsection N(3).
(6) On or before September 30, 2008, each dental office shall provide a
report to the Water Systems Manager, providing the following
information:
(a) If installation of the amalgam separator is complete, then the
report shall identify the installation date, the manufacturer and
the model name.
(b) If installation of the amalgam separator is incomplete, then the
report shall briefly explain the delay, provide an installation
schedule, and identify the manufacturer and the model name of
the amalgam separator that will be installed.
(7) If a dental office has provided a report according to Subsection
N(6)(b), then the dental office shall notify the Water Systems
Manager of the completion of the installation within five days after
completion.
(8) The Watertown Wastewater Treatment Plant shall provide forms for
reporting the information required by Subsection N(4), (5), (6), and
(7).
(9) From the contractors used to remove amalgam waste, dental
offices shall obtain records for each shipment, showing the volume
or mass of amalgam waste shipped, the name and address of
destination, and the name and address of the contractor. Dental
offices shall maintain these records for a minimum of five years.
(10) Dental offices shall allow entry to their premises by an employee or
representative of the Watertown Wastewater Treatment Plant to
inspect the vacuum system, amalgam separator, and amalgam
waste storage areas.
§ 508-9 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-9
1:866
§ 508-10. Enforcement procedures.
(11) Inspections shall occur during the normal operating schedule of
the dental office. The Watertown Wastewater Treatment Plant
employee or representative shall inspect dental offices according to
appointments made in advance, as long as this notice does not
impede enforcement of this subsection.
(12) If a dental office is implementing the best management practices
required by Subsection N(2) and is operating and maintaining the
amalgam separator required by Subsection N(3), then any
numerical discharge limit for mercury established in any other
section of this chapter does not apply.
(13)On or before January 15, 2009, and the same date in all years in the
future, a report must be submitted to the City of Watertown
Wastewater Treatment Plant at P.O. Box 477, Watertown, Wisconsin
53094. The report must state dates the amalgam separator was
emptied along with a copy from a certified contractor which
identifies the contractor and amount removed.
A. Slug or accidental discharges.
(1) Users shall notify the City immediately upon having a slug or
accidental discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of
this chapter in order to enable countermeasures to be taken by the
City to minimize damage to wastewater facilities and the receiving
waters. The notification shall include the location of discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. The
City may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary,
in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to
the environment, causes interference to the wastewater facilities
or causes the City to violate any condition of its WPDES permit. Any
person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service
and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
wastewater facilities or endangerment to any individuals. The City
shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. Within five days of the date of
occurrence, the user shall submit to the City a detailed written
statement describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences.
§ 508-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-10
1:867
(2) If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation,
the user shall notify the wastewater facilities within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis
to the wastewater facilities within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. The Water Systems Manager shall determine the
sampling and analysis required to demonstrate compliance. Where
the control authority has performed the original sampling and
analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control authority shall
perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies such
user of the violation and requires the user to perform repeat
analysis. [Amended 1-5-1016 by Ord. No. 16-1]
(3) Notice of noncompliance. Whenever the City finds that any user has
violated or is violating this chapter, the wastewater discharge
permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
herein, the City shall issue to the user a notice of noncompliance
for violations, except where serious noncompliance justifies
immediate issuance of a notice of violation. The notice of
noncompliance will explain the nature of the noncompliance and
require that the user, within 30 days of the date of the notice, file a
plan for the expeditious correction of the noncompliance. The plan
shall be reviewed by the City and approved if the plan
demonstrates that the proposed action will eliminate the violation
in a timely manner. If the user does not submit a plan acceptable to
the City, fails to submit a plan, or does not comply with the
submitted plan, the City may take action in accordance with
Subsection B. [Amended by Ord. No. 88-80]
B. Notification of violation. Whenever the City finds that any user is
violating this chapter, the wastewater discharge permit or any
prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the City may
serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for satisfactory
correction thereof shall be submitted to the City by the user.
C. Show cause hearing.
(1) Notice of the hearing. The City may order any user which causes or
allows conduct prohibited by this section to show cause before the
Public Works Commission why enforcement action should not be
taken against such user. A notice shall be served on the user,
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Public
Works Commission regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action, and
directing the user to show cause before the Public Works
Commission why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10
days before the hearing. The notice of the hearing may be served
on any agent or officer of a corporation.
§ 508-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-10
1:868
(2) Hearing officials. The Common Council has designated the
following as members of the hearing board: Public Works
Commission, City Engineer, Water Systems Manager and City
Attorney.
(a) The hearing board will:
[1] Issue, in the name of the Common Council, notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any
matter involved in such hearings.
[2] Take the evidence.
(b) The hearing officials will make a determination on the course
of action to be taken by the City.
(3) Transcripts. At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony
taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript so recorded will be made available to any member of the
public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual
charges thereof.
(4) Issuance of orders. After the Public Works Commission has
reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user
responsible for the prohibited conduct. The order may direct that,
following a specified time period, sewer service be discontinued
unless the problem is corrected and additional measures are taken
to prevent future problems. Further orders and directives as are
necessary and appropriate may be issued. The orders may also
revoke the user's wastewater discharge permit.
D. Legal action. If any user discharges domestic wastewater, industrial
wastes or other wastes into the City's wastewater facilities contrary to
the provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the City, the City Attorney may commence
an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Circuit
Court.
E. Civil and criminal penalties. Any user which is found to have violated an
order of the Public Works Commission or which willfully or negligently
failed to comply with any provisions of this chapter and orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder shall be subject to fines as
established in this subsection. The City shall have authority to seek or
assess civil and criminal penalties in at least the amount of $1,000 per
day for each violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement. Each
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided
herein, the City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs,
court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate
suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. In default of
§ 508-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-10
1:869
payment of such forfeiture and costs, said violator shall be imprisoned
for a period not to exceed 30 days. The following administrative fines
may be assessed against violators of this chapter:
(1) For an accidental discharge, the violator shall be fined not less than
$50 for each offense.
(2) For failure to report an accidental discharge, the violator shall be
fined not less than $1,500 for each offense.
(3) For significant noncompliance in a six-month period, the violator
shall be fined not less than $250 per day of documented violations.
(4) For significant noncompliance in two consecutive six-month
periods, the violator shall be fined not less than $500 per day of
documented violations.
(5) For violations which result in the wastewater facilities violating its
WPDES permit, the violator shall be fined not less than $1,000 per
day of WPDES violation.
(6) For failure to provide reports on schedule, the violator shall be
fined not less than $100 for reports 0 to 14 days late, not less than
$250 for reports 15 to 30 days late, not less than $500 for reports
31 to 60 days late, and not less than $500 plus $100 per day for
reports more than 61 days late.
F. Costs of damage. Any user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, or which has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction,
damage or other impairment to the City's wastewater facilities, shall be
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage caused by such
violation or discharge. The City may add to the user's charge and fees
the costs assessed or incurred for any cleaning, repair or replacement
work caused by the violation or discharge, or may bill the user directly.
Refusal to pay the assessed or incurred costs shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
G. Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit, or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not less than $1,000. In default of payment, said
violator shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 508-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-10
1:870
ARTICLE III
Sewer Service Charge
§ 508-11. General provisions.
§ 508-12. Delinquency.
§ 508-13. Funds from sewer service charges.
The funds received from the collection of the charges authorized by this
chapter shall be deposited as collected. The user charge portion shall
be used for operation, maintenance and replacement costs and the debt
A. Sewer service charge recipient. The sewer service charges provided for
in this article are hereby levied and assessed upon each lodge, dwelling
unit, parcel of land, building or premises having any connection with or
discharging either directly or indirectly into the sewer system.
B. Annually determined charges. The City shall annually audit the system
to determine and fix the unit costs for use of the wastewater facilities on
the basis of a flat rate and flow charge and determine surcharge unit
costs for BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia
nitrogen and any other pollutant, taking into consideration the cost of
treatment of such wastewater, and may increase or decrease such unit
cost as often and in such amounts as may reasonably be required to
accomplish the purposes of this article. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-14]
C. Billing. The City shall compute the amounts due the City for sewer
service charges and render a statement thereof, at periodic intervals, to
the owner or occupant of any premises using the wastewater facilities.
All amounts due hereunder shall be payable at the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer.
A. Additional charges. If sewer service charges are not paid in full on the
due date, a charge of 1 1/2% per month shall be made on the balance.
[Amended by Ord. No. 85-31]
B. Effect of failure to receive bill. Failure to receive a bill does not relieve a
party of his/her obligation, nor relieve him/her of payment of the
penalty if not paid before the due date. Claims or complaints must be
made within five days from due date of bill. [Amended by Ord. No.
10-29]
C. Failure to receive bills. A nonresident owner of each lot or parcel of real
estate with a building located thereon in the City of Watertown,
Wisconsin, and which is subject to a sewer service charge shall notify
the Water Department of the City of Watertown, Wisconsin, of his
present address. Failure of any person to receive bills for sewer service
charges shall not be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor shall
such failure result in an extension of the period of time during which
the net bill should have been paid. [Amended by Ord. No. 10-29]
§ 508-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-13
1:871
service portion shall be used for debt service, including all reserves and
other funds required to be established and maintained under authorized
bonds and improvements of the wastewater facilities, except that the
portion of any such funds which is limited to a particular use by applicable
state or federal rules or regulations shall be used in compliance with such
restrictions.
§ 508-14. Unit cost categories.
The cost to be recovered pursuant to this chapter and the cost to be fixed
by the City in § 508-11B shall be determined and allocated in each of the
following categories:
§ 508-15. Determination of fixed rate charge. [Last amended by
Ord. No. 11-29]
A fixed rate charge will be assessed to each user for each connection to
private interceptor main sewer or wastewater facilities by water meter size.
§ 508-16. Determination of surcharges. [Amended by Ord. No.
12-14]
A surcharge will be assessed to any user discharging BOD, suspended
solids, total phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen loadings to the wastewater
facilities in excess of those concentrations defined in § 508-3 and shall be
determined as follows:
A. Category "A" (user charge system). Operation, maintenance and
replacement of existing and proposed wastewater facilities.
A. For Category "A." Unit costs for BOD and suspended solids shall be
calculated by apportioning the Category "A" costs associated with the
treatment of BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia
nitrogen that year and then dividing each apportioned cost by the total
estimated BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia
nitrogen to be received at the wastewater treatment plant in that year.
The formula for this unit cost calculation is:
BOD: Annual Category "A" costs associated
with BOD removal
Estimated annual BOD in 100 lbs.
= $__________/100 lbs.
BOD
SS: Annual Category "A" costs associated
with SS removal
Estimated annual SS in 100 lbs.
= $__________/100 lbs. SS
TP: Annual Category "A" costs associated
with TP removal
Estimated annual TP in lbs.
= $__________ lb. TP
§ 508-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-16
1:872
§ 508-17. Determination of flow charges.
AN: Annual Category "A" costs associated
with AN removal
Estimated annual AN in lbs.
= $__________ lb. AN
(1) The BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia
nitrogen loads in excess of the allowable concentrations shall be
utilized to determine the surcharge. The excess BOD, suspended
solids, total phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen load shall be
calculated by subtracting the allowable BOD, suspended solids,
total phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen concentrations from the
actual concentration discharged and then determining the excess
pounds of BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia
nitrogen. The formula for this calculation is as follows:
Excess BOD: (Actual mg/l - 175 mg/l BOD) x (user's billable flow
in mg) x 8.34 = lbs. BOD
Excess SS: (Actual mg/l - 170 mg/l SS) x (user's billable flow in
mg) x 8.34 = lbs. SS
Excess total phosphorus (TP): (Actual mg/l - 6 mg/l total
phosphorus) x (user's billable flow in mg) x 8.34 = lbs. total
phosphorus
Excess ammonia nitrogen (AN): (Actual mg/l - 25 mg/l AN) x
(user's billable flow in mg) x 8.34 = lbs. ammonia nitrogen
(2) The surcharge shall be calculated by multiplying the excess pounds
of BOD, suspended solids, total phosphorus and ammonia by the
appropriate unit cost for each category. The formula for this
calculation is as follows:
BOD: ($__________/100 lbs. BOD) x (excess BOD per billing period
in 100 lbs.) = $__________
SS: ($__________/100 lbs. SS) x (excess SS per billing period in
100 lbs.) = $__________
Total phosphorus: ($__________/lbs. total phosphorus) x (excess
total phosphorus per billing period in lbs.) = $__________
Ammonia nitrogen: ($__________/lbs. ammonia nitrogen) x (excess
ammonia nitrogen per billing period in lbs.) = $__________
A. Determination of billable flow and unit flow charges. The unit flow cost
for each category for users of the wastewater facilities shall be
determined by subtracting from the total annual category costs the
estimated revenue from the flat rate charge and the surcharges for that
year for each respective category and then dividing the remainder of
the costs to be recovered by the billable flow. [Amended by Ord. No.
80-2; Ord. No. 10-29; Ord. No. 11-20]
§ 508-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-17
1:873
(1) Billable flow will be determined annually by the sum of the
following:
(a) Measured industrial flow discharged to the sewer system.
(b) Residential flow discharged to the sewer system.
(c) Commercial, institutional and governmental flow discharged to
the sewer system.
(d) Estimated flow from all private well water users discharged to
the sewer system.
(2) The formula for the unit cost calculation for each category is as
follows:
Total
Annual
Category
Costs
Estimated
Annual
Revenue
from Flat
Rate
Charges
Estimated Annual
Revenue from
Surcharges = $__________
Estimated Billable Flow (as defined above)
in 1,000 Gallons
1,000 Gallons
B. Determination of flow charge. The flow charges to users of the
wastewater facilities shall be the product of the unit cost determined in
accordance with Subsection A(1) and that portion of the billable flow
attributed to each domestic, commercial, institutional, governmental
and industrial user. The formula for this calculation is as follows: (Unit
Flow Cost per 1,000 Gallons) x (User's Billable Flow in 1,000 Gallons) =
User Flow Charge.
C. Nonsewer water use. Domestic and residential users of the wastewater
facilities may receive a credit for water usage that is not discharged to
the sanitary sewer system of the City of Watertown for each lot or
parcel of real estate containing a building which is occupied and used
as a residence owned by the user, provided that such users obtain a
properly installed and City-approved deduct meter. Only one deduct
meter shall be allowed for each lot or parcel of residential real estate
owned by the user. Deduct meters will be available for use from the
Water Department according to the fee schedule outlined in Subsection
C(1) and (2) below, as may be modified from time to time. This
subsection shall take effect on September 30, 2011. [Amended by
Ord. No. 11-15; Ord. No. 11-20]
(1) Each water user may obtain a deduct meter by paying a security
deposit as set by the Common Council and provided under separate
fee schedule for each deduct meter, which shall be refunded to the
§ 508-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-17
1:874
§ 508-18. Establishment of sewer service charges. [Last amended
6-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15]
water user upon return to the Water Department of the deduct
meter in good working order by the user.189
(2) Each water user may retain the deduct meter for an annual fee as
set by the Common Council and provided under separate fee
schedule for the entire calendar year from January through
December. In order not to be billed for a subsequent year, the water
user must return the deduct meter to the Water Department on or
before December 31 of the rental year.190
(3) In order for each lot or parcel of residential real estate to be
eligible for a nonsewer water use credit, the owner/water user
must demonstrate from the prior year's history of water usage for
that subject parcel that the actual water usage incurred during the
months of June, July and August of the prior year exceeds the water
usage by at least four units per month of flow charges, calculated
under § 508-18B(3) of this chapter, over the actual water usage
incurred during the months of January, February and March of the
prior year.
(4) The Water Systems Manager or his or her designee may allow
exceptions to this policy as he or she deems necessary.
A. Effective date. The sewer service charges hereby established shall be
effective June 16, 2015, January 2, 2016 and January 2, 2017.
B. Sewer service charge. The sewer service charge shall be as follows:
(1) Fixed rate charges. There shall be a fixed rate charge for each
connection to the wastewater facilities. This charge shall consist of
the following (in Table 1).
(2) Surcharges.
(a) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). Charges found in Table 1
shall be per 100 pounds of five-day BOD in excess of the BOD
load that would result from a concentration of 175 mg/l in the
user's wastewater.
(b) Suspended solids. Charges found in Table 1 shall be per 100
pounds of suspended solids in excess of the suspended solids
load that results from a concentration of 170 mg/l in the user's
wastewater.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 508-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-18
1:875
§ 508-19. Measurements of strength and volume.
(c) Phosphorus. Charges found in Table 1 shall be per pound of
phosphorus in excess of the phosphorus load that results from
a concentration of six ppm in the user's wastewater.
(d) Ammonia nitrogen. Charges found in Table 1 shall be per
pound of ammonia nitrogen in excess of the ammonia nitrogen
load that results from a concentration of 25 ppm in the user's
wastewater.
(3) Flow charges for users of the wastewater facilities. This charge as
found in Table 1 shall be based on 100 cubic feet (748 gallons).
Table 1
(By Effective Date)
6/16/2015 1/2/2016 1/2/2017
Volume Charge per 100
Cubic Feet:
$3.01 $3.25 $3.51
Surcharge Rates
BOD charge per 100
pounds
$63.86 $68.97 $74.49
SS charge per 100
pounds
$69.38 $74.93 $80.92
Phosphorus charge per
pound
$6.88 $7.43 $8.02
Ammonia nitrogen
charge per pound
$1.50 $1.62 $1.75
Monthly Meter Charge
(Fixed Rate)
5/8-inch $18.67 $20.17 $21.78
1-inch $26.41 $28.52 $30.80
1 1/2-inch $39.46 $42.62 $46.03
2-inch $55.20 $59.61 $64.38
3-inch $91.79 $99.13 $107.06
4-inch $196.43 $212.14 $229.12
6-inch $274.92 $296.92 $320.67
A. Volume.
(1) Flow for billing purposes for each user will be determined as
follows:
(a) By means of a special wastewater measuring device installed
in a sewer or other conduit carrying the wastewater flow;
§ 508-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-19
1:876
(b) By means of the amount of water used, determined from a
water meter in the user's public or private supply system;
(c) On the basis of the amount of water used, determined as
described heretofore in Subsection A(1)(b), but adjusted for
product losses or adjusted for waters which are legitimately
discharged to storm sewers. Such adjustments will be made
only upon application by the user, and only when the
application is properly supported by documentation which will
positively establish the amount of such product use or
discharges to storm sewers. Application for such adjustments
shall be made to the Water Systems Manager; or
(d) On the basis of the amount of water use, determined as
described in Subsection A(1)(b), but in the case of residential
users only, adjusted to reflect winter water consumption only.
(2) All private water supplies contributing to discharge to the sanitary
sewer system shall be equipped with a meter approved by the
Water Systems Manager, by and at the expense of the user. The
total amount of water used from such private supplies shall be
reported to the Water Systems Manager at a minimum each
quarter. The user shall provide for and permit access to such meter
by a representative of the wastewater treatment plant. Such
meters on private water supplies will not be required where
measurement is provided for the flow discharged to the sewer
system.
B. Strength. All industrial users who discharge other than domestic
wastes, or wastes from sanitary conveniences, or any other user
required by the City shall furnish the City with information monthly
concerning the concentration of BOD, suspended solids, total
phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen discharged to the wastewater
facilities. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the wastewater
facilities and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-14]
(1) Surcharge. Such information shall be used to determine monthly
surcharges, if any, as required under § 508-18B, Sewer service
charge, of this chapter.
(2) Sampling. Such information shall be obtained from the analysis of
no less than one flow-composited sample covering the operating
period of the facility. If the discharge is made through more than
one connection to the wastewater facilities, such sampling program
shall include all discharges.
(3) Monitoring facilities. Any industry required to pay a surcharge
under § 508-18B, Sewer service charge, of this chapter, or any
other user required by the City, shall install a suitable monitoring
§ 508-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-19
1:877
structure, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes to provide daily
wastewater characteristics information. Such structure and
equipment shall be constructed at the owner's expense in
accordance with the plans approved by the City and shall be
maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
(4) Waiver of monitoring facilities. The City may waive the requirement
for installation of monitoring facilities described in Subsection B(3)
if, upon application by the industry, it can be demonstrated that
results equitable to both the City and industry can be obtained
through the use of manually collected composite samples. If no
special structure is required, the monitoring structure shall be
considered to be the manhole required for periodic sampling in
accordance with Ch. SPS 382, Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) Waiver of daily sampling. The City may waive the requirement for
daily wastewater characteristic information for industries paying a
surcharge if, upon application by the industry, it can be
demonstrated that results equitable to both the City and the
industry can be obtained through other than a daily sampling
program.
C. Methods and analysis. All measurements, tests and analysis of the
characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and
also regulations in 40 CFR Part 136, Guidelines Establishing Test
Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants, and shall be determined at
the monitoring structure provided or upon suitable samples taken at
said monitoring structure.
D. Inspection and discrepancies of flow or strength. The City shall have the
right to periodically or continuously inspect the monitoring facilities to
measure, sample and analyze the user's flow and to analyze the samples
obtained by the user in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Upon the City's request, samples will be split, with 1/2 submitted to the
City. In the event of any discrepancy between the flows or loads
determined by the City and the user, the values determined by the City
shall be used for billing purposes.191
191. Editor's Note: Original § 26.06, Industrial cost recovery, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed by Ord. No. 12-14.
§ 508-19 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-19
1:878
ARTICLE IV
Excess Capacity Sewer Service Charge
[Added by Ord. No. 01-29 (effective 1-1-2002); amended by Ord. No.
04-10; Ord. No. 06-02; Ord. No. 06-21A]
§ 508-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPITAL COSTS — The capital costs to construct, expand or improve
wastewater treatment facilities, including the cost of land, and including
legal, engineering and design costs to construct, expand or improve
wastewater treatment facilities.
CITY — The City of Watertown.
EXCESS CAPACITY SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A monetary fee collected
from an owner of record or assessed against a land development, as the
parties may agree by mutual consent, which has been reduced to writing
in a developer's agreement, pursuant to § 66.0821, Wis. Stats., to defray all
or part of the requirements for construction, reconstruction, improvement,
extension, operation, maintenance, repair and depreciation of the
wastewater treatment facilities of the City of Watertown or any
indebtedness incurred for that purpose in order to provide services on a pro
rata basis to the land development upon which the excess capacity sewer
service charge is levied.
FULL BUILDING PERMIT — The written approval issued by the City
Building Inspector's office, in accordance with the provisions of § SPS
320.09, Wis. Adm. Code, and § 253-11 of the Watertown Code, for any
construction, repair, enlargement, improvement or alteration of any
building or structure within the City. It does not include the "early start"
permit or preliminary permit issued at the time of excavation or installation
of footings for any such building or structure.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to real property that creates additional residential equivalent
units within the City or its service areas or that results in nonresidential
uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved wastewater
treatment facilities within the City or its service areas.
OWNER OF RECORD — A person or entity that owns, builds, constructs or
creates a land development.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT (REU) — A unit of measure for the
excess capacity sewer service charge equivalent to one residential dwelling
unit. For purposes of this article, one residential equivalent unit is
considered equal to the basic residential water meter size of 5/8 inch or 3/4
inch. The residential equivalent unit is used as a single unit of measurement
for all residential, nonresidential, commercial, industrial and institutional
land developments because of the relationship between size of the water
meter and generation of sewage by the user or owner of record.
§ 508-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-20
1:879
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area delineated by the Common Council
within which the City provides wastewater treatment facilities.
SERVICE STANDARD — A certain quantity or quality of wastewater
treatment relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land, or other
appropriate measure as specified by the Common Council.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES — Facilities for collection,
storage, disposal and treatment of sewage and facilities for collection,
storage and disposal of stormwater and surface water, as well as a system
of collecting sewers and pump stations within the City.
WWTP — The Wastewater Treatment Plant Utility of the City of Watertown.
§ 508-21. Excess capacity sewer service charge levied.
A. An excess capacity sewer service charge is levied against each
residential equivalent unit constructed, altered or improved within the
City after the effective date of this article.
(1) For new construction, each residential equivalent unit constructed
or caused to be built by the owner of record shall be subject to the
assessment of the excess capacity sewer service charge.
(2) For alterations or improvements to an existing residential
equivalent unit, where a change in water meter size is requested,
the owner of record shall be assessed an excess capacity sewer
service charge equal to the difference between the new water
meter size and the existing water meter size on the residential
equivalent unit.
(3) Any existing structure within the City of Watertown which is served
by a well which will be capped and then the structure connected to
the sewerage system shall be subject to the assessment of the
excess capacity sewer service charge.192
(4) In the event any structure is annexed to the City of Watertown and
connects to the municipal sewerage system, such structure shall be
subject to the assessment of the excess capacity sewer service
charge.193
(5) The residential equivalent unit is the unit of measurement for
connecting to the sewerage system.
B. The amount of the excess capacity sewer service charge is calculated as
per the following table:
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 508-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-21
1:880
§ 508-22. Exemptions.
Meter Size
(inches) Equivalency 2003 2006 2007
5/8 and 3/4 1 $2,909 $2,996 $3,200
1 2.5 $7,273 $7,491 $8,000
1 1/4 3.75 $10,909 $11,236 $12,000
1 1/2 5 $14,545 $14,981 $16,000
2 8 $23,272 $23,970 $25,600
3 15 $43,635 $44,944 $48,000
4 25 $72,725 $74,906 $80,000
6 50 $145,450 $149,813 $160,000
8 or larger 80 $232,720 $239,701 $256,000
C. The excess capacity sewer service charge shall be paid in full by the
owner of record of the land development, unless expressly excepted
under § 508-22, within 14 days of issuance of a full building permit by
the office of the Building Inspector for any new construction or within
14 days of issuance of a permit by the office of the Building Inspector
for change in water meter size, whichever is applicable. The excess
capacity sewer service charge shall be payable to the office of the
Building Inspector within 14 days of issuance of any permit under this
subsection.
D. If the owner of record fails to make the entire payment when due, the
Building Inspector of the City shall issue a stop order, pursuant to
§ 253-9 of the City Code, and shall refuse to approve any plans or to
perform any further inspections until the excess capacity sewer service
charge is paid in full. The Building Inspector may also revoke the entire
building permit, pursuant to § 253-19 of the City Code, if such charge
remains unpaid for longer than three months after its due date. The
unpaid balance of the excess capacity sewer service charge shall bear
interest at the rate of 1.5% per month from the date of the full building
permit issuance by the office of the Building Inspector through the date
of payment.
E. The excess capacity sewer service charge shall be collected and levied
against all land development within the City until the capital costs
associated with the projects specified in the Wastewater Facilities Plan
Report and Report on Connection Fees for wastewater treatment
facilities have been incurred and satisfied, but in no event shall such
time period exceed seven years beyond the projected commencement of
the capital improvement projects which comprise the capital costs.
A. The following situations shall be exempted from assessment of the
excess capacity sewer service charge:
§ 508-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-22
1:881
§ 508-23. Fee revenue administration.
(1) Alterations or improvements to an existing building or structure
where no additional or larger water meter connections are
requested.
(2) The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or
structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger
water meter and/or sewer lateral connections are requested and
where the use of the building or structure has not changed.
(3) Alterations or expansions of an existing building or structure where
a change in water meter size results in a decrease in water meter
size.
(4) Any land development with an approved conditional use permit
issued by the City for multifamily residences as of the effective date
of this article.
B. Any claim for exemption must be made to the office of the Building
Inspector no later than the time of application for a full building permit
for new construction or issuance of a permit for a change in water
meter size, and any claim for exemption not so made shall be deemed
waived.
A. All monies collected from excess capacity sewer service charges shall
be used solely for the purpose of paying the proportionate costs of
providing wastewater treatment facilities that may become necessary
due to increased land development within the City. These costs may
include the cost of debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments
when the debt has been incurred for the purpose of proceeding with
designated wastewater treatment facilities projects prior to the
collection of all anticipated excess capacity sewer service charges for
that project to reimburse the City for advances of other funds or
reserves, as from time to time approved by the Common Council.
B. All monies collected from excess capacity sewer service charges shall
be placed in one or more segregated, interest-bearing accounts and
shall be accounted for separately from other City general and utility
funds. These revenues and interest earned thereon may be expended
only for capital costs and interest on debt related to those capital costs
for which the excess capacity sewer service charge was imposed.
C. Revenues derived from funds collected from excess capacity sewer
service charges imposed and collected but not used within a reasonable
period of time after collection to pay the capital costs for which they
were imposed shall be refunded on a prorated, proportional basis, as
determined by the Common Council, to the then-current owner of
record of the property with respect to which the excess capacity sewer
service charge was imposed, but in no event shall such reasonable time
period be greater than seven years after the recommended time for
§ 508-22 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-23
1:882
§ 508-24. Appeals.
The payment of an excess capacity sewer service charge imposed under
this article as a condition of a permit for new construction or issuance
of a permit for a change in water meter size may be contested as to the
amount, collection or use of the excess capacity sewer service charge to
the Public Works Commission, provided that the applicant files a written
notice of appeal in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer within 15 days
of the approval of the full building permit by the office of the Building
Inspector of an application for new construction or issuance of a permit
for a change in water meter size upon which the excess capacity sewer
service charge is imposed. Such notice of appeal shall be titled "Notice
of Appeal of Excess Capacity Sewer Service Charge" and shall state the
applicant's name, address, telephone number, address (if available) and
legal description of the land development upon which the excess capacity
sewer service charge is imposed, and a statement of the nature of and
reasons for the appeal. Said "Notice of Appeal of Excess Capacity Sewer
Service Charge" shall be immediately forwarded to the Water Systems
Manager. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall schedule the appeal for
consideration by the Public Works Commission at a regular meeting as
soon as reasonably practicable under the circumstances and shall notify
the applicant of the time, date and place of such meeting in writing by
regular mail, deposited in the mail no later than at least three days before
the date of such meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the Public Works
Commission may adjust the amount, collection or use of the excess capacity
sewer service charge upon just and reasonable cause shown.
§ 508-25. Review.
The excess capacity sewer service charge contained in this article shall be
reviewed by the Public Works Commission and approved by the Common
Council of the City in September of 2002 and every two years thereafter.
Until changed by this process, the current fees shall stay in full force and
effect.
commencement of construction, expansion or improvement of a specific
wastewater treatment facility project.
D. Any funds subject to a refund may be obtained upon application of the
then-current owner of record, who shall be entitled to return of the
original excess capacity sewer service charge paid, together with
interest at the rate of 1.5% per year from the date of said payment to
the date of said refund. The owner of record must submit a written
application for a refund to the City Clerk/Treasurer of the City of
Watertown within 180 days after the expiration of the seven-year time
period outlined in this article.
§ 508-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-25
1:883

ARTICLE V
Administration and Enforcement
§ 508-26. Filing of lien. [Amended by Ord. No. 84-20; 9-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-17]
Any charge levied pursuant to this chapter which is not paid shall be
collected and taxed and shall be a lien upon the property served in the
same manner as water rates are taxed and collected. This is pursuant to
§ 66.0809, Wis. Stats. On October 15 each year, notices shall be given to the
owner or occupant of all lots or parcels of real estate to which the sewer
service has been provided and said notice shall inform the recipient of the
payment for which is owing and in arrears at the time of giving such notice.
The City Water Systems Manager or his or her delegate shall furnish the
Watertown City Clerk with a list of all such lots or parcels of real estate,
and the notice shall be given by the Water Systems Manager or his or her
delegate. Such notice shall be in writing and shall state the amount of such
arrears, including any penalty assessed pursuant to this chapter; that unless
the same is paid by November 1, thereafter, a penalty of 10% of the amount
of such arrears will be added thereto; and thereafter, the same will be levied
as tax against the lot or parcel of real estate to which the sewer service
was furnished and for which payment is delinquent as above specified. Such
notice shall be served according to Wis. Stats. No later than November 16,
the Water Systems Manager or his or her delegate shall certify and file with
the City Clerk a list of all lots or parcels of real estate, giving the legal
description thereof, to the owners or occupants of which notice or arrears
in payment were given as above specified and which arrears still remain
unpaid, and stating the amount of such arrears together with the added
penalty, shall thereupon become a lien on the lot or parcel of real estate to
which the sewer service was furnished and payment for which is delinquent
and the Clerk shall insert the same as a tax against such lot or parcel of real
estate. All proceedings in relation to the collection of general property taxes
and to the return and sale of property for delinquent taxes shall apply to
said tax if the same is not paid within the time required by law for payment
of taxes on real estate.
§ 508-27. Civil action.
Any charges levied pursuant to this chapter, and which have been properly
sent to the occupant or owner and not paid, may be recovered in a civil
action by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 508-28. Amendments.
The City reserves the right to amend this chapter in part or in whole
whenever it may deem necessary, but only after due notice and hearing, as
provided by law.
§ 508-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-28
1:885
Chapter 512
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Compulsory connection — See Ch. 319, Art. I.
Plumbing — See Ch. 419.
Wastewater facilities — See Ch. 508.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 508-28 WATERTOWN CODE § 508-28
1:886
ARTICLE I
Water Department Operating Rules and Regulations
[Last amended by Ord. No. 10-30]
§ 512-1. Authority of Commission; adoption of Public Service
Commission regulations.
§ 512-2. Extension rules.
A. The Public Works Commission shall have general charge and direction
of all engineering work in connection with all improvements and
extensions made by the water utility, including the laying of water
mains and service connections, setting of hydrants, valves and
connections, as well as of any repair or reconstruction of the same, or of
any part thereof, and all the engineering records of the Department
shall be kept at the Water Department.
B. The Commission shall supervise and superintend and in general shall
have charge of all work of extension or improvement of the waterworks
plant. All work of this nature which shall be let by formal contract shall
be under the direct supervision and be carried out as the Commission
may direct and when the Common Council provides the moneys
therefor. For any work of this nature to be done without the intervention
of a formal contract, the Commission shall have general supervision
and, subject to such statutory requirements and such ordinances as the
Council may make, shall purchase the necessary materials and employ
the necessary help and labor for such work.
C. Construction work shall be left to the Commission to award as it sees
fit, but when awarded, the money to cover the cost of the work to be
performed shall be turned over to the Commission by the Council for
direct disbursement, and the City general fund shall be given credit on
the books of the Commission in the City equity account for the amount
so turned over. The Commission shall have authority to contract directly
for expenditures of an operating nature and shall also have authority to
contract directly for extensions, replacements and improvements in
sums not exceeding $10,000 in amount. Where the Commission
expends money for extensions or improvements for which the general
fund has provided the moneys, the Commission shall, after the close of
each year, be given credit in the City equity account for the amount so
paid.
D. The Watertown Public Works Commission hereby adopts by reference
the standard rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission of
the State of Wisconsin.
A. Application. Extensions to existing water mains shall be initiated by
application in writing. The application shall describe the proposed
extension by designating the point at which it shall connect with the
present facilities, the point at which it shall terminate and the ways to
§ 512-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-2
1:887
be affected or the course selected. It shall state the reasons or purposes
for requesting the extension and shall set forth the facts and
information necessary to enable the Commission to determine with a
reasonable degree of certainty as to whether or not inconvenience and
necessity require that the request be granted and to determine the
terms and conditions under which the extension is to be made. The
application shall be signed by the owner (or his agent duly authorized
by proper power of attorney) of the property abutting the way affected
or the course selected. It shall describe the property so abutting in
definite terms, so as to permit its identification upon the tax rolls of the
City, and shall set forth especially the number of feet frontage of each
piece or parcel of property so abutting.
B. Extension of mains. The City Water Department will extend water mains
for new customers and will decide whether the extension is to be sixinch
or larger pipe where fire protection service is needed, or eight-inch
pipe as a minimum size or larger where only general service is needed
on the basis provided therein.
C. Special assessments for water main construction. Where the cost of the
extension is to be immediately assessed against the abutting property,
the procedure set forth under §§ 66.0703 and 66.0721, Wis. Stats., will
apply, and as follows:
(1) The assessment for the first water service for any lot other than
corner lot shall be determined by the Commission on a per-frontfoot
basis along the short side.
(2) The assessment of corner lots, if served first by water along the
side street, shall be in accordance with the frontage of the short
side of the lot at the per-foot rate as determined by the
Commission.
(3) Corner lots. When a corner lot is already served by water along the
front or side and water service is added to the unserved side, no
assessment shall be made. However, if the dimensions of any
corner lot are sufficient to allow an area of 8,000 square feet for a
site on the front of the lot with sufficient front, rear and side yards
and also provide for a site with a frontage of not less than 80 feet
along the side street and an area of 8,000 square feet and proper
yard distances, an additional assessment at the current front-foot
rate shall be made for such frontage or property on the side street
which is available for a lot or lots on such street.
(4) If, because of topographical conditions, adverse use of neighboring
property, doubtful accessibility or other unusual conditions, it is
believed that an assessment determined by the formula herein set
forth would work an injustice, the Common Council, by formal
resolutions setting forth its reasons, may reduce such an
assessment to an amount which it deems to be the true benefit
under the circumstances. Further, if because of unusual conditions
§ 512-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-2
1:888
it is believed that an assessment determined by the formula herein
set forth would work an injustice to the City, the Common Council,
by formal resolutions setting forth its reasons, may increase such
an assessment to an amount which it deems to be the true benefit
under the circumstances.
(5) Payment for water main construction.194
(a) Payment made be made in cash within 60 days after notice of
assessment with interest at 9% per annum from 60 days after
notice.
(b) Payment may be made in five equal annual installments, if the
total bill is $500 or more, with interest thereon at the rate of
12% per annum. If the property owner shall sell or transfer
title to said property within the five-year installment period,
any remaining balance to be paid shall become immediately
due and payable upon the sale or transfer of ownership of said
parcel.
(6) The City Clerk/Treasurer shall notify each property owner after the
project has been completed and the assessments have been
computed of the amount of the assessment and the alternative
methods of payment and that unless the deferred plan is chosen by
written notice to such Clerk/Treasurer within 30 days, he will be
considered to have chosen the cash payment plan.
(7) Special assessments for water main installation shall be paid to the
Watertown Public Works Commission at the time the assessment is
levied.
D. Where the City is unwilling to make a special assessment because of
low density of prospective customers or for some other reason,
extensions will be made on a customer-financed basis, as follows:
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
CONTRIBUTOR — The owner of property at time of a contribution
or refund unless otherwise specified by written agreement.
CUSTOMER — The owner of premises to which water is now
or is to be furnished unless specific written agreements specify
otherwise. The customer at all times means the property owner at
the time a contribution is to made or a refund becomes available.
(2) Basis for determining contributions from original customers. The
applicant (or applicants, pro rata) will advance the amount that
would have been assessed under Subsection C above. The
contribution must be paid in advance of construction.
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-2
1:889
§ 512-3. Maps.
The Commission shall cause to be prepared maps showing the locations,
size and type of all mains, valves, service pipes and hydrants, and of the
entire waterworks system and shall from time to time make such additions
and alterations as shall correspond to the changes in the physical plant and
shall keep one of the maps in the Water Department office.
§ 512-4. Flushing mains.
The water mains shall periodically undergo a thorough treatment of
flushing. This shall consist not merely in opening hydrants at random, but
the mains shall be taken section by section and gates opened or closed so
as to concentrate large flows of water through the pipes being cleaned.
§ 512-5. Dead-ended mains.
Provisions shall be made for flushing each dead-ended main, and such
flushing shall be done from time to time as the circumstances of each case
(3) Additional customers and refunds. When additional customers are
connected to a water main that was originally financed in part by
customers, the Department will require a contribution from each
new customer equal to the existing average contribution. When the
amount of customer contribution computed under this subsection
is less than would have been assessed under Subsection C above,
the applicant for service shall pay an amount equivalent to the
assessment. This amount shall then be refunded pro rata to all
contributors along the extension whose remaining contribution still
exceeds what would have been assessed under Subsection C above.
When refunds have reduced the contribution of any contributor to
the applicable assessment per front foot, no further refund will be
made to that individual. After all refunds have been made, the
remaining premises that may connect will be charged at the rate
per front foot established for the extension.
(4) Limits of extension. When an extension beyond an existing
extension is required to serve a new customer, and the cost for a
customer exceeds the average remaining contribution in the
original extension, then the new extension will be considered as an
entirely new project, without refunds or other connection with the
original extension.
E. When customers connect to a transmission main or connecting loops
laid at Department expense, there will be a contribution of an amount
equivalent to the applicable assessment as determined in Subsection C
above.
F. The development period during which refunds shall be made will be
limited to 20 years.
§ 512-2 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-5
1:890
appear to require in order to forestall complaints from consumers regarding
stagnant and offensive water.
§ 512-6. Inspection of valves.
The valves on the water distribution system shall be thoroughly inspected
and operated at least once every two to five years [§ NR 810.13(2)(a),
Wis. Adm. Code] and maintained in good operating condition. A record of
each valve shall be made and kept, showing its size, type, location, date of
inspection and results thereof.
§ 512-7. Gate valves.
The distribution system shall be equipped with a sufficient number of gate
valves, so located that no single case of accident, breakage or repair in
the pipe system in important mercantile or manufacturing districts will
necessitate shutting from service a length of main greater than the side
of a single block or a maximum of 500 feet or, in other districts, lengths
greater than two sides of a single block with a maximum of 500 feet. It
is vitally important that gate boxes be kept raised to the street surface so
that no time will be spent unnecessarily in locating the same when occasion
demands.
§ 512-8. Inspection and tests.
The Department shall make systematic inspections of all unmetered water
taps at least once in every 12 months for the purpose of checking waste and
unnecessary use of water, and a record of the date of each inspection shall
be made. In laying mains the Department or its authorized representatives
shall make systematic inspection of all joints, hydrant connections, sleeves,
etc., to prevent poor or careless work and hence later loss of water by
continuous leakage. Each main extension shall be tested for tightness and
joints before trenches are refilled. The meter-testing apparatus shall be
examined periodically to see that its efficiency is up to the proper standard.
§ 512-9. Fire flow tests.
Periodical tests shall be made at different points in the City of several
hydrants simultaneously and discharges measured by some suitable devices
in order to show the amount of water available for fire protection service.
The pressure in the mains shall be observed before the period of flow at a
hydrant near the center of each group.
§ 512-10. Hydrants.
The Department shall maintain all hydrants in good serviceable condition
at all times, and to this end inspections should be frequent and thorough,
and the results recorded in the Department office, so that no hydrant
may be found frozen or out of order when emergency requires quick use,
and the Chief of the Fire Department shall make such reports of the use
§ 512-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-10
1:891
of Department facilities requested by the Department as may be deemed
reasonable so as to ensure excellency of service at all times.
§ 512-11. Connections with street main or distribution pipe not to
be tapped.
Any person who shall tap or make any connection with any street main or
distribution pipe without being authorized to do so, or who now having such
connection shall continue to use water through the same, shall incur and
be liable to the payment of a penalty of $40 and the water shall be shut off
from such unauthorized tap or connection until the same has been inspected
and passed by the Department. As a further penalty, such person shall be
chargeable with all water estimated by the Department consumed from date
such connection was made up to the time such connection is discovered.
§ 512-12. Permit required for plumbing work in connection with
waterworks.
All persons doing plumbing work in connection with the waterworks shall
take out a permit from the Department, which permit shall give a date of
commencement and date of notice of completion of work. The owner of the
premises shall be required to sign the proper application as provided in
the next section, which application must be on file with the Department
before work on any job is commenced. Proper blanks for the same shall be
had at the Department's office. The plumber shall make a full return to the
Department within 48 hours after the completion of the work.
§ 512-13. Requirements of applications for water connections.
All new building construction within the corporate City limits of the City
of Watertown must make provision to have water mains extended to the
property upon which the construction is proposed, and the building owners
must connect to the water system. Applications for water connections must
be made at the Department office on forms provided for that purpose by
the Department. The application must state the name of the owner, location
of the property designated by correct street address, the name of the
licensed plumber installing the fixtures, a brief statement of the conditions
under which service is supplied, exceptional features, if any, to be disclosed
clearly, and the address of the owner in case notice must be given for
discontinuance of service for nonpayment. All applications must be signed
by the owner or his duly authorized agent.
§ 512-14. Installation of service by Department.195
The Department shall tap the water main, furnish all pipe, fittings, labor,
etc., and install the service up to and including the curb box and approve
the shutoff cock at the meter upon the premises supplied. Such service
and connection up to and including the curb box shall remain the property
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-10 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-14
1:892
of the City of Watertown at all times, and said applicant shall acquire no
interest, right or title to the same by virtue of the fact that he has paid a fee
giving him the privilege to receive water through such pipe, subject to all
the conditions set forth in these rules and regulations.
§ 512-15. Installations of service pipes by plumbers.196
Whenever the Department permits the work of installing service pipes
to be done by licensed plumbers, it reserves the right at all times to
specify the kind of pipe and material to be used and to approve of all work
done as provided in § 512-14, unless otherwise provided by the rules and
regulations of the Commission.
§ 512-16. Restrictions on plumbers.
A. Plumbers shall not connect two or more services on one tap, but each
building must have one distinct and separate tap and service pipe, laid
not less than 6 1/2 feet below the surface after the street is brought to a
grade and, where physically possible in the judgment of the
Department, at least one foot horizontally distant from any sewer
service. Where the grade of a street is lowered so that service piping is
subject to freezing, the cost of lowering such service pipe when freezeup
occurs shall be borne by the City. Where, however, no change in
grade has been made and the service pipe freezes due to the fact that it
was not laid at a proper depth to prevent freezing when originally
installed, the cost of relaying such service pipe to a proper depth of 6 1/
2 feet shall be borne by the property owner from the curb to the
property and by the City from the main to the curb. The Department will
thaw out frozen service piping for the owner per the Public Service
Commission (§ PSC 185.88, Wis. Adm. Code). Relaying of water service
pipes both by the City and by consumers shall be contingent upon their
freezing.
B. Each service must be provided with a stop cock and a metal/plastic
extension box outside of the premises connected with the same. Where
a larger tap or a branch is required to replace a tap or taps previously
made, the tap or taps which are abandoned shall be shut off at the
corporation cock, and any larger tap or branch made shall be tapped at
the owner's expense. In case two or more taps are required for one
house, it may be granted only provided that each service is supplied
with sufficient facilities and connections at the meter so as to permit
each unit of service to be turned off separately for cause without
interfering with the service supplied to the other units and each facility
is supplied with a separate meter, and provided also that in case the
taps are on separate mains, or on opposite sides of a gate on the same
main, check valves shall be placed on each service. Supply pipes shall
not be laid across and connecting adjoining premises whether owned by
the same or different parties. Every service pipe where it enters the
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-16
1:893
§ 512-17. Maintenance of service pipe by Department and
consumer.
The service pipe from main to curb will be maintained and kept in repair at
the expense of the Department. However, it is the duty of the consumer to
maintain the service pipe from the curb to the property, and the Department
cannot make an allowance for the loss of water which has passed through
the meter and has been wasted by leakage or defective pipes and fixtures.
§ 512-18. Repairs to service pipes.197
In case of leakage in service pipe between curb and property, notice shall
be given to the owner or occupant to make necessary repairs, and if the
same are not commenced within 24 hours after notice is given, water will
be shut off until repairs are made. If not made within a reasonable time,
the Department will repair the same at the expense of the property owner,
and an additional charge as set by the Common Council and provided under
separate fee schedule based on the current tariff rate in effect will be made
for turning on water after repairs have eventually been made. The consumer
shall protect the stop box in his terrace and keep the same free from dirt
and other obstructions. Whenever the Department finds a stop box has
become defective because of dirt accumulation, breakage or otherwise, it
shall notify the owner of the premises served in writing at the premises and
proceed to make the necessary repairs. The cost shall be billed to the owner
of the premises served, unless otherwise provided. The Department shall
not be liable for damages due to failure to locate the stop box promptly and
shut off water in case of a leak on the consumer's premises.
§ 512-19. Records.
A record of the location of each service laid shall be made by the
Department.
cellar shall be furnished with a stop and waste cock so situated below
the action of frost that the water may be completely shut off and
drained from the pipes to prevent freezing. In case of danger of frost,
the service pipe shall be drained on both sides of the meter connection.
C. Every unit of service shall be supplied from the City's mains exclusively,
and any cross-connection whereby polluted water may be pumped or
allowed to flow into the Department distribution system is hereby
prohibited, except under special conditions authorized by the
Department. The Department reserves the right to order any crossconnection
eliminated if found faulty and may shut off the water supply
to the respective unit of service affected if its orders are not complied
with.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-20
1:894
§ 512-20. Restrictions on turning on water.
In no case may water be turned on by any person other than an employee of
the Department authorized to do this work, with the exception of a licensed
plumber, who may do so only after having been specially authorized to do
so by the Department to this effect, and after having arranged for means
whereby consumption of water may be determined by so doing.
§ 512-21. Cost of laying blind laterals.
Where it is necessary to lay blind laterals to vacant lots, the cost of the same
shall be paid for by the property owner and shall be returned to the property
owner of record at the time when application is made for service and such
service becomes active.
§ 512-22. Meters.
Meters will be furnished and placed by the Department. All meters shall be
so located that they shall be preserved from obstructions and frost and to
allow easy access thereto for reading and inspection. The location shall be
designated by proper employees or officers of the Department. No bypass
or other connection between the meter and the main shall be maintained,
unless specially authorized by the Department.
§ 512-23. Right of access by Department.
The Department by its duly authorized agents shall have the right of access
during reasonable hours to premises supplied with water service for the
purpose of inspection or the enforcement of the Department rules and
regulations. Whenever, in the opinion of the Department, the right of access
is unduly obstructed, the Department may notify the property owner that a
frost-proof box of an approved design will be located outside of the building
at a cost of labor and expense, plus 10% to cover overhead charges. If
installed, the cost shall be billed to the owner of the premises served unless
otherwise provided, or the Department may notify the property owners at
the premises served that service will be discontinued unless access is given
within a reasonable time.
§ 512-24. Installation of new service piping.
A. In installing new service piping, if meters are to be set, the consumer
shall at his expense provide proper connections and a meter box if
necessary for meter. In setting meters, all connections shall be made
according to the rules and regulations provided by the Department.
Nipples attached to the union and coupling shall be cut to a standard
provided by the plans of the Department, so that it may later be
removed for the insertion of a meter into the supply line.
B. There shall also be provided and set in proper position, in case the
meter is to be located below level of basement floor, a meter box
constructed according to the plans of the Department.
§ 512-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-24
1:895
§ 512-25. Water going through meter to be paid for.
All water which has gone through the meter must be paid for. If the meters
register incorrectly, or if there is a sound of running water, consumer shall
notify the Department's office, and an expert will be sent to examine the
pipes and will give advice free of charge.
§ 512-26. Repairing of meters.
Meters will be repaired by the Department, and the cost of such repairs
caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the Department. Any
damages which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the
owner of the premises, his agent or tenant, or from negligence of either of
them to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may
result from allowing said meter to become frozen or to be injured from hot
water or steam setting back from a boiler, or otherwise, shall be paid to the
Department by the owner of the premises and may be charged and collected
as a special tax against the property.
§ 512-27. Relocation of meters.
Where the location of meters interferes with ready inspection, reading and
removal of same, such meters may be relocated as may be directed by the
Department at the expense of the property owner.
§ 512-28. Testing of new and repaired meters.
All new meters purchased and all old meters which have been repaired or
removed from service for any cause shall be tested and adjusted to show not
more than two-percent error before being placed or replaced in service, and
all meters shall be tested at least once every 20 years. A complete record
shall be kept of each meter, noting all repairs and inspections made and
results of each test.
§ 512-29. Seal affixed to water meters.
Water meters, while in service, may be put under seal affixed by an
authorized employee or officer by authority from the Department. The
person responsible for water bills for water supplied through a meter whose
seal has been tampered with or broken shall be prima facie guilty of a
violation of this section.
C. In case a service is to be metered and there is no basement or where it
is impossible to properly set a water meter in a consumer's basement,
the Department will provide at the consumer's expense the proper
frost-proof box of an approved design (to be located outside the
consumer's building) at a cost of labor and material expense plus 10%
to cover overhead charges.
§ 512-24 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-30
1:896
§ 512-30. Water meters tested for accuracy by Department.
The Department shall make a test of the accuracy of any water meter not
greater than two inches in size upon the written request of a consumer
filed at the office of the Department, provided that consumer does not
request such test more frequently than once in 12 months. Tests made more
frequently than once in 12 months will be made only on order of the Public
Service Commission or at the expense of the consumer where meter is
within the tolerance of 2%. Meters greater than two inches in size will be
tested at instance and direction of the Department, but not less often than
once in every five calendar years. All tests are made in conformity with the
rules provided by the Public Service Commission.
§ 512-31. Fire protection service.
§ 512-32. Combination commercial fire hydrant and sprinkler
system.
Combination commercial fire hydrant and sprinkler service shall consist of
a pipeline with either:
§ 512-33. Valves to be sealed on automatic sprinkler systems.
Automatic sprinkler service alone, as required by insurance companies,
with water supplied either direct to tank or a combination of tank and direct
pressure, shall have all manual valves sealed, said seal to be broken only
in case of fire. Any abuse or illegal connection for the use of water through
these services shall forfeit the right of the consumer to such service for fire
protection, and the Department at its discretion shall have the power to
require any such service to be provided with a compound or director meter,
A. Said fire protection service shall consist of connections for automatic
sprinkler systems, standpipes (where same are connected permanently
or conterminously to the mains) and private hydrants.
B. Consumers who are regular users of water service may be supplied with
larger pipes with hydrants and hose couplings, or a sprinkler system
under the rules of fire underwriters, to be used only in case of fire.
Automatic sprinkler equipment shall be provided with controlling valve
or indicator post valve of a make and pattern to be approved by the
Department either in a valve pit near the main in the street or at the
curb.
A. A meter on a bypass of suitable size for commercial service required
around the valve of the same diameter as pipe placed on line, said valve
to be closed and sealed so as to divert all water through the meter and
opened only in case of fire; or
B. A compound or detector meter of standard make which will register
accurately everything passing through it from a no load to 50%
overload under varying pressures.
§ 512-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-33
1:897
to be put in at any time as said Department may in each case prescribe, and
to make any change or just and reasonable requirements as good service
may from time to time require in each instance, either as to said meter or to
any other parts of said appliance pertaining to the same.
§ 512-34. Private fire hydrant service.
A. Private fire hydrant service shall consist of a pipeline with hydrants on
the same, the latter to have hose threads and operating nuts the same
as on City hydrants. All hydrants shall be closed and sealed and opened
only in case of actual fire. When the seal is broken on any hydrant, the
Public Works Commission must be notified in writing at once, and
hydrants will be sealed by the Department.198
B. Operation and maintenance.
(1) For any private fire hydrant to be considered for inclusion in the
Water Department's operation and maintenance program, the
following minimum conditions shall be met:
(a) Hydrant equipment shall comply with current requirements of
the City of Watertown standard specification;
(b) Hydrant installation shall be calendar year 2005 or newer; or
(c) In lieu of requirements above, the hydrant owner shall provide
records of minimum annual/biannual hydrant maintenance
following installation. No hydrants will be considered if
installed before 1990.
(2) Prior to including private hydrant in its normal operation and
maintenance program, the Water Department will inspect the
location and condition of the hydrant and determine if it is
functional. The hydrant owner will be notified whether the hydrant
is acceptable under this policy or if repairs or modifications are
necessary before the hydrant can be included. The owner will also
be notified of possible concerns related to property damage that
could result from flushing.
(3) Hydrant location shall be accessible for Fire Department use as
determined and approved by the Watertown Fire Department.
(4) Hydrant shall be painted yellow for identification as a private
hydrant.
(5) Hydrant owner shall provide written easement to the private
hydrant in a form as approved by the City Attorney.
C. Operation and maintenance of private hydrants.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-34
1:898
§ 512-35. Unmetered connections used for fire protection tested.
Consumers having unmetered connections used for fire protection may test
their fire apparatus at any time under the following conditions:
(1) Department's normal program. Flushing frequency and schedule
will be determined by the Water Department and may vary year to
year. As much as possible, private hydrant owners will be notified in
advance of the approximate flushing schedule. Private hydrant
owners are specifically notified herein that water system flushing
may be conducted during overnight hours, from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m., or as determined to best provide system service.
(2) The Water Department will take reasonable precautions (diffusers,
splash boards, etc.) to control the flow of water while flushing. The
Water Department will not be responsible for damages to property
that result from flushing private fire hydrants.
(3) In the event normal operation and/or flushing results in failure or
required maintenance of a private fire hydrant, the hydrant owner
shall be responsible for replacement of, or repairs to, the hydrant.
The Water Department will inform the hydrant owner immediately
of deficiencies identified during operation and/or flushing. The
hydrant owner may hire the Water Department or a qualified
contractor to complete the work needed to restore the hydrant.
(4) Charges for the Water Department to replace or complete
maintenance on private hydrants shall be as follows:
(a) Hydrant replacement. One crew day (four people) of labor and
equipment plus actual cost of new hydrant and required parts.
(b) Hydrant maintenance. Minimum of two crew hours (two
people) of labor and equipment or actual time (whichever is
less) plus actual cost of required parts.
D. No future private hydrant services shall be allowed. Hydrants to be
located on private property shall be the property of the Water
Department. The property owner shall provide a minimum twenty-foot
easement centered over the water main and hydrant.
A. Upon notice given at the Department's office that such test is desired
and date and hour fixed when test is to be made.
B. When test of fire service is made by duly authorized insurance
representative or insurance inspector, no permit shall be required to
break any seals on the system, but in each instance the Department
shall be notified at once before making test, and such seals replaced by
the Department. This notice must be made by property owner or
representative.
§ 512-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-36
1:899
§ 512-36. Restrictions on private fire protection system.
Any private fire protection system supplied with water from the City's
service shall be supplied exclusively with City water, and no connection
will be allowed with any other system drawing its supply from any other
source, whereby the City's water may be contaminated by failure to close
valves or leaking check valves, etc., and no auxiliary or secondary suction
pipe to any underwriter's pump taking water from a river or other source
whatever will be permitted, except such other source may be acceptable to
and connection thereto specially authorized by the Department in writing.
Any private fire protection system using water from a river, wells or other
source than the City's service shall be kept separate from any such system
supplied from the City's service.
§ 512-37. Discontinuance of service for purposes of making repairs.
The Department reserves the right to shut off the water supply in the mains,
temporarily, for the purpose of making repairs, alterations and additions.
When circumstances will permit a sufficient delay, the Department shall
give notification by newspaper publication or by written notice delivered
to the premises of the discontinuance of the service and the approximate
length of time service will be discontinued. In such cases the Department
shall not be liable for any rebate, damages or inconvenience caused by such
temporary suspension of supply.
§ 512-38. Risk on consumer in accepting water service.
Consumers in accepting water service for their requirements agree to
accept such service at their own risk, and the Department shall not be
liable for any damage caused by lack of pressure, failure to supply, leaks,
breakage of machinery or facilities, or any cause beyond the control of
Department.
§ 512-39. Vacation of premises.
A. When premises are to be vacated, the Department shall be notified in
writing at once, so that it may read and remove the meter and shut off
the supply at the curb cock. The owner of the premises shall be liable
for damage to any of the property of the City of Watertown by reason of
failure to notify the Department of vacancy. A change of tenants in any
unit of service within any particular monthly meter reading period will
not be construed as a vacancy, and the entire billing for the period will
be submitted to the owner, and any adjusting in the way of apportioning
the bill between the outgoing and incoming tenants will have to be
made by the owner.
B. Premises which shall be and remain entirely vacant and the service to
which is shut off at the curb box by the Department shall be considered
as permanently vacant.
§ 512-36 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-39
1:900
§ 512-40. Emergency and occasional service permits.
§ 512-41. Unit of service.
A unit of service shall consist of any coterminous aggregation of space or
area of space occupied for a distinct purpose, such as an apartment, flat,
store, office or factory. Suites in houses or apartments where complete
housekeeping functions (such as cooking) are not exercised shall be classed
as a rooming house. Thus, houses and apartment buildings having suites
of one, two or more rooms with toilet facilities but without kitchen for
cooking are classed as rooming houses and may be considered as a single
unit of service. Where any conterminous unit of service is supplied through
C. Where a premises contains a number of conterminous units of service,
and where such premises is supplied by a single metered connection,
and, further, where absolute disconnection of service to such premises
is possible only by turning off water at the curb, the vacancy of one
distinct unit of service, such as a flat or an apartment building, cannot
be construed as a permanent vacancy unless plumbing is so arranged
that each distinct unit of service, such as each flat, can be disconnected
separately from the supply main.
A. Water used for puddling trenches, construction work, building purposes
or emergency service must be covered by a written permit which can be
obtained only at the Department office. In no case shall any employee of
the Department turn on water for such work unless contractor first
presents a permit. Wherever practical, such service shall be supplied
through meters, and the water shall be charged for at the regular
published rates. Where it is impractical to supply water through a
meter, the supply shall be determined as accurately as possible upon
some fair basis and shall be charged for at the regular published rates.
The opening through which service is demanded shall in such cases
determine the service charge.
B. If the permit is issued upon the basis of flat rates in force for building
purposes, upon completion of the work, contractor must return original
permit to the Department's office, together with a statement of actual
amount of water consumed or work actually done. In such cases, the
applicant for service must give a certified statement by architect or
builder as to number of bricks, cords of stone used, square yards of
plastering, cement work, etc. The Department reserves the right to
check preliminary estimates with actual material used in construction.
Separate permits for each individual construction job and piece of work
shall be taken out by the contractor or builder where water is not
chargeable to the owner of premises. Consumers shall not allow
contractors, masons or other persons to take water from their premises
without a permit from the Department. The Department reserves the
right to decide whether permits for this class of work are to be issued
on the meter basis or on the flat rate basis. See § 512-49.
§ 512-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-41
1:901
a secondary meter, such secondary meter shall be considered primary, and
the primary service charge shall apply.
§ 512-42. Service to be supplied through meter whenever practical.
No free service shall be given any schools, fire stations, public buildings,
or for street sprinkling, sewer flushing, or any purpose whatsoever, but
all such service shall be supplied through meters wherever practical and
shall be charged for water service at the regular rates. Where it is not
practical to supply service through a meter, the supply shall be determined
as accurately as possible upon some fair basis, and the regular published
rates shall be charged therefor. The opening through which service is
demanded shall in such cases determine the service charge. All water which
has gone through the meter or through the opening through which service
is demanded must be paid for.
§ 512-43. Bills rendered monthly; penalty for nonpayment.
All bills shall be rendered monthly to the premises described in a clear and
definite manner by house number. All bills except those for special readings
or purposes shall be dated on the last day of the billing period in which
service is rendered, at the net rate. To each bill remaining unpaid 20 days
after the date thereof shall be added a penalty of 1% of the net rate, and
this penalty shall be collectable in the same manner as the original charge.
§ 512-44. Discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bill.
Service shall be discontinued to residents and customers pursuant to §§ PSC
185.37, 185.38 and 185.39, Wis. Adm. Code. Such regulations are adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if they were set forth in full.
§ 512-45. Estimated reading bills submitted where premises closed.
Where readings cannot be obtained because the premises are closed, an
estimated reading bill will be submitted, based on the consumption for the
past 12 months, or on such a basis as may be deemed fair and equitable
by the Department. This estimated reading will be adjusted at the time
the reading is obtainable in the course of the next reading period. Where
readings cannot be obtained because right of access is unduly obstructed,
§ 512-23 shall apply.
§ 512-46. How account computed where meter fails to register.
If a meter fails to register, the account will be computed in the same manner
as provided for in § 512-45.
§ 512-47. Charges accruing for removing meter other than for
repairing or testing.
When a meter is removed from the premises for any reason other than
repairing or testing, or the premises are vacated as defined in § 512-39,
§ 512-41 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-47
1:902
water will be turned off and on and meters installed and removed only upon
a proper application signed by the owner of the property served, or by his
duly authorized agent, and not upon the request of the tenant.
§ 512-48. Effect of failure to receive bill.
Failure to receive a bill does not relieve a party of his/her obligation nor
relieve him/her of payment of the penalty if not paid before the due date.
Claims or complaints must be made within five days from due date of bill.
§ 512-49. Where deposit to insure prompt payment is required.
Where the Department is required to render services which in accordance
with statute are not chargeable to the premises to which such service
is rendered, or where for just or sufficient reason it is found advisable
not to do so, the Department may demand a deposit for a reasonable
amount to insure prompt payment upon the date due, but such deposit
must be uniform in all cases. (Occasional services: see § 512-40; private fire
protection service: see §§ 512-31 to 512-36.)
§ 512-50. Lists furnished to Clerk/Treasurer. [Amended 9-20-2016
by Ord. No. 16-16]
On November 15 in each year, the Water Systems Manager or his or her
delegate shall furnish to the City Clerk/Treasurer a list of all lots or parcels
of real estate to which water was furnished during the preceding six months
and the amount due for the same if the same has not been paid. A penalty of
10% shall be added and the Water Systems Manager or his or her delegate
shall proceed to collect the dues with the penalty. All delinquent water bills
shall be collected as regular City taxes, pursuant to § 66.0809, Wis. Stats.,
which is hereby made a part of these rules.
§ 512-51. Penalty.
Any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the Commission, who,
without written authority, operates any valve connected with the street or
supply mains or operates any shutoff valve within a stop box controlling
the flow of water to any premises, or breaks or tampers with the seal of
any water meter in service, or opens or operates any hydrant connected
with the distribution service or any valve thereon, except for extinguishing
fire, whether the hydrant is City property or has been placed by the owner
for his own protection, or wantonly injures or impairs the same, shall
be subject to the penalty provided in § 512-98. Only authorized persons
of the Fire Department, for fire purposes only, and others authorized by
the Department shall use hydrant wrenches in the operation of hydrants
connected with the water supply of the Department. Permits for the use of
hydrants apply only to such hydrants as are designated in the permit for the
particular use specified.
§ 512-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-52
1:903
§ 512-52. Controlling valve for hydrant nozzle.
The Department reserves the right hereunder to require a controlling valve
to be placed upon hydrant nozzle, when water is being used for any purpose
other than for fires, in order to prevent damage to fire hydrants and
consequent impairment of fire protection.
§ 512-53. Powers granted to Commission to enforce provisions.
For the purpose of a reasonable enforcement of the within provisions the
Commission may designate any person or persons upon whom may be
conferred such police powers as is usual and proper in the appointment of
special police, upon the person or persons designated complying with all
laws, rules and regulations provided in cases of special police appointment.
§ 512-54. Definition.199
"Department" as used in this article shall include the Public Works
Commission and employees thereof.
§ 512-55. Wellhead protection.
A. Purpose and authority. The residents of the City of Watertown depend
exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain
land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade
groundwater quality. The purpose of this section is to institute land use
regulations and restrictions to protect the City's municipal water supply
and well fields and to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City.
B. Application of regulations. The regulations specified in this section shall
apply only to lands within 1,500 feet of Wells 8 and 10 of the Watertown
Water Department (cones of depression) or within the five-year time of
travel (TOT) of these wells and which also lie within the City of
Watertown corporate limits.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AQUIFER — A saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains
and will yield significant qualities of water.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area around a well in which the water
level has been lowered at least 1/10 of a foot by pumping of the
well. The Wisconsin Geological and Natural History Survey Special
Report No. 10, titled "Wellhead Protection Districts in Wisconsin: An
Analysis and Test Applications," identified the cone of depression for
the neighboring Township of Emmet to be a radius of 1,500 feet.
For ease of determination, the cone of depression or groundwater
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-55
1:904
protection overlay district has been established as being 1,500 feet
from the Watertown wells.
FIVE-YEAR TIME OF TRAVEL (TOT) — The recharge area upgradient
of the cone of depression, from the outer boundary of which it is
determined or estimated that groundwater and potential contaminants
will take five years to reach the pumping well. The five-year TOT for
the Watertown well fields is established based on flow path modeling
contained in the report titled "Watertown Case Study: Wellhead
Protection Programs and Monitoring System Design."200
RECHARGE AREA — Area in which water reaches the zone of
saturation by surface infiltration and encompasses all areas or features
that supply groundwater recharge to a well.
WELL FIELD — A piece of land used primarily for the purpose of
locating wells to supply a municipal water system.
D. Groundwater flow direction. The flow of the groundwater within the
TOT is from the northeast to the southwest.
E. Groundwater protection; cones of depression.
(1) Intent. The primary portion of the Watertown recharge area to be
protected is the land within 1,500 feet of the boundary of the
Watertown wells, known as the cones of depression, as shown on
the attached map.201 These lands are subject to the most stringent
land use and development restrictions because of close proximity
to the wells and the corresponding threat of contamination.
(2) Prohibited practices. The following uses are prohibited uses within
the groundwater protection area. Uses not listed are considered
permitted uses.
(a) Septage and/or sludge spreading.
(b) Landfills or waste disposal facilities.
(c) Wastewater treatment facilities.
(d) Spray wastewater facilities.
(e) Bulk fertilizer and/or pesticide facilities.
(f) Asphalt products manufacturing.
(g) Salt storage.
(h) Electroplating facilities.
(i) Paint and coating manufacturing.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
201. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Water Department.
§ 512-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-55
1:905
§ 512-56. Submittal of as-built drawings.
Within 30 days after installation of all utilities in an approved subdivision,
excluding the surface layer of asphalt, the permittee shall notify the City
and submit drawings documenting construction. The person who designed
the subdivision for the permittee shall submit as-built certification to ensure
the constructed subdivision and installed public utilities comply with the
specifications included in the approved plans. At a minimum, as-built
certification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved
subdivision plans with what was constructed. Other information shall be
submitted as required by the City. Failure to submit as-built drawing within
30 days of subdivision completion, excluding asphalt surface layer, shall
negate the permittee's ability to obtain building permits for lots located in
the subdivision.
§ 512-57. Warranty of work.
Work done by the Water Department or by a private contractor for the
Water Department shall be warranted for one year from the completion of
work. This warranty shall not apply to any damages caused or repairs made
necessary by the homeowner's negligence.
(j) Hazardous and/or toxic materials storage.
(k) Radioactive waste facilities.
(l) Gasoline stations.
F. Wellhead protection plans. The wellhead protection plans for Wells 7, 8,
9 and 10, prepared by Earth Tech Engineers dated October 2001 and
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources on
December 17, 2001, are incorporated by reference herein.
§ 512-55 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-57
1:906
ARTICLE II
Private Well Abandonment
[Added by Ord. No. 87-52; amended by Ord. No. 97-5]
§ 512-58. Legislative purpose.
In order to protect the public health and promote the general welfare of the
residents of this City, the Common Council hereby finds and declares that it
is necessary to create, in the exercise of its police power, this article for the
purpose of preventing unused, unsafe and/or improperly constructed wells
from serving as a passage for contaminated surface or near-surface waters
or other materials to reach the usable groundwater so that these passages
may be eliminated by properly filling and sealing abandoned private wells
within the boundaries of the City.
§ 512-59. Applicability.
§ 512-60. Well operation permit. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.
17-7]
A well operation permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a well for
a five-year period of time and a renewal fee set by Public Works Commission
if the following requirements are met:
A. All private wells located on any premises which are served by the public
water system of the City of Watertown shall be properly filled and
sealed immediately after the building or structure on said premises
shall be connected with the municipal system. The provisions of this
subsection expressly do not apply to the private wells constructed by
Wis-Pak, Inc., in 1996, as long as Wis-Pak, Inc., is in compliance with the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources permits, City of Watertown
permits and the written agreement entered into between the City and
Wis-Pak, Inc.
B. Only those private wells for which a well operation permit has been
granted by the Director of the Watertown Water Department may be
exempted from this requirement, subject to the conditions of
maintenance and operation as specified in said permit. The Watertown
Water Department shall only issue permits for those buildings or
structures located within the corporate City limits of the City of
Watertown wherein it is impossible to extend water mains to the
property. The purpose of this article is to preserve the quality of the
underground aquifer which the Department utilizes to provide potable
water to its customers.
C. If any such private well for which a well operation permit has been
granted subsequently becomes abandoned or ceases operation, the
owner of said real estate upon which the well is located shall have 90
days from the date of abandonment or termination of operation to fill
and seal such private well pursuant to this article.
§ 512-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-60
1:907
§ 512-61. Methods of abandonment.
Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined
in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, including but not limited to the
following:
§ 512-62. Reports and inspection.
A well abandonment report must be submitted by the well owner to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources on forms provided by that
agency and available at the office of the Watertown Water Department.
The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling
of the well. The filling must be observed by a representative of the City of
Watertown Water Department.
§ 512-63. Enforcement.
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or any other well owner violating
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
forfeiture as provided in § 1-4 of the Watertown Code. Each twenty-fourhour
period of time during which time such a violation exists or continues
to exist shall be deemed and shall constitute a separate offense punishable
under this section.
A. The well and pump installation meet the requirements of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and a well constructor's report is on file with the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, or a certification of the
acceptability of the well has been granted by the Department of Natural
Resources and extension of the municipal water utility mains to the
property in question cannot be accomplished.
B. The well has a history of producing safe water and presently produces
bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by three samplings taken two
weeks apart and submitted with the application for the well operation
permit.
C. The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary due to
the fact that the municipal supply cannot be extended to the property in
question.
D. No physical connection shall or will exist between the piping of the City
of Watertown Water Department and the private well.
A. The pump and piping must be removed and the well checked for
obstructions prior to plugging.
B. Any obstruction or well liner must be removed prior to plugging.
§ 512-60 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-63
1:908
ARTICLE III
Special Assessments for Sewer and Water Main Construction
[Amended by Ord. No. 90-94]
§ 512-64. Basis for assessment.
The basis for sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water main assessments
shall be the assessable linear footage of frontage of each benefited property
within an assessment district, computed as per the following requirements.
§ 512-65. Assessable costs.
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water main and appurtenances assessable
costs:
§ 512-66. Determination of assessable linear footage.
The assessable linear footage shall be determined as follows.
A. The front-foot assessment for residential, commercial and industrial
zoned properties shall be based on the equivalent size sanitary sewer,
storm sewer and water main required to serve the respective
assessment district. The assessment rates shall be as determined by the
Public Works Commission and as recommended by the engineering
services. The minimum equivalent diameter size sanitary sewer for
residential properties shall be eight inches and the minimum size for
commercial, industrial or institutional properties shall be 10 inches.
Sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains in public rights-of-way
and within easements shall be assessed back to the respective
assessment district as directed by the Common Council. [Amended by
Ord. No. 10-30]
B. The acreage assessment for residential, commercial and industrial
zoned properties shall be levied, as determined by the Common
Council, to the respective assessment district. The assessment rates
shall be as determined by the Common Council and as recommended by
the engineering services. The minimum equivalent diameter size
sanitary sewer for residential properties shall be eight inches and the
minimum size for commercial, industrial or institutional properties shall
be 10 inches. Sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains in public
rights-of-way and within easements shall be assessed back to the
respective assessment district, as directed by the Common Council.
[Amended by Ord. No. 10-30]
C. Assessable sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water main costs shall
include the total costs for manholes and pump stations, force mains and
related appurtenances. Costs involving inspection, engineering, legal,
restoration costs such as pavement repair and landscaping, and
necessary administration costs to complete a project shall also be
assessed back to the respective assessment district.
§ 512-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-66
1:909
§ 512-67. Determination of assessable acreage.
The assessable acreage shall be determined as follows:
A. For corner lots:
(1) If the sewer is installed in both streets, add the two side dimensions
and divide by two to obtain the assessable frontage.
(2) If the sewer is installed in one street, add the two side dimensions
and divide by two to obtain the assessable frontage.
(3) If the owner is given his option for the lateral location and, as a
result of his decision, along with certain design decisions for the
project, the sewer is not installed on one of the sides, the
assessable frontage shall be figured as per Subsection A(1) of this
section for corner lots.
B. On lots with frontage on three streets, use the longest and shortest side
and compute as a corner lot.
C. On lots with frontage on two streets, use frontage on the street with the
service connection only, if the lot cannot be subdivided into an
additional lot or lots complying with the present zoning ordinance.
D. For lots on culs-de-sac, use the chord dimension at the building setback
line, as measured tangent to the curve at its mid-point, if said setback
line is formed by a curved line.
E. For lots on curves with an exterior angle over 45° as measured between
the side lot lines of each lot, use the chord dimension at the building
setback line for the inside lots on the curve.
F. On large tracts of land which are on corners, assume a future corner lot
that complies with the minimum present zoning ordinance and apply
the corner lot policy. The balance of the frontage shall be considered at
full linear footage. Deferment of assessment for large tracts of land will
be reviewed by the Public Works Commission on an individual basis
upon a written request for deferment by the respective property owner.
G. All deferments end when connection is made to the facility. When a
sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water main passes a large tract of land
that would be eligible for deferment, the cost of the assessment for the
home site will be assessed for the number of feet that would be required
on the minimum width required by zoning.
H. Lots which do not meet the above criteria will be handled on an
individual basis; as each special situation is decided, it will become
policy for future decisions of a similar nature.
A. For actual acreage of all parcels within the assessment district,
excluding acreage reserved for road rights-of-way and land zoned in
conservancy.
§ 512-66 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-67
1:910
§ 512-68. Sanitary sewer laterals.
Sanitary sewer laterals will be assessed back to each respective property
for the entire expense, on a unit or lump-sum basis, when installed within
public rights-of-way or easements. No time payment will be allowed.
§ 512-69. Deferments.
Generally, deferments are allowed in the final resolution of an assessment
project where no connection is desired or available. All deferments end
when a parcel is connected to the facility. However, the owner of a large
residential parcel may elect to pay or begin paying for the minimum
frontage required in the zoning district in which the parcel is located
and defer the remainder for the duration of the deferment period. Special
assessments for sewer improvements levied upon agricultural lands which
are actually devoted to agriculture or farming purposes and are not used
for any other purposes shall be deferred on the following basis:
B. All deferments end when connection is made to the facility. When a
sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water main passes a large tract of land
that would be eligible for deferment, the cost of the assessment for the
home site will be assessed for the acreage that would be required on
the minimum lot required by zoning.
A. If said land is used for other than agricultural or farming purposes and
any use of the improvement is made, the assessment will become due
and payable in full upon the next installment payment date for said
district in which said property lies, as determined by the final resolution
or the first November 1 after said use is made if there is no installment
date in said district, and interest established by the final resolution
shall be charged from the first November 1 after the date of the final
resolution. The interest rate will be that established in the final
resolution for deferred assessments, and if there is no separate rate
established for deferred assessments, it shall be the same as that
established for installments, and if there is none established for either
deferred assessments or installments, it shall be at the rate of 12% per
annum. If within five years from the date of the final resolution a parcel
of said land is divided by certified survey or final subdivision plat, is
used for other than agricultural or farming purposes and any use of the
improvement is made, the Common Council, as its sole option, may
negotiate with such a property owner an agreement by which less than
the entire assessment might be paid when only a portion of the property
is used for other than agricultural or farming purposes and any use of
the improvement is made.
B. Any assessment deferred pursuant to this resolution may nevertheless
be prepaid upon the same terms as installment assessments are
allowed to be prepaid and as provided for in the final assessment
resolution.
§ 512-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-70
1:911
§ 512-70. Assessment calculations on certain installations.
When a developer/landowner extends the sanitary sewer, storm sewer and
water main facilities under § 545-8C, the City Engineer will determine
the estimated cost of these facilities to service said parcel requiring the
facilities. The cost for the installation beyond what would be required
for that parcel (development) will be assessed to all potential benefitted
properties by the methods stated in the assessment policy or as established
by the final resolution of the project.
§ 512-71. Land split; sale or transfer of property.
When there is a land split or sale of property on which an assessment exists,
the following will apply:
§ 512-72. Exclusions.
All properties located within the assessment district will be subject to
the police power assessment herein, unless the Common Council makes
a determination that a parcel of real estate receives no police power
determination of benefit. The Common Council shall make benefit
determinations on all properties being assessed prior to the assessment
being levied.
§ 512-73. Payment for construction.202
§ 512-74. Notice of amount of assessment.
The City Clerk/Treasurer shall notify each property owner after the project
has been completed and the assessments have been computed of the
amount of such assessment and the alternative methods of payment and
A. If the assessment is deferred, the deferment period ends and the buyer
will have the option of lump-sum or installment payment, regardless of
whether a connection exists, except as noted in Subsection B below.
B. When the facility was installed and assessments made under the
provisions of § 545-8C, upon sale of the property all such assessments
are due and payable in lump-sum payment from the buyer.
A. Payment made be made in cash within 60 days after notice of
assessment, with interest at 12% per annum after due date.
B. Payment may be made in five equal annual installments, if the billing
totals $500 or more, with interest thereon at the rate of 12% per
annum. If the property owner sells or transfers title to said parcel
within said five-year period, any remaining balance due shall
immediately become payable in full upon the date of sale or transfer of
ownership.
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-70 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-74
1:912
that, unless the deferred plan is chosen by written notice to the Clerk/
Treasurer within 30 days, the property owner will be considered to have
chosen the cash payment plan.
§ 512-75. Disposition of moneys.
All moneys received for special assessments for the construction of sanitary
sewers, storm sewers and water mains shall be placed in the account in a
permanent improvement fund.
§ 512-76. Applications for sewer, curb and gutter, and water.
Applications for sewer, curb and gutter, and water must be received by the
City Engineer on or before August 1 of each year in order to include the
work in the financing plan for the following year.
§ 512-77. Report of Public Works Commission.
Immediately after August 1 of each year, the City Engineer shall notify
the Public Works Commission of all applications for sanitary sewer and/or
water main extensions, and the Public Works Commission shall submit its
written report to the Common Council as soon as possible, approving or
disapproving each request and setting forth its reason and the estimated
cost of all water main installations which are to be made in connection with
the applications for sanitary sewer which it approves.
§ 512-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-77
1:913

ARTICLE IV
Extraterritorial Extensions of Sewer and Water Service
[Added by Ord. No. 82-25]
§ 512-78. Annexation required.
The extension of existing water mains and existing sanitary sewer will not
be provided to property owners of lands lying outside of the boundaries of
the City of Watertown, unless said lands are first annexed to the City of
Watertown.
§ 512-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-78
1:915

ARTICLE V
Cross-Connection Control
§ 512-79. Definition.
A "cross-connection" shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which
contains potable water from the City of Watertown water system and the
other water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety,
or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system
to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential
between the two systems.
§ 512-80. Prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the City of Watertown may enter the supply or distribution system
of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have
been approved by the Watertown Water Department and by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources in accordance with § NR 811.07, Wis.
Adm. Code.
§ 512-81. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Watertown Water Department to cause inspections
to be made of all properties served by the public water system where crossconnection
with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency
of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved
shall be as established by the Watertown Water Department and as
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 512-82. Right of entry. [Amended by Ord. No. 10-30]
Upon presentation of credentials, a representative of the Watertown Water
Department shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to
examine any property served by a connection to the public water system
of the City of Watertown for cross-connection. If entry is refused, such
representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant, pursuant to
§ 66.0119(1) and (2), Wis. Stats. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant
of any property so served shall furnish to the Watertown Water Department
any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such
property.
§ 512-83. Water service to be discontinued.
The Watertown Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in
§ 512-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-83
1:917
violation of this article exists and to take such other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after
reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.,
except as provided in § 512-84. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 512-84. Emergencies.
If it is determined by the Watertown Water Department that a crossconnection
or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare
and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed
with the Clerk/Treasurer of the City of Watertown and delivered to the
customer's premises, services may be immediately discontinued. The
customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.,
within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
§ 512-85. Plumbing Code. [Added by Ord. No. 87-51]
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code, as adopted by
reference in § 419-1 of the Watertown Code, but is supplementary and
additional thereto.
§ 512-83 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-85
1:918
ARTICLE VI
Water and Sewer Lateral Control
[Added by Ord. No. 91-46]
§ 512-86. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SANITARY SEWER LATERAL — Any physical connection or arrangement
between the municipal sewer system which contains wastewater or other
processed water and a private source such as a building, residence or other
private property which has been used for any purpose.203
WATER LATERAL — Any physical connection or arrangement between the
municipal water system which contains potable water from the City of
Watertown water utility system and any other private building, residence
or property whereby the City of Watertown provides potable water to said
private building, residence or property to be used for any purpose.
§ 512-87. Water lateral connection.
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established,
replace or permit to be replaced any water lateral, unless otherwise
provided herein. No water lateral shall be established whereby potable
water is transmitted from the public water supply of the City of Watertown
to a private building, residence or other private property unless such water
lateral has been connected, installed and supplied by the City of Watertown
Water Department, unless otherwise provided herein.
§ 512-88. Sanitary sewer lateral connection.
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established,
replace or permit to be replaced any sanitary sewer lateral, unless
otherwise provided herein. No sanitary sewer lateral shall be established
whereby wastewater from a private building, residence or other private
property enters the City of Watertown sewer system unless such sewer
lateral has been connected, installed and supplied by the City of Watertown
Water Department, unless otherwise provided herein.
§ 512-89. Exception to Water Department installation or repair.
When a subdivision is under construction within the corporate City limits
of the City of Watertown and application has been made to the City of
Watertown Water Department, in writing, for approval and permission to
allow a private contractor to establish any water lateral and/or sanitary
sewer lateral, said approval and/or permission may be granted by the City
of Watertown Water Department in its sole discretion. This exception is
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 512-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-89
1:919
for the purpose of providing a suitable alternative installation procedure
if the City of Watertown Water Department is unable to complete a large
installation project within reasonable time limits. The City of Watertown
Water Department shall issue written approval of the use of a private
contractor at the sole expense of the owner of the property and the
contractor engaged by the owner to provide services. The City of Watertown
Water Department and/or any private contractor approved by the City of
Watertown Water Department shall install and connect such water and/
or sanitary sewer laterals in conformance with all Watertown Water
Department regulations, all Watertown general ordinances and all
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in
accordance with § NR 811.07, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 512-90. Permit required.
§ 512-91. Periodic maintenance inspections.
It is the duty of the Watertown Water Department to cause periodic
inspection to be made of all property served by the public water system
where water lateral connections with the public water system are deemed
necessary. It shall further be the duty of the Watertown Water Department
to cause periodic inspection to be made of all properties served by the
public sewer system where sanitary sewer lateral connections with the
public sewer system are deemed necessary. The frequency of inspection and
reinspection shall be based on construction requirements for the private
property in conformance with all municipal, state and federal laws, as
established by the Watertown Water Department and as approved by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 512-92. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of credentials, a representative of the Watertown Water
Department shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time
to examine any property served by a water lateral and/or a sanitary sewer
lateral to the public water system or the public sewer system for the
purpose of connection or repair of a water and/or sanitary sewer lateral.
If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection
warrant pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats. On request, the owner, lessee
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to establish or permit to be
established, replace or permit to be replaced any water lateral and/or
sanitary sewer lateral located within the corporate City limits of the
City of Watertown shall make application for a plumbing permit as
outlined below to the City of Watertown Plumbing Inspector.
B. Application by the landowner or any agent shall be submitted proposing
the work to be performed, including the establishment or repair of
water laterals and/or sanitary sewer laterals, in conformance with
§§ 253-14 to 253-17 of this Code, and any and all subsequent
amendments thereto.
§ 512-89 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-92
1:920
or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the Watertown
Water Department any pertinent information regarding the piping system
or systems on such property.
§ 512-93. Emergency conditions.
If at any time it becomes apparent that an emergency condition exists
with respect to water lateral connections and/or sanitary sewer lateral
connections, the owner or his agent may cause emergency repairs to be
performed by a licensed plumber immediately, without application pursuant
to § 512-90 of this article and the requirements of § 253-11 et seq. of this
Code. The licensed plumber shall take all actions deemed necessary to
restore the public water system and/or public sewer system as it affects the
private property to a stable condition at the sole expense of the owner and/
or any agents.
§ 512-94. Discontinuance of service; notice required.
The Watertown Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water and/or sewer service to any property wherein any water
and/or sewer lateral connection in violation of this article exists and to
take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate
any danger of damage to the public water system and/or the public sewer
system. Water service and/or sewer service shall be discontinued only after
reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.,
except as provided in § 512-95. Water service and/or sewer service to such
property shall not be restored until the water lateral and/or sanitary sewer
lateral has been eliminated or replaced in compliance with the provisions of
this article.
§ 512-95. Emergency discontinuance; written finding required.
If it is determined by the Watertown Water Department that a water lateral
and/or sanitary sewer lateral or the connection thereof, or any emergency
related thereto, endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires
immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the
Clerk/Treasurer of the City of Watertown and delivered to the customer's
premises, services may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall
have an opportunity for a hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., within 10 days
of such emergency discontinuance.
§ 512-96. Plumbing Code.
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code, as adopted by
reference in § 419-1 of this Code, but is supplementary and additional
thereto.
§ 512-97. Fees.
A. The fee for a plumbing permit shall be as set forth in § 253-15B of this
Code, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 512-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-97
1:921
B. The costs and fees to be assessed against the property owner for the
installation, establishment and/or repair of any water lateral and/or
sanitary sewer lateral by the City of Watertown Water Department shall
be at a rate approximating the actual cost of the work performed and
materials provided as set forth on a schedule maintained on file with the
City of Watertown Water Department main office and available for
inspection at any time by any member of the public. Such schedule shall
be maintained at fee rates and costs as established by the City of
Watertown Water Department and amended from time to time as
deemed necessary by the City of Watertown Water Department to
enable the Water Department to recover the actual costs of all work
performed pursuant to this article.
§ 512-97 WATERTOWN CODE § 512-97
1:922
ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 512-98. General penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each violation and each day a
violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in
this section shall prevent enforced removal of a violation of this chapter.
§ 512-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-98
1:923
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 525
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
§ 525-1. Authority.
Pursuant to § 62.23(2) and (3), Wis. Stats., the City of Watertown is
authorized to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan as defined in
§ 66.1001(1)(a) and (2), Wis. Stats.
§ 525-2. Public participation.
The Common Council of the City of Watertown has adopted and followed
written procedures designed to foster public participation in every stage
of the preparation of a Comprehensive Plan as required by § 66.1001(4)(a),
Wis. Stats.
§ 525-3. Plan Commission recommendation.
The Plan Commission of the City of Watertown, by a majority vote of the
entire Commission recorded in its official minutes, has adopted a resolution
recommending to the Common Council the adoption of the document titled
"City of Watertown Comprehensive Plan," containing all of the elements
specified in § 66.1001(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 525-4. Public hearing.
The City of Watertown has held at least one public hearing on this
ordinance, in compliance with the requirements of § 66.1001(4)(d), Wis.
Stats., and provided numerous other opportunities for public involvement
per its adopted public participation strategy and procedures.
§ 525-5. Adoption of Comprehensive Plan.
The Common Council of the City of Watertown, Wisconsin, does, by
enactment of this ordinance, formally adopt the document titled "City of
Watertown Comprehensive Plan," pursuant to § 66.1001(4)(c), Wis. Stats.204
Chapter 532
FLOODPLAIN AND SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545. Zoning — See Ch. 550.
204. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 512-98 WATERTOWN CODE § 525-5
1:924
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 532-1. Statutory authorization.
This chapter for floodplain and wetland protection is adopted pursuant to
the authorization contained in §§ 61.35, 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 281.31,
Wis. Stats.
§ 532-2. Findings of fact.
Uncontrolled development and use of the wetlands, floodplains, rivers and
streams and the pollution of the navigable waters of the City of Watertown
would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated
responsibility to all municipalities to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning
grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of
structures and land uses; and preserve shore cover and natural beauty.
§ 532-3. Statement of purpose.
To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and
protect life, health and property, this chapter has been established to:
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands;
C. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter
or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into waters of the state;
D. Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by
preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat;
E. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the wetland areas;
F. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting wetland
excavation, filling and other earthmoving activities;
G. Minimize expenditures of public monies for costly flood control
projects;
H. Reduce rescue and relief efforts, generally undertaken at the expense
of the taxpaying public;
I. Prevent business interruptions, which usually result in the loss of local
incomes;
J. Reduce damage to public facilities such as utilities, municipal buildings,
streets and bridges which may be located in floodplains;
K. Prevent the occurrence of future flood blight areas on floodplains;
§ 532-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-3
1:925
§ 532-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain and Wetland Zoning
Ordinance for the City of Watertown."
L. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
M. Prevent increases in regional flood heights which could increase
damage during floods and which may result in conflicts or litigation
between property owners; and
N. Discourage development in the floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
§ 532-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-4
1:926
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 532-5. Compliance; other permits.
Any development, as defined in § 532-49, in floodplains and wetlands shall
be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
local, state and federal regulations. It is the responsibility of the applicant
to secure all other necessary permits from appropriate federal, state and
local agencies, including those required by the United States Army Corps
of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended.
§ 532-6. Areas to be regulated.
§ 532-7. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
§ 532-8. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
A. This chapter regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional
flood or base flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from
the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as
AE, A1-30 and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are
displayed as A and AO Zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be
derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is
referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
B. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
A. This chapter supersedes all the provisions of the City of Watertown
Zoning Code, Chapter 550, except that where the Zoning Code is more
restrictive than the provisions contained in this chapter, the Zoning
Code shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise. The more restrictive of either the
Wetland District or Floodplain District regulations shall apply when a
property is located in both zoning districts.
B. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail.
§ 532-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-8
1:927
favor of the City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this
chapter is required by a standard in Ch. NR 116 or NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code,
and where the provision of this chapter is unclear, the provision shall be
interpreted in light of the Chs. NR 116 and NR 117 standards in effect on
the date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most
recent text amendment to this chapter.
§ 532-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering experience
and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or the flood height
may be increased by man-made or natural causes such as ice dams or bridge
openings restricted by debris. Therefore, this chapter does not imply that
areas outside of the delineated floodplain or permitted land uses within the
floodplain will be totally free from flooding and associated flood damages;
nor does this chapter create liability on the part of, or a cause of action
against, the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that may result from reliance on this chapter.
§ 532-10. Annexed areas.
The Dodge and Jefferson County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on
the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the
municipality for all areas annexed by the municipality until the municipality
adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Ch.
NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, and 44 CFR 59 to 72, National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's
Official Zoning Map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated
by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in
the office of the City's Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of annexation
shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway.
§ 532-11. Zoning maps.
The maps designated below are hereby adopted and made part of this
chapter. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as
floodplains or A Zones (A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30) on the maps based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below and the revisions in the Watertown
Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any
changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the
DNR and FEMA through the Letter of Map Change process (see Article VII,
Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations
(RFEs) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR.
These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the City Engineer, City
of Watertown, Wisconsin. If more than one map or revision is referenced,
the most restrictive information applies. See also § 532-7B.
§ 532-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-11
1:928
A. Official maps based on the FIS.
(1) FEMA Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM) for Jefferson
County, Panels Nos. 55055C0067F, 55055C0078F, 55055C0079F,
55055C0086F, 55055C0087F, and 55055C0088F, dated February 4,
2015, based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) 55055CV001B and
55025CV002B, dated February 4, 2015. [Amended 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 14-33]
(2) FEMA Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM) for Dodge
County, Panels Nos. 55027C0659G, 55027C0676G, 55027C0678G
and 55027C0679G, dated May 19, 2014, based on the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) 55027CV000C, dated May 19, 2014.
(3) FEMA Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) for Dodge County, Panel No.
55027C0678G, dated February 26, 2019, based on Case No.
18-05-4306P, dated February 26, 2019. [Added 3-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-2]
B. Official maps based on other studies. Any maps referenced in this
section must be approved by the DNR and be more restrictive than
those based on the FIS at the site of the proposed development.
(1) Dodge County Flood Storage Map Panel No. 3 of 13, dated May 19,
2014, approved by the DNR.
(2) Jefferson County Flood Storage Map Panel No. 12 of 13, dated
February 4, 2015, approved by the DNR. [Added 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 14-33]
(3) Wisconsin wetland inventory maps stamped "Final" on January 23,
1986.
(4) One-hundred-year dam failure floodplain map for the upper
Watertown DAMBRK Study, dated April 2004, prepared by Mead &
Hunt, Inc., and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 532-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-11
1:929

ARTICLE III
Wetland Zoning District
§ 532-12. District boundaries of wetlands.
§ 532-13. Permitted uses in wetlands.
The following uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of Chs. 30 and
31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if
applicable.
A. The wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the City of
Watertown which are two acres or more in size and are shown on the
final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a part of
this chapter in § 532-11.
(1) There shall be excepted from the boundary of the wetland district
that part of a mapped wetland hereinafter described, established
and determined as set forth in the following described lands in
Jefferson County, Wisconsin: A.L. Pritchard's 1st Addition, part of
lots 1 through 8, Block 6, and that part of the right-of-way owned by
the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railway Company, as shown
on the map. (Property is known as 315 Mary Street.)
B. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the wetland district
boundary shown on the official zoning maps and the actual field
conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning
Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the
Department to determine if the wetland district boundary, as mapped,
is in error. If Department staff concur with the Zoning Administrator
that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a
building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the
correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors
shown on the official zoning maps, the Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
A. Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a building
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
boating.
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops.
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber.
(4) The pasturing of livestock.
§ 532-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-13
1:931
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops.
B. Uses which do not require the issuance of a building permit and which
may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided
below:
(1) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level
stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally
wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the
conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected;
(2) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland
alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting
cranberries;
(3) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems, where
permissible under § 30.20, Wis. Stats., to restore preexisting levels
of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to
dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible
under Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and that dredged spoil is placed on
existing spoil banks where possible;
(4) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction or maintenance;
(5) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
(6) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the wetland zoning district, provided that
such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the
wetlands listed in § 532-15A of this chapter; and
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of
existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and
filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction.
C. Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of
essential utility and emergency services, or to provide access to
uses permitted under this section, provided that:
(a) The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
§ 532-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-13
1:932
(b) The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse
impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in
§ 532-15A of this chapter;
(c) The road is designed and constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the intended use;
(d) Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only; and
(e) Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction
or maintenance of the road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
(a) The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted
in the wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows
or other wetland or aquatic animals;
(b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
(c) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
(d) Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks
and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural
and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms,
wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
(a) Any private development allowed under this subsection shall
be used exclusively for the permitted purpose.
(b) Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming
beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed.
(c) The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the
uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where
such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in
Subsection C(1); and
(d) Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal
farms, and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of
improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland
values.
§ 532-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-13
1:933
§ 532-14. Prohibited uses in wetlands.
§ 532-15. Rezoning wetlands.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines and water, gas and sewer lines and related
facilities, and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines,
provided that:
(a) The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities
and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland;
(b) Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed; and
(c) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural
functions of the wetland listed in § 532-15A.
A. Any use not listed in § 532-13 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a
portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter
in accordance with § 532-15 and Article VII.
B. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary highwater
mark of any navigable waters is prohibited.
A. Rezoning of a shoreland wetland shall require amendment of the Final
Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map, adopted in Article II of this chapter,
pursuant to procedures established in Article VII. In order to ensure
that any amendment will be consistent with the protection objectives of
§ 281.31, Wis. Stats., the City shall not rezone a wetland in a wetland
zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning
may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following:
(1) Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity;
(2) Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland;
(3) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into waters of the
state;
(4) Shoreline protection against soil erosion;
(5) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
(6) Wildlife habitat; or
§ 532-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-15
1:934
(7) Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including
scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
B. Upon notification of a proposed amendment as required by Article VII,
if the district office of the Department determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria
listed in Subsection A of this section, the Department shall so notify the
City of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing
held on the proposed amendment.
C. If the Department notifies the municipal Plan Commission in writing
that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact
upon any of the criteria listed in Subsection A, that proposed
amendment, if approved by the City, shall not become effective until
more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the Common
Council approval was mailed to the Department, as required by Article
VII. If within the thirty-day period the Department notifies the Council
that the Department intends to adopt a superseding wetland zoning
ordinance for the City under § 62.231(6), Wis. Stats., the proposed
amendment shall not become effective until that ordinance adoption
procedure is completed or otherwise terminated. The record of the
Common Council decision on the proposed amendment shall advise the
petitioner of the provisions of this section.
§ 532-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-15
1:935

ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Zoning Districts
§ 532-16. General provisions applicable to all floodplain districts.
A. General standards applicable to all floodplain districts.
(1) The community shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be
constructed with flood-resistant materials; and be constructed to
minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical
equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions
of flooding.
(2) Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home
parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for
any development that meets the subdivision definition of this
chapter and all other requirements in § 532-31. Adequate drainage
shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages.
B. District boundaries of floodplain zoning districts. The boundaries of the
regional floodplain areas shall be those areas designated on the zoning
maps which have been adopted and made a part of this chapter in
§ 532-11.
C. Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas within the
jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into four districts defined
as follows:
(1) The Floodway District (FW) consists of the channel of a river or
stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel
required to carry the regional floodwaters and is contained within
AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
(2) The Flood-Fringe District (FF) consists of that portion of the
floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway and
displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
(3) The General Floodplain District (GFP) consists of all areas which
have been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater during the
regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary
determined, including A, AH and AO Zones on the FIRM. It includes
both the floodway and flood-fringe districts.
§ 532-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-16
1:937
(4) The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain
where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional
flood discharge.
D. Locating floodplain boundaries. Where an apparent discrepancy exists
between the location of the outermost boundary of the flood-fringe
district or general floodplain district shown on the Official Floodplain
Zoning Map and actual field conditions, the location of the district
boundary line shall be initially determined by the Zoning Administrator
using the criteria set forth in Subsection D(1) or (2) below. Where the
Zoning Administrator finds that there is a significant difference
between the district boundary shown on the map and the actual field
conditions, the map shall be amended using the procedures established
in Article VII, Amendments. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a
boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a building
permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual
predevelopment field conditions and the basis upon which the district
boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments
required under this section. Disputes between the Zoning
Administrator and an applicant over the location of the district
boundary line shall be settled by the Zoning Board of Appeals according
to § 532-37D. Where the flood profiles are based on established base
flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment
or revision pursuant to Article VII, Amendments. [Amended
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
(1) Where flood profiles exist, the location of the district boundary line
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator using both the
scale appearing on the map and the elevations shown on the water
surface profile of the regional flood. Where a discrepancy exists
between the boundary line location shown on the map and actual
field conditions, the regional flood elevations shall govern. A map
amendment is required where there is a significant discrepancy
between the map and actual field conditions. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny
a building permit on the basis of a district boundary derived from
the elevations shown on the water surface profile of the regional
flood, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for initiating any map
amendments required under this section within a reasonable
period of time.
(2) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the district
boundary line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator
using the scale appearing on the map. Where there is a significant
difference between the district boundary line shown on the map
and actual field conditions, the Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable
time. Where a map amendment has been approved by both
§ 532-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-16
1:938
Common Council and the Department, the Zoning Administrator
shall have the authority to grant or deny a building permit.
E. Removal of land from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be grounds for removing lands from the floodplain
district, unless they are removed by filling to a height of at least two
feet above the regional flood elevation; the fill is contiguous to lands
outside the floodplain district; and the map is amended pursuant to
Article VII. To remove flood insurance requirements, FEMA must first
revise the Flood Insurance Rate Map or issue a Letter of Map
Amendment or Revision. Also see Article VII.
F. Hydraulic and hydrologic analysis.
(1) No development shall be allowed in floodplain areas which will:
(a) Cause an obstruction to flow as defined in § 532-49; or
(b) Cause an increase in regional flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits where it is
determined the proposed development will cause an obstruction to
flow or increase in regional flood height of 0.00 feet or greater
unless the provisions of Article VII, Amendments, are met.
G. Watercourse alterations. Prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and prior to the issuance of any building permit which
may be required for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify adjacent municipalities, the regional
office of the Department and the appropriate office of FEMA and shall
require the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits.
The standards of this subsection must be met and the flood-carrying
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse
shall be maintained. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and
pursuant to Article VII, the community shall apply for a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed
and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
H. Development under Chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats. Development which
requires a permit from the Department, under Chs. 30 and 31, Wis.
Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and
navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained
and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFEs
established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM,
or other floodplain zoning maps or this chapter are made according to
Article VII.
I. Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall
have low flood damage potential and shall meet the following
provisions:
§ 532-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-16
1:939
(1) The campground is approved by the Department of Health
Services.
(2) A building permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
(3) The character of the river system and the elevation of the
campground are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an
impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground
that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all
persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written
agreement between the campground owner, the municipal
emergency management coordinator and the chief law
enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which
evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood
elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures
for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel
responsible for conducting the evacuation.
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at
which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the
officials identified in Subsection I(4) to remain in compliance with
all applicable regulations, including those of the State Department
of Health Services and all other applicable regulations.
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready
for highway use are allowed.
(7) The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for
more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit
must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a
written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such
authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period
not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the
provisions of this section.
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by
the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of
this section.
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180
consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either
§ 532-17 or 532-18 for the floodplain district in which the structure
is located.
§ 532-16 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-16
1:940
§ 532-17. Floodway district (FW).
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation
when a flood warning is issued.
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems
and wells, shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed
to the flood protection elevation.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas mapped as
floodway on the official floodplain zoning maps, and to those portions of
the general floodplain district determined to be floodway.
B. Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed within the
floodway district and in the floodway portion of the general floodplain
district, provided that they are not prohibited by any other regulations,
that the standards contained in Subsections C and D are met, and that
all permits or certificates required under this chapter have been issued:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasturing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, silviculture, truck farming, forestry,
sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural private and public recreational uses, such as golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and
fishing areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails.
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or essential for
historical areas, provided they are not in conflict with the
provisions in Subsections C and D.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials, according to
Subsection C(4) below.
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses such as docks, piers or
wharves, including those used as part of a marina; other waterrelated
uses, such as dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational
aids and river crossings of transmission lines and pipelines may be
allowed if all other necessary local, state and federal permits are
secured, including Ch. 30 or 31, Wis. Stats., permits, from the
Department.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges, according to Subsection C(3)
below.
§ 532-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-17
1:941
C. Standards for developments in floodway areas.
(1) General.
(a) Any development in floodway areas shall meet all of the
provisions of § 532-16 and have low flood damage potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide a cross-section elevation view of the
proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, indicating
whether the proposed development will obstruct flow, or an
analysis calculating the effects of the proposal on the regional
flood height for the Zoning Administrator to determine the
effects of the proposal according to § 532-16F.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application
where it is determined the project will cause any increase in
the flood elevations upstream or downstream based on the
data submitted for Subsection C(1)(b) above.
(2) Structures. Only structures which are accessory to permitted open
space uses, or are essential for historical areas, or are functionally
dependent on a waterfront location, may be allowed by permit,
provided the structures meet all of the following criteria:
(a) The structures are not designed for human habitation or
associated with high flood damage potential;
(b) The structures do not obstruct the flow of floodwaters or cause
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
regional flood. Structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flow of floodwaters,
and approximately on the same line as those of adjoining
structures;
(c) The structures are firmly anchored to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement; and
(d) The structures have all service facilities, such as electrical and
heating equipment, at or above the flood protection elevation
for the particular area and shall have a minimum of two
openings on different walls having a total net area not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, the
bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot
above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens,
louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit,
provided that:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation;
§ 532-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-17
1:942
(b) Construction does not cause an increase in the height of the
regional flood according to § 532-16F, except where the water
surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and this chapter are
amended, as needed, to reflect any changes resulting from
such construction. Any such amendment must be reviewed and
approved by the Department and FEMA. See also Article VII
pertaining to amendments.
(4) Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, provided
that:
(a) The requirements of § 532-16A are met;
(b) The fill or deposition of materials does not encroach on the
channel area between the ordinary high-water mark on each
bank of the stream unless a Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., permit has
been granted by the Department and a permit pursuant to
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, has been issued, if
applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met;
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading sufficient
to prevent erosion; and
(d) Such fills are not associated with private or public solid or
hazardous waste disposal.
D. Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in Subsection B
are prohibited, in addition to the following uses which are always
prohibited, in floodways and the floodway portions of the general
floodplain:
(1) Structures in, on or over floodway areas which are designed for
human habitation, associated with high flood damage potential, or
not associated with permanent open space uses;
(2) The storage of any materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal,
plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(3) Any uses which are not in harmony with, or which may be
detrimental to, the uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(4) All private or public on-site sewage disposal systems, except
portable latrines that are removed during flooding, and systems
associated with public recreational areas and Departmentapproved
campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of Ch.
SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code;
(5) All public or private wells that are used to obtain water for ultimate
human consumption, except those for recreational areas that meet
§ 532-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-17
1:943
§ 532-18. Flood-fringe district (FF).
the requirements of local ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) All solid or hazardous waste disposal sites, whether public or
private;
(7) All wastewater treatment ponds or facilities except those permitted
under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
(8) All sanitary sewer or water lines, except those used to service
existing or proposed development outside of the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the
flood-fringe district, as shown on the official floodplain zoning maps,
and to those portions of the general floodplain district that are
determined to be in the flood-fringe area.
B. Permitted uses. Any structures, land use or development, including
accessory structures and uses, are allowed within the flood-fringe
district and flood-fringe portions of the general floodplain district,
provided that the standards contained in § 532-16A and Subsection C
below are met, that the use is not prohibited by any other ordinance or
local, state or federal regulation, and that all permits or certificates
required under this chapter have been issued.
C. Standards for developments in flood-fringe areas. All of the provisions
of § 532-16A shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested:
(1) Residential uses. Any structure or building used for human
habitation which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered or moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
(a) The lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be
placed on fill at or above the flood protection elevation (which
is a point two feet above the regional flood elevation) except
where Subsection C(1)(b) is applicable. The fill elevation shall
be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation
extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure.
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional
flood elevation, provided that it is floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation. No permit or variance shall allow any
floor, basement or crawlway below the regional flood elevation.
(c) Contiguous dry land access, defined in § 532-49 as a vehicular
access route above regional flood elevation, shall be provided
§ 532-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-18
1:944
from a structure or building to land which is outside the
floodplain, except as provided in Subsection C(1)(d) below.
(d) In existing developments where existing streets or sewer lines
are at elevations which make compliance with Subsection
C(1)(c) above impractical, the municipality may permit new
development and substantial improvements where access
roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, provided:
[1] The municipality has written assurance from the
appropriate local units of police, fire and emergency
services that rescue and relief will be provided to the
structure(s) by wheeled vehicles, considering the
anticipated depth, duration and velocity of the regional
flood event; or
[2] The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency
evacuation plan.
(2) Accessory structures or uses. An accessory structure or use (not
connected to a principal structure), including nonresidential
agricultural structures, shall meet all the applicable provisions of
§ 532-17C(2) and D.
(3) Commercial uses. Any commercial structure or building which is to
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved into the
flood-fringe area shall meet the requirements of Subsection C(1)
pertaining to residential uses. Storage yards, parking lots and
other accessory land uses may be at lower elevations, subject to the
requirements of Subsection C(5) below, provided an adequate
warning system exists to protect life and property. However, no
such area in general use by the public shall be inundated to a depth
greater than two feet or subjected to flood velocities greater than
two feet per second during the regional flood.
(4) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or
industrial structure or building which is to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered or moved into the flood-fringe area shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood level or meet the floodproofing standards in § 532-42. On
streams or rivers having prolonged flood durations, greater
protection may be required to minimize interference with normal
plant operations. A lesser degree of protection may be permissible
for storage yards, parking lots and other similar uses subject to the
criteria in Subsection C(3) above and (5) below.
(5) Storage or processing of materials. The storage or processing of
materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or which in times
of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall be
at or above the flood protection elevation for the particular area or
floodproofed in compliance with § 532-42. Adequate measures shall
§ 532-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-18
1:945
be taken to assure that these materials will not enter the river or
stream during flooding.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges should be designed to be
compatible with the local comprehensive floodplain development
plans and:
(a) When failure or interruption of public utilities, streets and
bridges would result in danger to the public health or safety or
where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of
the area, construction of and substantial improvements to such
facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation in compliance with § 532-42.
(b) Minor or auxiliary roads or nonessential utilities may be
constructed at lower elevations, provided that they withstand
flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
(7) Sewage systems, wells and solid waste sites.
(a) All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation and shall meet the applicable
provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(b) All wells, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to
the flood protection elevation and shall meet the applicable
provisions of Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(c) All solid or hazardous waste disposal sites, whether public or
private, are prohibited.
(8) Deposition of materials for any purpose may only be allowed if the
provisions of this chapter are met.
(9) Mobile homes, manufactured homes, and mobile recreational
vehicles in floodplains.
(a) Owners or operators of all existing mobile home parks and
mobile home subdivisions located in the regional floodplain
shall file an evacuation plan, indicating alternate vehicular
access and escape routes, including mobile home hauler
routes, with the appropriate local disaster preparedness
authorities and shall provide for adequate surface drainage to
minimize flood damage.
(b) In existing mobile home parks, all new homes with new pads,
replacement units on existing pads, substantially improved
mobile/manufactured homes, and recreational vehicles that
remain on site in excess of 180 days or are unlicensed or not
ready for highway use, and which are placed or improved on a
site located in the regional floodplain, shall:
§ 532-18 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-18
1:946
§ 532-19. Other floodplain districts.
Other floodplain districts may be established under this chapter and
reflected on the floodplain zoning map. These districts may include general
floodplain districts and flood storage districts.
§ 532-20. General floodplain district (GFP).
[1] Have the lowest floor elevated to the regional flood
elevation; and
[2] Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(c) Outside of existing mobile home parks, including new mobile
home parks, and all single units outside of existing parks, all
new, replacement and substantially improved mobile/
manufactured homes and recreational vehicles that remain on
site more than 180 days which are unlicensed or are not ready
for highway use shall meet the residential development
standards for the flood-fringe in Subsection C(1) and (9)(b)[2]
of this section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(d) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles
that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not
fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the
elevation and anchoring requirements in Subsection C(9)(b)
and (c). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
A. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH Zone.
B. Permitted uses. The general floodplain district encompasses both
floodway and flood-fringe areas. Therefore, a determination shall be
made pursuant to Subsection D below to determine whether the
proposed use is located within a floodway or flood-fringe area. Those
uses permitted in § 532-17, Floodway district (FW), above and § 532-18,
Flood-fringe district (FF), above are allowed within the general
floodplain district, according to the standards of Subsection C,
Standards for development in the general floodplain district, below, and
provided that all permits or certificates required under this chapter
have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the general floodplain district. Once it is
determined according to Subsection D below that a proposed use is
§ 532-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-20
1:947
§ 532-21. Flood storage district.
located within a floodway, the provisions of § 532-17, Floodway district
(FW), above shall apply. Once it is determined that the proposed use is
located within the flood-fringe, the provisions of § 532-18, Flood-fringe
district (FF), above shall apply. All provisions of the remainder of this
chapter apply to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation; or
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
(2) In AO/AH Zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
D. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the general floodplain district, the
Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit, at the time of application, two
copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which accurately locates
the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain
district limits, channel of stream, existing floodplain developments,
together with all pertinent information such as the nature of the
proposal, legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations,
building floor elevation and floodproofing, and the flood zone as
shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following additional
information as is deemed necessary by the Department for
evaluation of the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood
flows and the regional flood elevation and, where applicable, to
determine the boundaries of the floodway:
(a) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water
supply and sanitary facilities; soil types; and other pertinent
information.
(b) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage
of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
(c) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 532-32.
§ 532-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-21
1:948
A. General. The flood storage district delineates that portion of the
floodplain where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account
and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood discharge. The district
protects the flood storage area and assures that any development in the
storage areas will not decrease the effective flood storage capacity,
which would cause higher flood elevations.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the
flood storage district (FSD), as shown on the official floodplain zoning
maps.
C. Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage
district must meet the applicable requirements in § 532-18C.
D. Standards for development in flood storage districts.
(1) Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase
equal or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional
flood.
(2) No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the
predevelopment ground surface and the regional flood elevation
shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed
development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost
(compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table
is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage.
(3) If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district on
this waterway is rezoned to the flood-fringe district. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge
calculated without floodplain storage, as per Article VII,
Amendments, of this chapter.
(4) No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it
can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the
floodplain.
§ 532-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-21
1:949

ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Structures and Uses
§ 532-22. Applicability.
Insofar as the standards in this article are not inconsistent with the
provisions of § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., for cities and villages, they shall
apply to all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures. These
regulations apply to the modification of, or addition to, any structure and to
the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of
this chapter or any amendment thereto.
§ 532-23. General provisions.
The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the
time this chapter or an applicable amendment to this chapter took effect
and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including
the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued,
subject to the following conditions:
§ 532-24. Modifications and additions to nonconforming structures
in wetland zoning district.
Nonconforming structures and uses regulated under the wetland provisions
of this chapter are subject to all provisions of this chapter, except as
otherwise stipulated in § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.
§ 532-25. Nonconforming structures in floodplain areas; general
provisions.
A. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building,
structure or property shall conform to the appropriate provisions of this
chapter.
B. Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use
of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or
subsequent amendment of this chapter may be continued although such
use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. However, such
nonconforming use may not be extended or increased.
C. The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are
located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters
shall comply with the requirements of § 30.121, Wis. Stats.
D. Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to
continue as nonconforming uses.
A. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall
be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
§ 532-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-25
1:951
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure
or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes
painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural components and
the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage
or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs
associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered
maintenance. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200
square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal
structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the
structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe
ingress and egress to the principal structure.
B. The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses
and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value,
the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted,
and the percentage of the structure's total current value those
modifications represent.
C. No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use which over the life of the structure
would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value shall
be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the
applicable requirements of this chapter, and contiguous dry land access
is provided in compliance with § 532-18C(1). The costs of elevating a
nonconforming structure or a structure with a nonconforming use to
the flood protection elevation are excluded from the fifty-percent
provision in this subsection.
D. No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with
a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50% of
its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a
conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential
and commercial uses in compliance with § 532-18C(1).
E. If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done under
Subsections C and D equals or exceeds 50% of the present equalized
assessed value, the work shall not be permitted unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a
conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential
and commercial uses in compliance with § 532-18C(1).
F. Except as provided in Subsection G below, if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is
substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt
unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance
requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the
§ 532-25 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-25
1:952
total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the structure's present equalized assessed value.
G. For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a
nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such
nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it after
the nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming building will
meet all of the minimum requirements under applicable FEMA
regulations (44 CFR Part 60) or the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(1) Residential structures:
(a) Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation, using fill, pilings, columns,
posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the
requirements of § 532-42C.
(b) Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, and shall
be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood
damage.
(c) Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
(d) In A Zones, shall obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
(e) In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, meet the standards in § 532-20C.
(f) In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from the structure.
(2) Nonresidential structures:
(a) Shall meet the requirements of Subsection G(1)(a) to (f).
(b) Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the regional flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the
standards in § 532-42A or C.
(c) In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, meet the standards in § 532-20C.
§ 532-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-25
1:953
§ 532-26. Nonconforming structures in floodway areas.
H. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure; the alteration will comply with § 532-17C; flood-resistant
materials are used; and construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with § 532-42 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of
Subsection G if it is determined that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
I. As requests are received for structural modifications or additions to
nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures in the floodplain, a
record shall be kept which lists the nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the
cost of those additions or modifications which have been permitted, and
the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications
represent.
J. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted, and
any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon,
shall conform to the applicable requirements of this ordinance. [Added
5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
A. Modification or addition.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway
area, unless such modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance;
(b) Meets criteria of § 532-25; and
(c) Will not increase the amount of obstruction to flood flows as
provided in § 532-16F.
(2) Any addition to an existing structure shall be floodproofed pursuant
to § 532-42.
(3) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is
enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
(a) The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect
or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of
floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two
openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least
one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area.
§ 532-25 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-26
1:954
§ 532-27. Nonconforming structures in flood-fringe areas.
The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches
above the adjacent grade;
(b) The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(c) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(d) The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
B. No new on-site sewage disposal system or addition to an existing on-site
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by
a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be
allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of
an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall
meet the applicable requirements of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS
383, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. No new well or modification to an existing well, used to obtain water for
ultimate human consumption, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway
area shall meet the applicable requirements of this chapter and Chs.
NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the flood-fringe
area unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or
variance and, except where Subsection B below is applicable, the
modification or addition is placed on fill or is floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation in compliance with the applicable regulations for
that particular use in a flood-fringe area in § 532-18.
B. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection A above would
result in unnecessary hardship, and only where the structure will not be
used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage
potential, the Zoning Board of Appeals, using the procedures
established in §§ 532-7 and 532-8, may grant a variance from those
provisions for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below.
Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than
the flood protection elevation may be permitted, provided:
(1) No floor is below regional flood for residential and commercial
structures;
(2) Human lives are not endangered;
(3) Public facilities, such as water and sewer, are not to be installed;
(4) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
§ 532-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-27
1:955
§ 532-28. Flood storage area.
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in § 532-21D
are met.
(5) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(6) The structure will not be used for storage of materials that are
buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal, plant,
fish or other aquatic life.
C. All new on-site sewage disposal systems or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of an on-site sewage disposal system in a floodfringe
area shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. All new wells or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a
well in a flood-fringe area shall meet the applicable provisions of this
chapter and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 532-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-28
1:956
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 532-29. General.
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/
appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance
adopted under § 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., these officials shall also administer
this chapter.
§ 532-30. Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
A. Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter, assist them in
preparing permit applications and appeal forms, and ensure that the
regional flood elevation is shown on permit applications where
appropriate.
B. Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this chapter.
C. Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial
damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structure
has occurred.
D. Keep records of all official actions, such as:
(1) All permits issued.
(2) Inspections made.
(3) Work approved.
(4) Floodproofing certificates.
(5) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations for floodplain development.
(6) Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
(7) All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
(8) List of nonconforming structures and uses.
E. Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties.
F. Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional office:
§ 532-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-30
1:957
§ 532-31. Building permits.
(1) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text
amendments.
(2) Copies of any case-by-case analyses and any other information
required by the Department, including an annual summary of the
number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken.
(3) Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
G. Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter to the
appropriate municipal planning agency and the City Attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the violation reports shall also be sent to the
Department regional office.
H. Submit copies of floodplain text and map amendments and biennial
reports to the regional FEMA office.
A. When required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a building
permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before any
development, as defined in § 532-49, including any change in the use of
an existing building or structure, is initiated.
B. Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator upon forms furnished and shall include the following
information for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations:
(1) General information.
(a) Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property
owner and contractor.
(b) Legal description of the property and a general description of
the proposed use or development indicating new construction
or modification to existing structures.
(2) Site development plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to
scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and
shall contain the following information:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot. Also, a copy
of the Wetland Inventory Map shall be provided, if applicable,
with elevation noted;
(b) Location and boundaries of wetlands;
(c) Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration;
§ 532-30 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-31
1:958
§ 532-32. Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development.
All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study
contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All
studies shall be reviewed and approved by the Department.
(d) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
(e) Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover;
(f) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways;
(g) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
(h) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(i) Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as
determined from floodplain zoning maps used to delineate
floodplain areas;
(j) The elevation of the lot, lowest floor of proposed buildings and
fill with the vertical datum from the adopted study, either
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD). This will include a FEMA elevation
certificate.
(k) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation at the
location of the development and to determine whether or not
the requirements of § 532-16 are met. This may include any of
the information noted in § 532-20D.
(l) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 532-16F. See also § 532-17C(1)(b).
C. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall
expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be
extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause.
A. Zone A floodplains.
(1) Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards
in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
(2) Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on
the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydraulic
§ 532-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-32
1:959
Analysis: Determination of the Regional Flood Elevation, and the
following:
(a) Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model
shall be based on detailed study information for downstream
structures (dam, bridge and culvert) to determine adequate
starting WSEL for the study.
(b) Channel sections must be surveyed.
(c) Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used
for the development of cross-section overbank and floodplain
mapping.
(d) A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is
allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross
sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope,
including a survey of the channel at each location.
(e) The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
(f) A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is
required at each structure.
(g) Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and
upstream limits of the proposed development and any
necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the
reach if greater than 500 feet.
(h) Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when
assigning parameters for the base model such as flow,
Manning's 'n' values, expansion and contraction coefficients or
effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past
flooding data such as high-water marks to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is
available, adequate justification shall be provided for any
parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices.
(i) The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order
to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference
between the proposed flood profile and the existing study
profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
(3) Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided,
showing all cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits
based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the
proposed development, and whether the proposed development is
located in the floodway.
(a) If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway,
then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood
elevation.
§ 532-32 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-32
1:960
(b) If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it
must be added to the base model to show the difference
between existing and proposed conditions. The study must
ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing
model, unless adequate justification based on standard
accepted engineering practices is provided.
B. Zone AE floodplains.
(1) Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing
study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on § NR
116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Discharge.
(2) Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydraulic Analysis:
Determination of the Regional Flood Elevation, and the following:
(a) Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data
and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a
continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised
reach. If data from the effective model is available, models
shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the
elevations shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report
to within 0.1 foot.
(b) Corrected effective model. The corrected effective model shall
not include any man-made physical changes since the effective
model date but shall import the model into the most current
version of HEC-RAS for Department review.
(c) Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing model
shall be required to support conclusions about the actual
impacts of the project associated with the revised (postproject)
model or to establish more up-to-date models on which
to base the revised (post-project) model.
(d) Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised (postproject
conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model
and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the
proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed
conditions.
(e) All changes to the duplicate effective model and subsequent
models must be supported by certified topographic
information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes.
(f) Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream
reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections
upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be
identical to those in the effective model and result in water
§ 532-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-32
1:961
§ 532-33. Certificates of compliance.
surface elevations and top widths computed by the revised
models matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The effective
model shall not be truncated.
(3) Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted
to the Department for review which meet the following conditions:
(a) Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised
floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles,
topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood
Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, and
bridge plans.
(b) Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval,
and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital
version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order
that the FIRM may be more easily revised.
(c) Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and 0.2%
annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries.
(d) If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data
(GIS or CADD) are used, then all supporting documentation or
metadata must be included with the data submission along
with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with FEMA
mapping specifications.
(e) The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective
floodplain boundaries.
(f) All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in
accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup
table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering
scheme.
(g) Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the
map.
(h) The stream center line or profile baseline used to measure
stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map.
A. Except where no building or conditional use permit is required, no land
shall be occupied or used and no building which is hereafter
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be
occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning
Administrator, subject to the following provisions:
§ 532-32 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-33
1:962
§ 532-34. Other permits.
Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit, the applicant must
secure all necessary permits from federal, state and local agencies,
including but not limited to those required by the United States Army Corps
of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
§ 532-35. Fees.
The Common Council may, by resolution, adopt fees for the following:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit.
(3) The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after
notification of completion of the work specified in the permit,
providing the building or premises or proposed use conforms to all
the provisions of the chapter.
(4) For floodplain development, the applicant shall submit a
certification signed by a registered professional engineer or
professional land surveyor that the fill and lowest floor elevations
are in compliance with the permit issued, including any required
floodproofing. Floodproofing measures also require certification by
a registered professional engineer or architect that the
requirements of § 532-42 are met. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-18; 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
B. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at
the time of adoption of this chapter, certifying, after inspection, the
extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or
not such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. The applicant
must secure all necessary permits from federal, state and local
agencies, including those required by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
A. Building permits.
B. Certificates of compliance.
C. Public hearings.
D. Legal notice publications.
E. Conditional use permits.
§ 532-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-36
1:963
§ 532-36. Plan Commission.
§ 532-37. Board of Appeals.
The appropriate board created under § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., is hereby
authorized or shall be appointed to act as the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the purposes of this chapter. The Board of Appeals shall exercise the
powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of
business. The Zoning Administrator may not be the Secretary of the Board.
A. The Plan Commission shall:
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) Review and make recommendations to the governing body on all
proposed amendments to this chapter, maps and text.
B. The Plan Commission shall not: [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18; 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
(1) Grant variances to the terms of this chapter in place of action by
the Zoning Board of Appeals; nor
(2) Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
A. Powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals:
(1) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
(2) May grant, upon appeal, a variance from the dimensional standards
of this chapter pursuant to § 532-38.
(3) Shall hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries
shown on the official floodplain zoning map pursuant to Subsection
D of this section.
B. Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be
taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or
bureau of the City affected by any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the official whose decision is in question. Such appeal
shall be taken within 30 days, as provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the official whose decision is in question and with the Zoning
Board of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the reasons for the
appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the
Board all the documents constituting the record concerning the matter
appealed.
C. Hearing appeals and applications for variances.
§ 532-36 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-37
1:964
§ 532-38. Variances.
(1) Notice and hearing. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable
time for a hearing on the appeal or application. The Board shall
give public notice by publishing a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985,
Wis. Stats., specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and
the matters to come before the Board. Notice shall be mailed to the
parties in interest. Written notice shall be given to the appropriate
regional office of the Department at least 10 days prior to hearings
on proposed variances and appeals for map or text interpretations.
At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board shall resolve boundary disputes, decide
variance applications, and decide appeals of permit denials.
(2) Decision. A decision regarding the appeal or application shall be
made as soon as practical. Copies of all decisions on variances and
appeals for map or text interpretations shall be submitted to the
appropriate regional office of the Department within 10 days after
they are granted or denied. The final disposition of an appeal or
application to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a
written resolution or order signed by the Chairperson and
Secretary of the Board. Such resolution shall state the specific facts
which are the basis of the Board's determination and shall either
affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed, in whole or in part; dismiss the appeal for
lack of jurisdiction or prosecution; or grant the application,
including the reasons or justifications for granting an appeal, with
a description of the hardship or practical difficulty demonstrated by
the applicant, in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the
recorded minutes of the Board proceedings.
D. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in hearing disputes concerning the district
boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map:
(1) Where a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate
or detailed floodplain studies, the regional flood elevations or
profiles for the point in question shall be the governing factor in
locating the district boundary. If no regional flood elevations or
profiles are available to the Board, other available evidence may be
examined.
(2) In all cases, the person contesting the location of the district
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present
arguments and technical evidence to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Where it is determined that the district boundary is incorrectly
mapped, the Board should either inform the Plan Commission to
petition the City or inform the person contesting the location of the
boundary to petition the City for a map amendment. See also
Article VII.
§ 532-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-38
1:965
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from
the dimensional standards of this chapter where an applicant
convincingly demonstrates that:
(1) Literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship on the applicant;
(2) The hardship is due to adoption of this chapter and special
conditions exist unique to the property and not common to a group
of adjacent lots or premises (in such case the Zoning Code or Map
must be amended);
(3) Such variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(4) Such a variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in
§ 532-3.
B. In addition to the criteria in Subsection A, to qualify for a variance
under FEMA regulations the following criteria must be met:
(1) The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation.
(2) Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/2 acre
and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the
regional flood elevation.
(3) Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not
cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not
increase costs for rescue and relief efforts, and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of this chapter.
C. A variance shall not:
(1) Grant, extend or increase any use of property prohibited in the
zoning district.
(2) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss.
(3) Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
(4) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area.
(5) Permit a lower degree of flood protection in any floodplain area
than the flood protection elevation. In the flood-fringe area, a lower
degree of flood protection than the flood protection elevation may
only be allowed pursuant to § 532-27B.
(6) Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or map(s)
required in Article VII.
(7) Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its use, which
would preclude its continued designation as a historic structure.
§ 532-38 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-38
1:966
§ 532-39. Conditional use permits.
§ 532-40. Appeals of permit denials.
D. When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and
flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25 per $100 of
coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record.
A. Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall be permitted
only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and a conditional use permit has been reviewed and
approved, following the procedures in Chapter 550 (Zoning). To secure
information upon which to base its determination, the applicant may be
required to furnish, in addition to the information otherwise required
for a conditional use permit, other pertinent information which is
necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the
purpose of this chapter.
B. Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the permitted uses in this chapter, the Plan
Commission shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in
addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, as are necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter as listed in § 532-3. Such conditions
may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific
enumeration, type of shore cover; erosion protection measures;
increased side yard setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water
supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation;
operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks,
parking areas and signs; and type of construction.
A. On appeal, the Common Council shall review all data constituting the
basis for the appeal of permit denial. This data may include (where
appropriate):
(1) Permit application data listed in § 532-31B.
(2) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 532-20D.
(3) Data listed in § 532-17C(1), where the applicant has not submitted
this information to the Zoning Administrator.
(4) Other data submitted to the Zoning Administrator with the permit
application or submitted to the Common Council with the appeal.
(5) The recommendation of the Plan Commission.
B. For appeals of all denied permits, the Common Council shall:
(1) Follow the procedures outlined in § 532-37.
(2) Render a decision regarding the appeal within 10 days of the public
hearing, which shall be submitted to the appropriate regional office
§ 532-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-40
1:967
§ 532-41. Public information.
§ 532-42. Floodproofing.
of the Department within 10 days after rendered. The final
disposition of an appeal shall be in the form of a written resolution.
Such resolution shall state the specific facts which are the basis of
the Council's determination and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or
modify the Plan Commission decision or determination appealed,
in whole or in part; dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or
prosecution; or grant the application for a permit.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the
Common Council shall:
(1) Affirm the denial where the Common Council agrees with the data
showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or
greater than 0.00 foot may only be allowed after amending the
flood profile and map and any appropriate legal arrangements are
made with all adversely affected property owners.
(2) Grant the appeal where the Common Council agrees that the data
properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase
equal to or greater than 0.00 foot, provided no other reasons for
denial exist.
A. Where useful, marks on bridges or buildings or other markers may be
set to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood at
appropriate locations within the floodplain.
B. All available information in the form of maps, engineering data and
regulations shall be readily available in the office of the City Engineer
and should be widely distributed.
C. All legal descriptions of property in the floodplain should include
information designating the floodplain zoning classification when such
property is transferred.
A. No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are
adequately designed to protect the structure or development to the
flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA floodproofing
certificate.
B. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(1) Withstand the flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces, and other factors associated with the regional flood;
(2) Assure protection of structures to the flood protection elevation;
§ 532-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-42
1:968
(3) Provide anchorage of structures to foundations to resist flotation
and lateral movement;
(4) Ensure that the structural walls and floors are watertight to the
flood protection elevation and the interior remains completely dry
during flooding, without human intervention;
(5) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(6) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
C. For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or
variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(1) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(2) That meets or exceeds the following standards:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 532-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-42
1:969

ARTICLE VII
Amendments
§ 532-43. Obstructions or increases.
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made
to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water
surface profiles, in accordance with § 532-44.
§ 532-44. Actions requiring amendment.
The Common Council may supplement or change floodplain and wetland
zoning districts and regulations contained in this chapter according to
§ 62.23, Wis. Stats., Chs. NR 116 and 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and, for
wetlands, § 532-15. Actions which require an amendment to this chapter
and/or submittal of a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) include, but are not
limited to, the following:
A. In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall
be permitted unless the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with § 532-44. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
B. In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official
floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in
accordance with § 532-44.
A. Any change to the Official Floodplain Zoning Map, including the
floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area.
B. Correction of significant discrepancies between the water surface
profiles and floodplain zoning maps.
C. Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a
height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
land lying outside the floodplain.
D. Any fill or encroachment into the floodplain that will obstruct flow
causing an increase of 0.01 foot or more in regional flood height.
E. Any upgrading of floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by
the municipality.
F. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines
or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
§ 532-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-44
1:971
§ 532-45. Procedures.
Amendments to this chapter may be made upon petition of any interested
party according to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. Such petitions shall
include all necessary data required by §§ 532-20D and 532-31.
G. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations
on the FIRM.
A. A copy of each proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for recommendation to the Common Council and be
submitted to the appropriate regional office of the Department within
five days of submission to the Plan Commission.
B. A public hearing shall be held as required by § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats.,
following publication of a Class 2 notice as defined in § 532-49. The
appropriate regional office of the Department shall be provided with
written notice of the public hearing at least 10 days prior to such
hearing.
C. A copy of the decision on each amendment shall be provided to the
Department within 10 days of the decision.
D. No amendment to the maps or text of this chapter shall become
effective until reviewed and approved by the Department. Any change
to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and
approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to
regional flood elevations (RFEs) on non-FEMA maps are effective until
approved by the DNR.
E. All persons petitioning for a map amendment which involves an
obstruction to flow causing an increase of 0.01 foot or more in the
height of the regional flood shall obtain flooding easements, or other
appropriate legal arrangements, from all adversely affected property
owners and notify the local unit of government before the amendment
can be approved by the governing body.
F. When considering amendments to the Official Floodplain Zoning Map,
in areas where no water surface profiles exist, the Plan Commission
shall consider data submitted by the Department, the Zoning
Administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available
information. (See § 532-16D.) [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18; 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
§ 532-44 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-45
1:972
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 532-46. Enforcement.
Any development, as defined in § 532-49, or use established after the
effective date of this chapter in violation of this chapter, by any person, firm,
association or corporation (including building contractors or their agents),
shall be deemed a violation. The Zoning Administrator shall refer violations
to the Plan Commission and the City Attorney, who shall prosecute such
violations.
§ 532-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which violates or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than $5 nor more than $50 per offense, together
with the taxable costs of such action. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 532-48. Nuisances.
Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance, and the creation thereof
may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at
suit of the City, the state or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30(2), Wis.
Stats.
§ 532-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-48
1:973

ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 532-49. Definitions.
Word usage: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in
the singular number include the plural number, words in the plural number
include the singular number; the word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive.
All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
Definitions: Specific words used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A detached subordinate structure or
a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found with the principal
structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot
as that of the principal structure or use.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or
VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a onepercent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on a municipality's official floodplain zoning
map (see definition) which would be inundated by the base flood or regional
flood as defined herein. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A
Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending
on the availability of data for a given area.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and
depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of
Watertown.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been specified by adoption of a municipal ordinance and approved
by the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats.,
and which allows limited filling between the bulkhead line and the original
§ 532-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-49
1:975
ordinary high-water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the
floodway provisions of this chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, tent or other mobile
recreational vehicle.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification issued by the Zoning
Administrator, stating that any construction and use of land or a building,
the elevation of fill, or the first floor of a structure is in compliance with all
of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is permitted by this chapter, provided
that certain conditions specified in this chapter are met and that a permit is
granted by the Plan Commission.
CRAWLWAY or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for limited
access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any new use, change of use and any artificial change
to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; any placement of
mobile homes; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or
structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; ditching, lagooning,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations;
the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
which is outside the floodplain, such as a road, with its surface above
regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief
vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, building, use or development in the
floodway.
§ 532-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-49
1:976
EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION — A
parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home
lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is
completed before the effective date of this chapter.
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be placed. This includes
installation of utilities, either final site grading, pouring pads, or
construction of streets.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
generally determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a
particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average,
once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in
any given year.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood; it is generally
associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map prepared for the City by
FEMA, designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are
designated as unnumbered A Zones and do not contain floodway lines or
regional flood elevations. These maps form the basis for both the regulatory
and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special
flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation and determination of flood hazard areas. It provides maps
designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both
flood insurance rate zones and regional flood elevations as well as floodway
lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered
A Zones. Flood Insurance Study maps form the basis for both the regulatory
and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by:
A. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and
B.
§ 532-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-49
1:977
FLOODPLAIN — That land which has been or may be hereafter covered by
floodwater during the regional flood. The floodplain includes the floodway
and the flood-fringe and may include other designated floodplain areas for
regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The full range of public policy and action
for ensuring wise use of floodplains. It includes everything from the
collection and dissemination of flood data to the acquisition of floodplain
lands and the enactment and administration of codes, ordinances and
statutes for land use in the floodplain.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line, showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation that corresponds to a
point two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile associated with
the regional flood. (Also see "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — Represents a factor of safety usually expressed in terms
of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard
compensates for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors include, but are
not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology
of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development, and the
sedimentation of a riverbed or streambed.
HABITABLE BUILDING — Any building or portion thereof used or designed
for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements of
Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. Class 1 notice is required at a minimum for appeals;
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
C.
§ 532-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-49
1:978
published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing. Class 2
notice is required at a minimum for all zoning ordinances and amendments,
including map amendments; published twice, once each week consecutively,
the last publication at least a week (seven days) before the hearing.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Any danger to human life or public
health or the potential for any significant economic loss to a structure or its
contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, resulting
from a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is
directly attributable to development in the floodplain, but not attributable
to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors,
expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation-design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in the states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
D.
§ 532-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-49
1:979
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MOBILE HOME or MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in
one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. For the purpose of this chapter, the term does not include
recreational vehicles or travel trailers which remain licensed and ready for
highway use and remain on site less than 180 days.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING —
A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicle."
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any
additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates
more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective model."
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the
effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
§ 532-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-49
1:980
of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected
effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing or preproject
conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective
model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The City of Watertown,
Wisconsin.[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 5-2-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-11]
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — The Rock River, all natural inland lakes within
the City, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within
the territorial limits of this City which are navigable under the laws of
this state (i.e., navigable bodies of water with a bed differentiated from
adjacent uplands and with levels or flow sufficient to support navigation by
a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis).
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the flood-fringe district
is a conforming use. However, if the first floor is lower than the flood
protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a residence
in the floodway).
OBSTRUCTION OF FLOW — Any development which physically blocks
the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development by itself or in
conjunction with any future similar development will cause an increase in
regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 532-11, which has been approved by
the Department and FEMA.
§ 532-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-49
1:981
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PLANNING AGENCY — The Plan Commission of the City of Watertown.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving a single structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. This term also means an alternative
sewage system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, including a substitute for the septic tank or the soil absorption
field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system
located on a different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
READY FOR HIGHWAY USE — A mobile recreational vehicle or travel
trailer is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices,
and has no permanently attached additions.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special
flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood
will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis,
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed,
light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. In any given year, there is
a one-percent chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded.
During a typical thirty-year mortgage period, the regional flood has a
twenty-six-percent chance of occurrence. The regional flood is based upon
a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed or
an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general watershed
region, or both. FEMA uses the term "base flood," which means the regional
flood. If depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
§ 532-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-49
1:982
SHORELANDS — Lands within the following distances from the ordinary
high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or
flowage and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
streambed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any structural repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and
is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however,
include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which existed
before the improvement began, was identified by a municipal official,
and is necessary to assure safe living conditions.
A.
Any alteration of a designated historic structure (see definition) or
site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin State
Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
B.
§ 532-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-49
1:983
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — The circumstance where special conditions,
which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict
conformity with the restrictions governing dimensional standards (such
as area, setbacks, frontage or height) unnecessarily burdensome or
unreasonable in light of the purpose of this chapter. Unnecessary hardship
is present only where, in the absence of a variance, no feasible use can be
made of the property.
VARIANCE — An authorization granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals to
construct, alter or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates
from the dimensional standards of this chapter. A variance may not permit
a use of property otherwise prohibited by this chapter or allow construction
not protected to the flood protection elevation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphic representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods to obtain groundwater, regardless of its
intended use.
WETLAND ALTERATION — Any construction, filling, flooding, draining,
dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization
measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
WETLAND DISTRICT — The zoning district created in this chapter,
designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been
adopted and made a part of this chapter, as described in § 532-11.
WETLANDS — Those areas where water is at, near or above the land
surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and
which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
§ 532-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-49
1:984
ARTICLE X
Severability
[Added 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
§ 532-50. Severability.
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall
not be affected.
§ 532-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 532-50
1:985
Chapter 545
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See § 1-4.
Construction codes — See Ch. 253.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 288.
Impact fees — See Ch. 341.
Restoration and maintenance of
vegetation — See Ch, 446, Art. III.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 453.
Wastewater facilities — See Ch. 508.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 512.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 532-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 532-50
1:986
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 545-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision Regulations, City of
Watertown, Wisconsin."
§ 545-2. Intent and purpose. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-63]
This chapter is intended to regulate and control the division and subdivision
of land within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction of the City of Watertown in order to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare; to encourage the most appropriate use of land;
to provide the best possible living environment for people; and to conserve
the value of buildings placed upon the land, by furthering the orderly layout
and use of land; ensuring proper legal description and proper monumenting
of land; preventing overcrowding of land and avoiding undue concentration
of population; lessening congestion in the streets and highways; securing
safety from fire, flooding, water pollution and other hazards; providing
adequate light and air; facilitating adequate provisions for transportation,
water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, open space, stormwater
drainage, the conservation of land, natural resources, scenic and historic
sites, energy and other public requirements; facilitating further
resubdivision of larger parcels into smaller parcels of land; ensuring
enforcement of the development concepts, policies and standards
delineated in the Comprehensive Plan and related components, the Official
Map, the Parks and Open Space Plan, the Transportation Plan, the Zoning
Code, the Erosion Control and Stormwater Runoff Codes, and the Building
Code of the City of Watertown.
§ 545-3. General requirements. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-63]
A. Conformance with policies. It is the intent of the City of Watertown that
land be developed in harmony with the following policies agreed to in
the Comprehensive Plan, Plan for Parks and Open Space, Official Map,
and the Jefferson County or Dodge County Land Use Plan, as adopted
by the City of Watertown:
(1) To plan the location and/or timing of new development to make it
efficient, to reduce public costs and to encourage separation and
distinction between municipalities.
(2) To direct and stage new growth only to those areas planned and
programmed for development and capable of providing a full range
of urban services, including transportation and schools.
(3) To discourage scattered development and urban sprawl.
§ 545-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-3
1:987
(4) To ensure that development complements rather than conflicts with
natural features such as rolling topography, trees, creeks, ponds
and rock formations.
(5) To develop a system of interior open spaces within existing
environmental corridors to delineate neighborhoods, control
stormwater drainage and provide circulation for pedestrian and
bicycle traffic.
(6) To ensure that development locates and coordinates safely and
efficiently with transportation facilities.
(7) To encourage preservation of open space and aesthetic quality in
development through the use of planned development districts.
(8) To favor development intensities and patterns that are supportive
of alternative modes of transportation.
(9) To promote and maintain balanced commercial activity that is
viable and responsive to the needs of the community and the
surrounding market area.
(10) To preserve the quality of the water and the air and to prevent
extreme noise and visual blight.
(11) To preserve prime agricultural land through the design and
location of development.
(12) To encourage development in the City with balanced residential,
commercial, industrial and open space patterns and public
services.
B. Land suitability. No land shall be divided or subdivided for development
which is held unsuitable by the Plan Commission for reason of flooding
or potential flooding, soil limitations, inadequate drainage, steep
topography, incompatible surrounding development, inadequate public
services or any other condition likely to be harmful to the health, safety
or welfare of the future residents or users of the area or harmful to the
community.
(1) Except as provided herein, the Plan Commission shall determine
land suitability prior to the time the preliminary plat or certified
survey map is considered for approval, following review and
recommendations by the appropriate City commissions and
committees. The Plan Commission may impose special conditions
on the plat or certified survey map deemed necessary to protect the
health, safety or welfare of future residents of the area. Those
areas which are found to be environmentally sensitive shall be
considered for preservation as open space. The determination of
land suitability will be evaluated through the site assessment
procedures, § 545-4A. The subdivider shall furnish such maps, data
§ 545-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-3
1:988
and information as may be necessary to make a determination of
land suitability.
(2) Should the Plan Commission determine that the land is unsuitable
for the intended development, it shall state its reasons in writing to
the subdivider within 30 days of initial Plan Commission action. The
subdivider may present additional evidence to support the
proposed plat or certified survey map. Upon review of the
additional evidence, the Plan Commission shall affirm, modify or
withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
(3) The subdivider may appeal the determination of unsuitability as
provided in § 545-39, Appeals.
C. Determination of adequacy of public facilities and services.
(1) A certified survey map, preliminary plat or final plat shall not be
approved unless the Plan Commission and the Common Council
determine that adequate public facilities and public services are
available to meet the needs of the proposed land division.
(2) The applicant shall furnish any data requested by the City
Engineer, who shall transmit this information to appropriate City
commissions, committees and boards for review and shall act as
coordinator for their reports to the Plan Commission and the
Common Council on the adequacy of water, sanitary and storm
sewers, fire service, police, parks and open space and recreation
facilities, and transportation facilities.
(3) Public facilities and public services for a proposed plat or certified
survey map may be found to be adequate when the following
conditions exist:
(a) Where the proposed land division is located in an urban service
area or planned future urban service area where mainline
interceptor sewer service is available, presently under
construction, or designated by the Common Council for
extension of sewer service, the Plan Commission and the
Common Council shall also consider the recommendations of
the City Engineer and the Public Works Commission on the
capacity of trunk lines and of sewage treatment facilities and
any other information presented. Where the proposed land
division is not located in an urban service area or planned
future urban service area where mainline interceptor sewer
service is available, presently under construction, or
designated by the Common Council for extension of sewer
service, the Plan Commission and the Common Council shall
consider the site-specific and overall impact of such
development on the public health, safety and welfare of the
immediate area and the community as a whole.
§ 545-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-3
1:989
(b) Where the proposed land division is located within an urban
service area or planned urban service area where arterial
transmission water main service and adequate capacity are
available, presently under construction, or designated by the
Common Council for extension of public water service, the Plan
Commission and the Common Council shall consider the
recommendations of the City Engineer and the Public Works
Commission on line capacities, water sources and storage
facilities as well as any other information presented. Where the
proposed land division is located within an urban service area
or planned urban service area where arterial transmission
water main service and capacity are not available, presently
under construction, or designated by the Common Council for
extension of public water service, the Plan Commission and the
Common Council shall consider the site-specific and overall
impact of such development on the public health, safety and
welfare of the immediate area and the community as a whole.
(c) The City Engineer and Public Works Commission recommend
to the Plan Commission and the Common Council that
adequate facilities are available to ensure the proper
stormwater management.
(d) The Parks, Recreation and Forestry Commission recommends
that future residents of the proposed land division can be
assured park, recreation and open space areas, facilities and
services which meet the standards of the Park and Open Space
Plan.
(e) The appropriate Police Department and Fire District verify that
timely and adequate service can be provided to the residents.
(f) The proposed land division is accessible by existing publicly
maintained, all-weather roads adequate to accommodate both
existing traffic and that traffic to be generated by the proposed
land division, or necessary additional roads and road
improvements are budgeted for construction with public or
private financing, or public transportation service sufficient to
serve the land division in combination with the foregoing is
available or programmed for the area. The Plan Commission
and the Common Council shall consider the recommendations
of other commenting agencies and jurisdictions, and such
factors as level of service, average and peak use, and any other
information presented.
(g) Where the Plan Commission and the Common Council
determine that one or more public facilities or services are not
adequate for the proposed development, but that a portion of
the area could be served adequately, or that careful phasing of
the development could result in all public facilities and public
§ 545-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-3
1:990
services being adequate, conditional approval may include only
such portions or may specify phasing of the development.
D. Lot sizes. In the case of all land divisions, including all plats and
certified survey maps, lot sizes shall conform to the area and width
requirements of Chapter 550, Zoning, unless otherwise modified by the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Dedication and reservation of land.
(1) Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the jurisdiction of this
chapter encompasses all or any part of a street, highway, bikeway,
pedestrianway, greenway, environmental corridor, waterway, or a
drainage or utility easement designated in the Comprehensive Plan
or Official Map, the subdivider shall plat said public way in the
locations and dimensions indicated on said Comprehensive Plan or
Official Map. The Plan Commission shall determine whether said
public way should be dedicated to the public or reserved by the
subdivider.
(2) Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the jurisdiction of this
chapter encompasses all or part of a park site, open space or other
recreation area or school site designated in the Comprehensive
Plan, Park and Open Space Plan, or Official Map, said public sites
shall be platted and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider, at the
discretion of the Plan Commission, in the locations and dimensions
indicated on said plans or map in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(3) Once a preliminary plat or certified survey map is approved, any
lands proposed for public use above shall not be altered without the
written approval of the Plan Commission, the Park, Recreation and
Forestry Commission, and the Public Works Commission.
F. Penalties.
(1) Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall
invalidate purported transfers of titles at the option of the
purchaser in accordance with the provisions of § 236.31(3), Wis.
Stats.
(2) Any subdivider or agent of the same who violates or fails to comply
with this chapter shall be subject to penalties prescribed in the
enforcement provisions of the Code of the City of Watertown.
(3) A building permit shall be refused for any site violation of this
chapter.
G. Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
§ 545-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-3
1:991
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property, if additional lots are not thereby created and
the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes
required by the Zoning Code in Chapter 550 or other applicable
laws or ordinances, unless the parcels have been part of a prior
land division or subdivision.
(4) Where sale or exchange of parcels involves only a change of lot
lines, the land division may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator after a staff review to determine conformance with
City of Watertown ordinances.
§ 545-3 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-3
1:992
ARTICLE II
Procedures
§ 545-4. Site assessment and concept plan.
In planning and developing a subdivision or minor subdivision, the
subdivider or agent shall, in every case, pursue the following course:
A. Site assessment and concept plan procedure. Before filing an
application for approval of a preliminary plat or certified survey map,
the subdivider shall consult with the Department of Public Works and
shall prepare the following:
(1) A site assessment checklist per the requirements of Subsection B
below.
(2) A concept plan per the requirements of Subsection D below.
(3) Written requests to the Public Works Commission for any water
main and sanitary sewer extensions necessary to serve the
proposed plat.
(4) A signed statement listing development projects for which the
applicant has received City approval in the last five years and
indicating any outstanding performance or financial obligations on
such projects which derive from application of City land use
regulations. If this statement is found to contain information which
is contrary to fact or to omit the listing of such projects or
obligations or to describe obligations on which performance or
payment is delinquent, the application may be dismissed without
prejudice until the application is corrected and/or the delinquency
is cured.
(5) On completion of the above documents [Subsection A(1), (2), (3)
and (4)], a preapplication meeting shall be held with the
Department of Public Works and Site Plan Review Committee to
assist the subdivider in appraising the objectives of this chapter,
the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map and any pertinent
ordinances and to reach conclusions regarding the objectives and
general program for the development.
(6) The subdivider shall revise the submitted documents per the
direction of the Site Plan Review Committee. Twenty copies of said
revised documents shall be submitted to the Department of Public
Works, which shall distribute the copies for review and comment by
the: Public Works Commission, Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission, and Site Plan Review Committee. The comments of
said groups shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission to assist in
its review of the concept plan.
B. Site assessment checklist. A site assessment checklist shall be prepared
by the subdivider for review and approval by the Plan Commission.205
§ 545-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-4
1:993
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this site assessment checklist is to provide
the basis for an orderly, systematic review of the effects of all new
subdivisions upon the community environment in accordance with
the principles and procedures of § 236.45(1), Wis. Stats. The Plan
Commission will use these procedures in determining land
suitability under § 545-3B. The goals of the community in requiring
this checklist are to eliminate or reduce pollution and siltation to an
acceptable standard, assure ample living space per capita,
preserve open space and parks for recreation, provide adequately
for stormwater control, maintain scenic beauty and aesthetic
surroundings, administer to the economic and cultural needs of the
citizens and provide for the effective and efficient flow of goods and
services.
(2) Coverage. The site assessment checklist requirement shall apply to
all land divisions, including minor subdivisions. The Plan
Commission may waive the requirement for the filing of a site
assessment checklist for minor subdivisions of less than five acres
total area.
C. Site assessment report.
(1) Determination of need for site assessment report. The site
assessment checklist, concept plan, utility extension request and
financial obligation report required in Subsection A above shall be
reviewed by the Plan Commission upon receipt of reports from the
Public Works Commission, the Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission, and the Site Plan Review Committee. The Plan
Commission may, at that time, for reasons stated in a written
resolution setting forth specific questions on which it requires
research, data and input from the developer and other affected
persons, decide that the site assessment checklist raises unusually
significant questions on the effects on the environment and/or that
an unusually high level of citizen interest has resulted from
questions raised in the site assessment checklist and that review by
other City committees and commissions is required. The listing of
questions can include items which this chapter already enables the
Commission to obtain, or it may include additional information
which is relevant to the questions specified in the resolution. The
resolution may also request data on the specific impact questions
from other governmental agencies or from the developer or
applicant. The resolution shall set a reasonable date for the return
of the requested data and information, and it may specify the
format in which the data is to be presented.
(2) Hearing on site assessment report. Following the return to the Plan
Commission of the data required in the resolution adopted under
the subsection above, the Commission shall make such report
available for scrutiny by the applicant or petitioner, by City
205. Editor's Note: The Site Assessment Checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 545-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-4
1:994
departments, commissions and committees, and by other
interested persons or agencies. The Plan Commission may schedule
and hold a public hearing on the findings of the report. The hearing
shall be preceded by a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.
Persons attending such hearing shall be afforded an opportunity to
comment on the report.
(3) Review of site assessment report. The Plan Commission shall
review the site assessment report, with supporting data,
department and committee reviews and any other data required for
determining the suitability of the land for the proposed
development. Within 45 days after submission to the Plan
Commission of the final expanded site assessment report, the Plan
Commission shall decide whether said land is suitable for
development and proceed as required by Subsection D below.
D. Concept plan requirements. A concept plan shall be prepared by the
subdivider for review and approval by the Plan Commission.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this concept plan is to depict the general
intent of the subdivider in terms of general layout of the land
division and its relationship to nearby properties, utilities and other
public facilities. In conjunction with the site assessment checklist,
the concept plan provides an opportunity to review the general
intent and impact of the proposed land division, without the need
for detailed engineering, surveying and other time-consuming and
costly processes associated with the preliminary plat.
(2) Coverage. The concept plan requirement shall apply to all land
divisions, including minor subdivisions. The Plan Commission may
waive the requirement for the filing of a concept plan for minor
subdivisions of less than five acres total area.
(3) Concept plan submission requirements. The concept plan shall be
submitted at a scale of not more than 200 feet to one inch and shall
show all lands under the control of the applicant which are
contiguous or separated only by existing public roads or railroad
rights-of-way. The concept plan shall show the following
information:
(a) Name of the proposed subdivision.
(b) Name, address and telephone number of the owner, subdivider,
engineer, land surveyor and land planner.
(c) Date, graphic scale and North point.
(d) Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot,
quarter section, township, range and county, and a location
map showing the relationship between the plan and its
surrounding area.
§ 545-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-4
1:995
(e) The exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision
referenced to a corner established by the United States Public
Land Survey, and the total acreage encompassed thereby.
(f) The location of existing property lines, buildings, drives,
streams and watercourses, dry runs, lakes, marshes, rock
outcrops, wooded areas, environmental corridors, and other
similar significant features within the parcel being subdivided.
(g) The location, right-of-way width and names of any adjacent
existing streets, alleys or other public ways, easements and
railroad and utility rights-of-way within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
(h) The name and width of any adjacent existing street pavements
for streets located outside the City limits.
(i) The location and size of any existing sanitary and storm
sewers, culverts or drain pipes, and the location and size of any
existing water and gas mains on or adjacent to the plat and
proposed for use in the development. If sewers and water
mains are not present on or adjacent to the preliminary plat,
the distance and the size of those to be connected to by the
development shall be indicated.
(j) Location and names of adjacent subdivisions, parks and
cemeteries.
(k) Existing land use and zoning included within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
(l) General location and right-of-way width of all proposed streets.
(m) General layout and size of all lots.
(n) General location and approximate area and dimensions of any
sites proposed to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds, greenways or other public uses or which are to
be used for group housing, shopping centers, church sites or
other nonpublic uses.
(o) General location and area of stormwater drainage facilities.
(p) A preliminary listing of dwelling unit counts by single-family,
two-family, three-family, four-family and multifamily types, and
the approximate area devoted to nonresidential uses.
(q) The preliminary development schedule indicating the
approximate timing of the proposed development.
§ 545-4 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-5
1:996
§ 545-5. Preliminary plat and comprehensive development plan.
In planning and developing a preliminary plat, the subdivider or agent shall,
in every case, pursue the following course:
A. Preliminary plat procedure.
(1) Prior to submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall
prepare a preliminary plat and file a written request for its
approval with the Secretary of the Plan Commission and the State
of Wisconsin in accordance with § 236.12, Wis. Stats. A preliminary
plat shall not be submitted prior to approval of the site assessment
checklist (or, when required, the site assessment report), nor
before the approval of the concept plan, all as required in § 545-4
above. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-23]
(2) On completion of a draft preliminary plat, a meeting shall be held
with the Department of Public Works and Site Plan Review
Committee to assist the subdivider in appraising the objectives of
this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map and any
pertinent ordinances and to reach conclusions regarding the
objectives and program for the development.
(3) The subdivider shall revise the submitted draft preliminary plat
documents per the direction of the Site Plan Review Committee.
Twenty copies of said revised documents shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Works, which shall distribute the copies for
review and comment by the Public Works Commission, the Park,
Recreation and Forestry Commission, and the Site Plan Review
Committee. The comments of said groups shall be forwarded to the
Plan Commission to assist in its review of the preliminary plat.
(4) The request for approval by the Plan Commission shall be
submitted at least seven days prior to the date of the meeting of the
Plan Commission at which the request is to be considered and shall
include all data required by this chapter. The Plan Commission may
forward a copy of the plat to Dodge or Jefferson County for review
and comment.
(5) The preliminary plat shall include the entire area owned or
controlled by the subdivider. The Plan Commission may waive this
requirement to allow the subdivider to submit a comprehensive
development plan (CDP) meeting the requirements of Subsection D
below for that portion of the land which is not to be included in the
final plat when the subdivider owns or controls 80 acres or more.
The subdivider shall in all cases submit a preliminary plat for the
lands to be included in the first phase of the final plat.
(6) The Plan Commission shall recommend approval, denial or
approval with conditions, and the Common Council shall, within 90
days from the date submitted, approve, approve conditionally or
§ 545-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-5
1:997
reject the preliminary plat and, when included, the comprehensive
development plan, based on its determination of conformance with
the intent and provisions of this chapter and all related plans
and ordinances and the recommendations of appropriate City
committees and commissions. The Site Plan Review Committee
shall prepare comments on the Plan Commission's
recommendation, in conjunction with revisions to the preliminary
plat provided by the subdivider, in order to provide assurance
that all recommended revisions to the plat made by the Plan
Commission have been complied with within such revised versions.
In all cases, the time period within which Common Council action
is required shall not commence until the City has received all
maps, plans, drawings and related data necessary for plat review of
the latest version of the preliminary plat as outlined herein. Such
time may be extended by a written agreement with the subdivider.
Failure of the Common Council to act within such 90 days or
extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the preliminary
plat and comprehensive development plan. The reasons for
conditional approval or rejection shall be stated in the minutes
of the meeting, and a letter stating such reasons shall be sent
to the applicant. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for
36 months from the date of the last required approval of the
preliminary plat. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-23]
(7) The action of the Common Council shall be noted on three copies of
the preliminary plat: one copy of which shall be returned to the
subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon, one copy of
which shall be retained by the Engineering Department, and one
copy of which shall be retained by the Assessment Department.
(8) Replats are to be processed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 236.36, Replats, of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(9) If the preliminary plat or certified survey map contains private
road(s), the following note shall be added to the plat or CSM when
it is presented for approval as a final plat:
Notice of Possible Limitation of Public Services
This plat or certified survey map contains private road(s) and, as
a result, certain City services may be limited. The extent of these
limitations is spelled out in a document called a City/developer
agreement or, if this is a condominium plat, in a document called a
general development plan (GDP), which directly relates to this plat
or CSM and is filed as a public document in the offices of both the
Watertown City Clerk/Treasurer and the Director of Public Works
for the City of Watertown.
(10) The subdivider shall provide a copy of the approved preliminary
plat to the following utility providers or their successor
§ 545-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-5
1:998
company(ies) for their comments prior to the drawing of the final
plat: Wisconsin Natural Gas; Ameritech; Marcus Cable; and
WEPCO.
B. Preliminary plat requirements. The preliminary plat shall be submitted
in 20 copies at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch and shall
show correctly on its face:
(1) Description.
(a) Name of the proposed subdivision.
(b) Name, address and telephone number of the owner, subdivider,
engineer, land surveyor and land planner.
(c) Date, graphic scale and North point.
(d) Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot,
quarter section, township, range and county, and a location
map showing the relationship between the plan and its
surrounding area.
(2) Existing conditions.
(a) Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet for a
slope less than 5% and five feet for a slope of 5% or more.
(b) A scaled drawing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
subdivision referenced to a corner established by the United
States Public Land Survey, and the total acreage encompassed
thereby.
(c) Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, streams
and watercourses, dry runs, lakes, marshes, rock outcrops,
wooded areas, environmental corridors, and other similar
significant features within the parcel being subdivided.
(d) Location, right-of-way width and names of any adjacent
existing streets, alleys or other public ways, easements and
railroad and utility rights-of-way within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
(e) Type, width and elevation of any adjacent existing street
pavements, together with any legally established center-line
elevations, for streets located outside the City limits.
(f) Water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey, and known or determined high- and low-water
elevations and boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain
and floodway.
(g) Subsurface soil, rock and water conditions, including depth to
bedrock and average depth to groundwater table.
§ 545-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-5
1:999
(h) Location, size and invert elevation of any existing sanitary and
storm sewers, culverts or drain pipes and the location and size
of any existing water and gas mains on or adjacent to the plat
and proposed for use in the development. If sewers and water
mains are not present on or adjacent to the preliminary plat,
the distance to and the size of those nearest and the invert
elevations of sewers shall be indicated.
(i) Location and names of adjacent subdivisions, parks and
cemeteries.
(j) Existing land use and zoning included within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
(3) Proposed conditions.
(a) Location, width and name of all proposed streets and
walkways.
(b) Layout and scale dimensions of all lots and proposed lot and
block numbers.
(c) Draft of proposed covenants (if any) to be imposed.
(d) Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be
reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, greenways or
other public uses or which are to be used for group housing,
shopping centers, church sites or other nonpublic uses.
(e) Plans showing the proposed locations for streets, walkways,
drainageways and public easements, showing the existing
ground surface, including extensions for reasonable distance
beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision, when requested,
shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The subdivider
shall also provide a statement from a licensed engineer,
representing the project, which certifies that the technical
requirements of this chapter will be met when final
engineering design plans (including plans and profiles for
public improvements and grading, erosion control and
stormwater management plans) are submitted. Such final
engineering design plans shall be submitted and approved by
the City Engineer prior to approval of the final plat.
(f) When requested by the City Engineer, because of concern
about drainage, groundwater and tree cover, a lot grading plan
showing proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more
than two feet.
C. Comprehensive development plan procedure.
(1) When the subdivider has 80 acres or more of land under his
control, he may, where authorized by the Plan Commission, elect to
file a comprehensive development plan (CDP) in lieu of a
§ 545-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-5
1:1000
§ 545-6. Final plat.
In planning and developing a final plat the subdivider or agent shall, in
every case, pursue the following course:
preliminary plat for that land not to be included in the first phase
of the final plat.
(2) The process for review of the CDP shall be identical to and shall
coincide with review of the preliminary plat submitted for the
remaining portion of the property.
(3) The Plan Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or reject
the CDP within the same review period as required for the
preliminary plat. One copy shall be returned to the applicant,
notifying him in writing of any conditions of approval or reasons for
rejection.
(4) Any subsequent change to the CDP and exhibits shall require filing
with the Secretary of the Plan Commission. Within 30 days of filing,
the Plan Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or reject
the revised CDP.
D. Comprehensive development plan requirements. The CDP shall be
submitted in 20 copies at a scale of not more than 200 feet to one inch
and shall show all lands under the control of the applicant which are
contiguous or separated only by existing public roads or railroad rightsof-
way. The plan shall show:
(1) The items under required preliminary plat data in Subsection B.
(2) All proposed collector and arterial streets.
(3) All proposed stormwater drainage facilities.
(4) Projected population broken down by single-family and multifamily
units.
(5) A further breakdown of multifamily units by the number of
bedrooms on a percentage basis.
(6) The development schedule, indicating the approximate timing of
the proposed development.
(7) A draft preliminary plat meeting the requirements of this chapter
may be submitted after a minimum of 20 days after submittal of the
comprehensive development plan for that portion of land to be
developed in the first stage.
A. Final plat procedure.
(1) Prior to submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall
prepare a draft final plat with the Public Works Department. A draft
final plat shall not be submitted prior to approval of the preliminary
§ 545-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-6
1:1001
plat as required in § 545-5 above. The proposed plat may constitute
only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record at that time.
(2) On completion of a draft final plat, a meeting shall be held with the
Department of Public Works and Site Plan Review Committee to
assist the subdivider in appraising the objectives of this chapter,
the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map and any pertinent
ordinances and to reach conclusions regarding the objectives and
program for the development.
(3) The subdivider shall revise the submitted draft final plat documents
per the direction of the Site Plan Review Committee. Twenty copies
of said revised final plat documents shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Works, which shall distribute the copies for
review and comment by the: Public Works Commission, Park,
Recreation and Forestry Commission, and Site Plan Review
Committee. The comments of said groups shall be forwarded to the
Plan Commission to assist in its review of the final plat.
(4) The subdivider shall file a written request for approval of the final
plat with the Secretary of the Plan Commission and the State of
Wisconsin in accordance with § 236.12, Wis. Stats. Such written
request and filing of final plats shall be submitted at least 12 days
prior to the date of the meeting of the Plan Commission at which
the request is to be considered and shall include all data required
by this chapter. The Plan Commission may forward a copy of the
final plat to Dodge or Jefferson County for review and comment.
(5) The final plat shall include the entire area owned or controlled by
the subdivider within the phase of development for which final
approval is sought.
(6) The Plan Commission shall recommend approval, denial or
approval with conditions, and the Common Council shall, within 60
days from the date submitted, approve, approve conditionally or
reject the final plat, based on its determination of conformance
with the intent and provisions of this chapter and all related plans
and ordinances, and recommendations of appropriate City
committees and commissions. The Site Plan Review Committee
shall prepare comments on the Plan Commission's
recommendation, in conjunction with revisions to the final plat
provided by the subdivider, in order to provide assurance that all
recommended revisions to the plat made by the Plan Commission
are complied with within such revised versions. In all cases, the
time period within which Common Council action is required shall
not commence until the City has received all maps, plans, drawings
and related data necessary for plat review of the latest version of
the final plat as outlined herein. Such time may be extended by a
written agreement with the subdivider. The Common Council shall
review the final plat for conformity with all conditions of approval,
§ 545-6 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-6
1:1002
§ 545-7. Minor subdivision (certified survey map).
if any, and § 545-3 above of this chapter, and shall base approval
or disapproval on these requirements. If the final plat meets the
requirements of this chapter and has been submitted within six
months from the approval date of the preliminary plat, and the
conditions have been met in the case of a preliminary plat given
conditional approval, the Council shall approve the final plat.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-23]
(7) Prior to approval of the final plat by the Common Council, the
developer shall enter into a contract for improvements as required
by Article III below. Prior to the signing of said contract by the
Mayor and the City Clerk/Treasurer, the developer shall pay to the
City all required fees, area charges and deposits, and provide any
required performance bonds.
(8) The final plat shall be recorded with the Dodge or Jefferson County
Register of Deeds only after certificates of the Wisconsin
Department of Administration, of the Common Council, of the
surveyor, and those certificates required by § 236.21, Wis. Stats.,
are placed on the face of the plat. The developer shall record the
final plat with the proper County Register of Deeds within 12
months after the date of the last approval of the plat and within 36
months after the first approval. All required fees shall be due and
payable prior to the proper City officials' signing of the approved
final plat. If the final plat is not recorded within this time period, or
an extension is not approved by the Plan Commission, then a
penalty payment of $100 per calendar day shall accrue, beginning
with the 31st day through the date of recording. The penalty
payment shall be made to the City Clerk/Treasurer and must be
paid in full prior to the issuance of building permits by the City
within the platted area. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-7; 10-4-2016
by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-23]
(9) If the Common Council fails to act within 60 days and the time has
not been extended by agreement and if no unsatisfied objections
have been filed within that period, the plat shall be deemed
approved and, upon demand, a certificate to that effect shall be
made on the face of the plat by the Clerk/Treasurer of the City.
(10) The subdivider shall provide a duplicate reproducible copy of the
plat on dimensionally stable polyester film to the City along with 11
folded blue-line copies, and one copy in DXF format on a 3 1/2 inch
diskette or digital file. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-23]
B. Final plat requirements. The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall
comply with the requirements of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and Subsection A
of this section.
§ 545-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-7
1:1003
A. Minor subdivision (certified survey) procedure.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land located within
the corporate limits of the City of Watertown which shall result in a
minor subdivision as defined by this chapter without first filing an
application and a certified survey map for approval by the Plan
Commission (and the Common Council when dedication of land is
involved) and subsequently recording said map with the Dodge or
Jefferson County Register of Deeds. The certified survey map shall
comply fully with § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and with all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Preapplication procedure.
(a) Before filing an application for approval of a certified survey,
the subdivider shall consult with the Department of Public
Works and shall prepare the following:
[1] Prepare a preliminary sketch for review and approval.
[2] Complete a site assessment checklist or, when required, an
expanded site assessment report for review and approval.
(b) This procedure is intended to assist the developer in
appraising the objectives of this chapter, the Comprehensive
Plan, the Official Map and other pertinent City ordinances. The
preapplication information shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission as a preliminary certified survey map for review
and approval.
(3) Plan Commission action. The Plan Commission shall, within 90
days, approve, approve conditionally or reject the certified survey
map. In certain instances, the Plan Commission may not require a
preliminary certified survey map. The reason for conditional
approval or for rejection shall be recorded in the minutes, and a
letter detailing the action taken shall be sent to the applicant. After
the conditions of approval have been satisfied, the resolution of
approval and of acceptance for any land dedications shall be
presented to the appropriate governmental body for action and, if
approved, shall be placed on the face of the map with nonfading
ink. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-23]
(4) Compliance.
(a) The applicant shall comply with the provisions of § 545-3
(General requirements) and Article III (Required
Improvements and Design Standards) of this chapter.
(b) Where streets or other areas are dedicated to the public, the
certified survey map shall contain an owner's and a
§ 545-7 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-7
1:1004
§ 545-8. Extraterritorial land divisions. [Amended by Ord. No.
98-64]
mortgagee's certificate which are in substantially the same
form as required by § 236.21(2)(a), Wis. Stats.
(c) Before an approved certified survey map is recorded, the
applicant must pay to the City or other unit of government any
accrued real estate taxes and special assessments owing on
any land dedicated by the survey and, to the Dodge or Jefferson
County Treasurer, any delinquent taxes on the dedicated land.
(d) Upon recordation by the developer, two copies of the recorded
document shall be furnished to the City.
B. Certified survey map requirements.
(1) The certified survey map shall be prepared by a professional land
surveyor and shall comply with the provisions of § 236.34, Wis.
Stats., and of this chapter.
(2) The certificate of approval shall be placed on the face of the map.
(3) When a dedication of land is required, the Common Council
resolution accepting the dedication and approving the map shall be
placed on the face of the map.
A. Extraterritorial land division policies. The following policies shall
govern the City Plan Commission in approving division of land within
the extraterritorial area in order to promote those purposes set forth in
§ 545-2, if the City of Watertown elects to formally apply its
extraterritorial land division approval authority through Council
resolution.
(1) No land divisions (subdivisions or minor subdivisions) as defined in
this chapter will be permitted within the formally adopted
extraterritorial limits of the City of Watertown without approval of
the City, per the procedures in this chapter as applicable to land
divisions within the City.
(2) Land divisions (subdivisions and minor subdivisions) will be
permitted within the formally adopted extraterritorial limits of the
City of Watertown if not exceeding an overall density of one
dwelling unit for 35 acres, exclusive of the farmstead demonstrated
by the subdivider to the satisfaction of the City to be existing as of
the effective date of this chapter. Lots for nonresidential use will be
handled on a case-by-case basis. The standards used to review
these land divisions will be the same as the standards contained in
the Jefferson County or Dodge County Exclusive Agricultural
Zoning District Ordinance that is used for considering rezonings.
The only exception to this policy is that lots resulting in the infill of
§ 545-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-8
1:1005
existing subdivisions or certified survey maps, as determined by
the City Plan Commission, may be permitted.
(3) The minimum lot size within the formally adopted extraterritorial
limits of the City of Watertown shall be one acre. A smaller lot size
may be allowed if also approved by the respective town board. In all
instances, the density provisions of Subsection A(2), immediately
above, shall also apply.
(4) The City of Watertown will attempt to seek consistency of the City's
plans and locally adopted town plans. To the extent that the policies
of the City of Watertown are more restrictive in regard to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare or environmental
quality, or in terms of implementing the City's Official Map, the
City's policies shall prevail. All land divisions within the formally
adopted extraterritorial limits will be subject to the land
reservation or dedication requirements of this chapter. This
specifically means the following:
(a) Any public right-of-way area identified on the City
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map shall be dedicated in
conformance with requirements of this chapter.
(b) Any waterway or stormwater management area identified on
the City Comprehensive Plan or Official Map shall be dedicated
in conformance with requirements of this chapter.
(c) Any land falling within the limits of an environmental corridor,
as mapped by the City of Watertown or Jefferson County or
Dodge County, will be required to record a public open space
easement specifying that the development shall be consistent
with conservancy area zoning in Chapter 550, Zoning.
(5) All land divisions within the formally adopted extraterritorial limits
shall be required to meet all of the development layout design
standards contained in this chapter.
(6) All land divisions within the formally adopted extraterritorial limits
will be required to follow erosion control plans in compliance with
this chapter.
(7) All land divisions within the formally adopted extraterritorial limits
shall pay the required review fees contained in this chapter prior to
initial placement on the Plan Commission agenda.
(8) The Plan Commission may require placement of covenants or deed
restrictions that are deemed necessary and appropriate by the City
Plan Commission to protect environmental quality, public health,
safety and welfare or otherwise implement the City's Official Map.
Any such restrictions shall be placed on the face of the plat or
certified survey map.
§ 545-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-8
1:1006
(9) The plat or certified survey map shall include those portions of the
entire original parcel of land on which any new lots or parcels are
created. Where only a portion of the entire original parcel is being
divided into new lots and depicted on the face of the plat or
certified survey map, a supplemental drawing shall be provided
that depicts said entire original parcel and demonstrates full
compliance with the provisions of Subsection A(2) above. This
supplemental drawing shall be signed and sealed by a professional
surveyor. In addition, in such instances where a supplemental
drawing is used, a note shall be placed on the face of the plat or
certified survey map cross-referencing such drawing indicating
areas necessary for compliance with the density standard
established herein.
(10) If a variance is granted to the above provision, the resulting
division of land shall conform to all of the pertinent regulations of
this chapter.
B. Extraterritorial land division procedures.
(1) In all cases, the time period within which action is required shall
not begin until the town board, the staff serving the Jefferson
County or Dodge County Zoning Committee, and the City of
Watertown have received all maps, drawings and data required for
plat or certified survey map approval.
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land located
within the formally adopted land division approval jurisdiction
of the City of Watertown without first filing an application and
paying the City's standard land division review fee.
(b) Preapplication procedure. Before filing an application for
approval of a plat or certified survey, the subdivider shall
consult with the Department of Public Works and shall prepare
the following:
[1] Prepare a preliminary sketch for review and approval.
[2] Complete a site assessment checklist or, when required, an
expanded site assessment report required by this chapter,
for review and approval.
(2) This procedure is intended to assist the developer in appraising the
objectives of this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map
and other pertinent City ordinances. The preapplication
information shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for review
and approval.
C. Extraterritorial land division requirements. Submittal requirements for
land divisions within the extraterritorial land division jurisdiction
enacted by Common Council resolution shall be identical to those
required for land divisions within the City limits. Preliminary plats and
§ 545-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-8
1:1007
§ 545-9. Fee and dedication schedule. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-16;
Ord. No. 07-24]
The following schedule is established to ensure that each land division,
subdivision, planned development and development project pays its share
of costs for public facilities and services. The fees in Subsection B shall also
apply to extraterritorial approval jurisdiction of the City of Watertown.
certified survey maps shall pay a fee as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule to defray the administrative cost
of review. [Amended by Ord. No. 07-24206]
A. Park and open space fee or dedication. A dedication of land and/or the
payment of a fee in accordance with the provisions of § 545-33 of this
chapter is required for each dwelling unit planned for development.
B. Fees to defray administrative expenses. The subdivider of land divisions
within the City shall reimburse the City for its actual cost of design,
inspection, inventorying, mapping and collecting attribute information
for infrastructure features for the GIS database, testing, construction,
and associated legal and real estate fees for the required public
improvements for the land division unless otherwise recovered through
other fees. The subdivider shall pay to the City of Watertown fees as set
by the Common Council and provided under separate fee schedule. Site
Plan Review Committee review fees applicable to zoning and
development-related issues shall not be applied to land divisions. The
City's costs shall be determined as follows: [Amended 10-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-18; 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
(1) The cost of City equipment employed;
(2) The actual costs of City materials incorporated into the work,
including transportation costs, plus a restocking and/or handling
fee not to exceed 10% of the cost of the materials;
(3) All consultant fees associated with the public improvements at the
invoiced amount in compliance with § 66.0628(3), Wis. Stats.
C. (Reserved)207
D. Area charge for stormwater management facilities. The subdivider shall
pay to the City of Watertown the apportioned cost for development of an
area-wide stormwater drainage system, where such a facility has been
designed to serve the proposed subdivision.
E. Sewerage fee. The subdivider shall pay to the City of Watertown the
apportioned cost, determined by the City, for sanitary sewer connection
fees.
206. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
207. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Payment for engineering, planning or legal services,
was repealed 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17.
§ 545-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-10
1:1008
§ 545-10. Condominium projects.
Each condominium project shall be reviewed on the basis of a condominium
plat prepared pursuant to § 703.11, Wis. Stats., and other applicable
statutes, as well as these land division and subdivision regulations, as a plat
or certified survey map for the land development or subdivision elements
of the project. Minor subdivision procedures in § 545-7 above shall apply to
City review of condominium plats.
§ 545-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-10
1:1009

ARTICLE III
Required Improvements and Design Standards
§ 545-11. Statement of intent.
§ 545-12. Monuments.
A. It is the intent of the City to ensure the quality in land development and
to insure that each development pays its share of the cost of public
facilities and services. The City will encourage the use of planned
developments employing innovative techniques for the design of
functional and aesthetic neighborhoods which maximize open space
and preserve the natural environment. Subdivisions shall be serviced
by public water and sanitary sewers and by public streets.
B. Prior to final approval and acceptance of improvements, and prior to
the issuance of any building permits in a subdivision located within the
corporate limits and extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the
City of Watertown, the subdivider shall install public improvements as
hereinafter provided. These improvements may be installed in plat
phases approved by the Plan Commission and public improvement
phases approved by the Public Works Commission. No building permit
may be issued for construction outside of phases of the plat which have
not had plans fully approved by the City.
A. The subdivision shall be monumented in accordance with the
requirements of § 236.15, Wis. Stats. If the topography is such that
extensive grading is required, the subdivider may, with the permission
of the City Engineer, place the monuments after the grading is
completed, provided the subdivider executes a surety bond in an
amount required by the City Engineer to insure that the monuments
will be placed within the required time.
B. Where the plat is located within a United States Public Land Survey
quarter section the corners of which have been relocated, monumented
and placed on the Wisconsin State Plane Coordinate System by Dodge
or Jefferson County or the City, the plat shall be tied directly to two or
more of the section or quarter corners so relocated, monumented and
coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be
determined by field measurements, and the type of monument and
Wisconsin State Plane Coordinates of the monument marking the
relocated section or quarter corners to which the plat is tied shall be
indicated on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to
the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone. The grid bearing and
distance of the tie shall be determined by a closed survey meeting the
error of closure herein specified for the survey of the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision and as adjusted to the City's control
survey.
§ 545-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-13
1:1011
§ 545-13. Conformity with adopted plans.
All proposed development shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, Plan
for Parks and Open Space, Transportation Plan, Utility Plans and the Official
Map of the City as they relate to utilities and transportation facilities. The
classification and location of all streets shall conform to the Official Map
and shall be considered in their relationship to existing and planned streets,
to topographic conditions, to natural features, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate location to the proposed uses of the land to
be served.
§ 545-14. Relationship to existing and future development.
§ 545-15. Blocks.
§ 545-16. Lots.
A. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for
the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
B. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided or developed and the
Comprehensive Plan indicates development is desired, the
arrangement of streets in the proposed development shall provide for
proper projection of streets to the boundary of the proposed
development.
A. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be compatible with the
planned use of the land, zoning requirements, need for convenient
access, control and safety of street traffic, and the limitations and
opportunities of topography. Block lengths in residential areas shall not
be less than 600 feet nor more than 1,000 feet between street lines
unless dictated by exceptional topography or other limiting factors of
good design.
B. Blocks shall be sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate
residential development from through traffic.
C. Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than 10 feet in width, shall be
provided near the center and entirely across any block 900 feet or more
in length or elsewhere where deemed essential to provide convenient
pedestrian circulation or access to parks, schools, shopping centers,
churches or transportation facilities.
A. The size, shape and orientation of the lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions and setback lines shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 550, Zoning.
§ 545-13 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-16
1:1012
§ 545-17. Building setback lines.
§ 545-18. Access.
Every lot or parcel created shall have a minimum frontage of 25 feet on a
public right-of-way.
§ 545-19. Railroads and limited access highways.
Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad
right-of-way or limited access highway, the subdivider shall proceed as
follows:
C. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided, and a proportion
of two to one shall normally be considered as a desirable maximum for
lots.
D. Side lot lines shall be right angles to straight lines or radial to curved
street lines on which the lots face whenever possible.
E. Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit adequate building
setbacks from side streets to conform with Chapter 550, Zoning.
F. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street.
G. Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines.
H. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except
where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
through traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation.
I. Residential lots fronting or backing on arterial streets shall be platted
with extra depth as required in § 545-20.
A. Where they are not controlled by the Zoning Code, building setback
lines appropriate to the location and type of development shall be
established by the Plan Commission, but shall in no instance be less
than typically required by Chapter 550, Zoning.
B. Where lots abut navigable waters, building setback lines for all
buildings and structures except piers, marinas, boathouses and similar
uses shall be shown on the plat and shall not be less than 75 feet from
the ordinary high-water line as measured in a horizontal plane.
A. In residential districts a buffer strip at least 30 feet in depth, in addition
to the normal lot depth required, shall be provided adjacent to the rightof-
way of a railroad or limited access highway. This strip shall be a part
of the platted lots, but the following restriction shall be written on the
plat: "This strip reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the
owner. The building of structures hereon is prohibited, and this strip
shall not be counted as any required yard. Maintenance of this strip is a
responsibility of the lot owner."
§ 545-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-19
1:1013
§ 545-20. Streets.
All streets must meet the design standards in Table 1208 as well as the
following requirements:
B. The Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land.
C. Location of local streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad
rights-of-way shall be avoided.
A. Additional right-of-way on existing streets. Developments that adjoin
existing streets which have rights-of-way less than the minimum
standard than the roadway as classified in the Comprehensive Plan and/
or Official Map shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet those
minimum standards.
B. Temporary roadway termination. Where a street is terminated
temporarily at the edge of a development and the street is longer than
240 feet or two lot widths, a temporary turnaround shall be provided by
one of the following methods:
(1) If the adjacent land is owned by the subdivider, a temporary
turnaround can be provided through a restriction (temporary
easement) on said land. Such a turnaround shall be constructed to
City standards.
(2) The subdivider may provide the required turnaround on one of the
last lots fronting on the temporary dead-end street through the use
of a temporary easement running to the City. Such a turnaround
shall be constructed to City standards.
C. Reserve strips. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to
streets except where control of such strips is placed in the City under
conditions recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Common Council.
D. Half streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half street is
adjacent to a tract being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
dedicated by the subdivider. In new plats, the creation of half streets is
prohibited.
E. Street jogs. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet
shall not be allowed. On collectors and arterials, offsets of less than 600
feet shall not be allowed.
F. Intersections.
(1) No more than two streets shall intersect at one point.
208. Editor's Note: Table 1, Minimum Roadway Design Standards, is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 545-19 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-20
1:1014
(2) Such intersection shall be laid out so that the angle of intersection
is as nearly as possible a right angle.
(3) No street shall intersect another street at less than a 75° angle.
(4) Intersections along arterial streets shall be held to a minimum, and,
whenever feasible, the minimum distance between intersections
shall be 1,200 feet.
G. Restriction of access (protection of arterial streets and highways).
Whenever a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to an arterial
street or highway, adequate protection of residential property,
limitation of access and the separation of through and local traffic shall
be provided by:
(1) Reversed frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line; or
(2) Marginal access street (frontage road).
H. Street names. A proposed street which is in alignment with or joins an
existing and named street shall bear the name of the existing street. In
no other case shall the proposed name of the street duplicate the name
of an existing street within the Watertown Fire Department Service
District. The use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive,"
"place" or "court" or similar description shall not be distinction
sufficient to constitute compliance with this subsection.
I. Alleys. Alleys shall not be allowed in residential districts, except as
approved as part of a planned unit development. In commercial, office
and industrial districts, alleys or other definite and assured provisions
shall be made for off-street parking, loading and service access
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed but not inconsistent
with the operation and use of the abutting street. No dead-end alleys
shall be allowed, nor shall any alley have its point of connection on an
arterial street.
J. Cul-de-sac streets. No more than 20% of the lots within a final plat may
abut a cul-de-sac except where necessary to provide a development
solution (as determined by the City Engineer) to a portion of the subject
property otherwise undevelopable due to surrounding existing
development or natural feature such as floodplain, wetland or steep
slope. All cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular turnaround
meeting the dimension standards in Table 1.209
K. Parkways, greenways and environmental corridors. When parkways,
greenways and environmental corridors are to be provided within the
proposed plat or certified survey and they are not officially mapped in
209. Editor's Note: Table 1, Minimum Roadway Design Standards, is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 545-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-20
1:1015
enough detail to determine exact dimensions, their width shall be
determined by the City Engineer.
L. Grades. The maximum street grades shall be those in Table 1.210
Pedestrianways shall have a maximum grade of 8%. Changes in street
grades shall provide such sight distances as the City Engineer
determines are required. Street grades shall be established to avoid,
wherever possible, excessive grading, removal of ground cover and
trees and leveling of the topography.
M. Pedestrianways and bikeways. In the design of the plat, the developer
shall make provisions for pedestrianways and bikeways for transport
and recreation as required by the Plan Commission on recommendation
of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission. Where it is deemed
necessary by the Public Works Commission, and in conformance with
the provisions of § 545-15C above, walks and paths away from streets in
common areas shall be lighted for safety and to permit visual
surveillance in accordance with § 545-29.
N. Street grading.
(1) With the submittal of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall
furnish standard drawings which indicate the existing and
proposed grades of streets shown on the plat. After completion of
design engineering work on the streets and approval of street
grades by the City Engineer and the approval of erosion control
measures by the City Engineer, the subdivider shall grade as
required within the right-of-way of the streets proposed to be
dedicated, including the vision clearance triangle on corner lots as
required in Chapter 550, Zoning. In cases where an existing street
right-of-way is made a part of the plat or abuts the plat, the
subdivider shall grade that portion of the right-of-way between the
existing pavement and the property line.
(2) The bed for the roadways in the street rights-of-way shall be graded
to subgrade elevation. The City Engineer shall approve all grading
within rights-of-way, and said grading shall extend for a sufficient
distance beyond the right-of-way to ensure that the established
grade will be preserved. The grading of rights-of-way for principal
and primary arterials shall only be required where necessary to
provide access to the streets or lots in the plat. Lots, where they
abut principal and primary arterials, shall be graded to proposed
street grade or to a grade approved by the City Engineer prior to
sale.
O. Street construction. [Amended by Ord. No. 01-10]
(1) After sanitary sewer and water utilities have been installed, and
after storm sewer trunk lines, manholes and catch basins have
210. Editor's Note: Table 1, Minimum Roadway Design Standards, is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 545-20 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-20
1:1016
§ 545-21. Water.
The subdivider shall install water facilities necessary to serve the
subdivision as designated and approved by the Public Works Commission.
These improvements are subject to Water Department specification and
inspection and may be required off site to ensure appropriate service (as
determined by the Water Department). The developer shall guarantee the
functional operation of all system parts for one year from date of
acceptance. Acceptance by the City shall be contingent upon the developer
meeting all conditions, including approved design, installation, regulatory
approvals, payment of all costs for the total project, and any special
provisions indicated for a particular project. All water system
been installed, the subdivider shall construct and dedicate as part
of the subdivision streets and sidewalks, including those adjacent
to platted lots in existing street rights-of-way abutting the plat,
curbs and gutters, local storm sewer inlets, leads, manholes, catch
basins and lines as deemed necessary by the Public Works
Commission and required by the Common Council. The subdivider
shall surface roadways to the widths prescribed by the Public
Works Commission and the City Engineer. Construction shall be
to City standard specifications for street improvements. Sidewalk
shall be installed as per the requirements in § 545-18C.
(2) All required installations of sanitary sewer, water main, stormwater
facilities, bikeways, gravel, binder course of asphalt pavement,
curb and gutter, and related improvements shall be made by the
subdivider prior to the issuance of building permits. The final lift of
asphalt shall be installed in the construction season following these
improvements to permit settling associated with the winter freezethaw
cycle. Any required installation of curb and gutter shall be
completed by October 15 of any given year, and any required
placement of asphalt pavement shall be completed by November 1
of any given year, unless inclement, unseasonable or marginal
weather conditions exist prior to these respective dates. In that
case, the City Engineer shall determine under what circumstances
either installation may be allowed. If not completed by these dates,
no building permits shall be issued until the required work is
completed in the next construction season. Sidewalks shall be
installed for each lot prior to occupancy, except that the entire
required sidewalk network shall be installed within two years of
final plat recordation.
(3) Street and sidewalk construction must comply with City standard
specifications and be inspected by the City Engineer. The
maintenance responsibility for pedestrianways and bikeways that
are not located in the public street right-of-way shall go to abutting
property owners in the same manner as those in the public right-ofway.
§ 545-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-21
1:1017
improvements, upon inspection and acceptance, become the property of the
City of Watertown Public Works Commission.
§ 545-22. Sanitary sewer.
The subdivider shall install sanitary sewer facilities necessary to serve the
subdivision as designated and approved by the Public Works Commission.
These improvements are subject to the City of Watertown specifications and
inspection. The developer shall guarantee the functional operation of all
system parts for one year from date of acceptance. Acceptance by the City
shall be contingent upon the developer meeting all conditions, including
approved design, installation, regulatory approvals, payment of all costs
for the total project, and any special provisions indicated for a particular
project. All sewer system improvements, upon inspection and acceptance,
become the property of the City of Watertown.
§ 545-23. Utility easements.
A. Underground requirements.
(1) All new electric distribution lines, all new telephone lines from
which individual lots are served, community antenna television
cables and services, and gas utility services shall be underground
unless the Plan Commission shall find upon study that:
(a) The placing of such facilities underground would not be
compatible with the development; or
(b) Location, topography, soil, swamp, solid rock, boulders, stands
of trees, rows of trees, hedges or other physical conditions
would make underground installation unreasonable or
impracticable.
(2) Associated equipment and facilities, such as, but not limited to,
substations, pad-mounted transformers, pad-mounted
sectionalizing switches and pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, may
be located above ground, provided that they are located in an
inconspicuous manner, screened from public view and fit into the
development plans for the subdivision.
(3) The subdivider or his agent shall furnish proof to the Plan
Commission that such arrangements as may be required under
applicable rates and rules filed with the Public Service Commission
of the State of Wisconsin have been made with the owners of such
lines or services for placing their respective facilities underground,
as required by this section, as a condition precedent to approval of
the final plat, development plan or certified survey map.
(4) Temporary overhead facilities may be installed to serve a
construction site or where necessary because of severe weather
conditions. In the latter case, within a reasonable time after
weather conditions have moderated or upon completion of
§ 545-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-23
1:1018
installation of permanent underground facilities, such temporary
facilities shall be replaced by underground facilities and the
temporary facilities removed.
B. Easement conditions.
(1) Adequate easements shall be provided and dedicated on each side
of all rear lot lines and on side lot lines, across lots, or along front
lot lines where necessary, for the installation of storm and sanitary
sewers, gas, water, electric lines and communication lines. Such
easements shall be noted as "utility easements" on the final plat or
certified survey map. Prior to approval of the final plat, the specific
implementation plan for a planned unit development (PUD), the
comprehensive development plan, or the certified survey map,
concurrence of the appropriate electric and gas communications
companies as to the location and width of the utility easements
shall be noted on the final plat, specific implementation plan for the
PUD, comprehensive development plan, or certified survey map. All
easements for storm and sanitary sewers, water mains, pedestrian
walks and other public purposes shall be noted thereon as "public
easements for" followed by reference to the use for which they are
intended.
(2) Where the electric and gas communications facilities are to be
installed underground, the utility easements shall be graded to
within six inches of final grade by the subdivider prior to the
installation of such facilities, and earth fill, piles or mounds of dirt
shall not be stored on such easement areas. Utility facilities when
installed on utility easements, whether overhead or underground,
shall not disturb any monumentation in the plat. In cases where
monumentation is disturbed, the utility shall bear the cost of
replacement. Failure to comply will be subject to penalty as
provided in § 236.32, Wis. Stats.
(3) Where the electric and gas communications facilities are to be
installed underground, a plat restriction shall be recorded with the
final plat or certified survey map, stating that the final grade
established by the subdivider on the utility easements shall not be
altered by more than six inches by the subdivider, his agent or by
subsequent owners of the lots except with written consent of the
utility or utilities involved. The purpose of this restriction shall be
to:
(a) Notify initial and future lot owners of the underground
facilities at the time of purchase;
(b) Establish responsibility in the event of damage to such
facilities; and
(c) Establish the need to alter such facilities. When the utility
company uses a service application, said application should
§ 545-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-23
1:1019
§ 545-24. Drainage and environmental corridor easements.
also notify the initial and subsequent lot owners of their
responsibility regarding such underground facilities.
A. Greenways and environmental corridors included within land to be
divided shall receive the following prescribed treatment by the owner of
the subdivision. Where a subdivision is traversed by a waterway,
drainageway, channel or stream, or mapped greenway/environmental
corridor, an adequate drainageway or easement shall be provided as
required by the Plan Commission conforming substantially with the line
of such watercourse. The location, width, alignment and improvement
of such drainageway or easement shall be subject to the approval of the
Plan Commission. Parallel streets or parkways may be required.
Stormwater drainage shall be maintained by landscaped open channels
of adequate size and grade to accommodate the flow resulting from the
one-hundred-year rainfall event of any duration, such sizes and design
details to be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.
B. The subdivider shall be responsible for an acceptable continuous
drainageway through the proposed plat as determined by the City
Engineer. The subdivider shall furnish the City Engineer with a plan
outlining the greenway/environmental corridor boundaries and the
location of existing drainageways. Such areas shall be dedicated or
reserved as required by § 545-3E. In addition, the subdivider shall
furnish to the City Engineer a set of cross sections (on fifty-foot
stations) of the greenway based on City datum oriented upon a base line
as prescribed by the City Engineer. Where a natural drainageway exists
which has acceptable hydraulic capacities including alignment and
grade as determined by the City Engineer, construction will not be
required and the existing natural growth shall be preserved. Where
such natural growth is not preserved by action of the subdivider or his
agents, he shall be responsible for repairing the disturbed areas by
returning them to the original condition by methods approved by the
City Engineer. When it is determined by the City Engineer that the
hydraulic capacities including alignment and grade are not acceptable,
then such alignment, grade and slopes shall be improved by the
subdivider to the cross section specified by the City Engineer.
C. The subdivider shall install permanent pipes or culverts at a grade
designated by the City Engineer under all streets crossing a greenway
or drainageway. Said installation shall be in accordance with the State
of Wisconsin Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. Culverts
required across intersections for temporary street drainage and shall
be furnished and installed by the developer. All temporary culverts
installed by the developer shall be completely removed when the
streets are constructed to City standards and the area restored to as
nearly original condition as possible, as determined by the City
Engineer.
§ 545-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-24
1:1020
§ 545-25. Intrablock drainage and foundation design.
§ 545-26. Erosion control.
D. In order to assure proper drainage, the ground elevation along any lot
line common with the boundary of a greenway/environmental corridor
shall be to an elevation approved by the City Engineer. All lot grading
and building elevations shall provide for positive drainage. Grading or
filling within the greenway/environmental corridor limits is prohibited.
E. Greenways/environmental corridors shall be limited to public uses.
A. Two weeks prior to submittal of the preliminary plat for review and
approval, the subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer a surface
water drainage plan for the plat. This plan may be a part of the erosion
control plan. The plan shall indicate but not be limited to the following:
elevation of streets, existing topography of the block, proposed
drainage swales, proposed yard swale, proposed lowest finished floor
elevation range, and indication of the direction of drainage.
B. Upon approval of the plan, the developer shall place on the preliminary
plat arrows to indicate the direction of drainage swales required for
intrablock drainage and the following note: "Arrows indicate direction
of drainage swale construction during grading and said swales shall be
maintained by the lot owner unless modified with approval of the City
Engineer."
C. A minimum six-foot-wide drainage easement (three feet on each side of
the property line) shall be retained along all joint property lines on the
plat. Such easement shall be designated as a stormwater drainage
easement and shall conform to the drainage plan.
D. Where a subdivider's subsoil investigation indicates potential for
groundwater less than 10 feet from the proposed street center-line
elevation, the subdivider shall so note on the face of the plat and
indicate the lots affected.
A. The subdivider shall install all temporary and permanent erosion
control and sediment control structural aid works as outlined in
approved plans required by Chapter 288, Erosion and Sediment
Control, of this Code.
B. The subdivider shall employ erosion control measures to prevent
erosion, siltation, sedimentation, and washing and blowing of dirt and
debris from excavation, grading, open cuts, side slopes and related
activities of the subdivider or the contractors. Such measures shall
include, but not be limited to, seeding, sodding, mulching, watering,
ponding and the construction of berms. Plans for erosion control may
be submitted to the Dodge or Jefferson County Soil and Water
Conservation District for review and comments. These comments shall
be available to the City Engineer for review two weeks prior to
§ 545-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-26
1:1021
§ 545-27. Stormwater management.
All proposed development shall be in compliance with Chapter 288, Erosion
and Sediment Control, and Chapter 453, Stormwater Management, of this
Code. Specifically, the subdivider shall install storm sewers and all other
facilities necessary for the management of all stormwater deriving from the
lands being developed in accordance with the requirements of said policy
and related provisions of this chapter.
§ 545-28. Sidewalks and bikeways. [Amended by Ord. No. 98-6]
submittal of the final plat and before any land surfaces are disturbed.
Such plans shall meet the requirements of the Municipal Code relating
to land grading and Chapter 288, Erosion and Sediment Control.
Guidelines, standards and specifications contained in the Natural
Resources Conservation Service publication "Minimizing Erosion in
Urbanizing Areas" shall provide a framework for the development,
review and implementation of the erosion control plan.
A. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ARTERIAL STREETS — Arterial streets serve trips of moderate length
and provide intracommunity continuity and access to major streets.
They provide more emphasis on land access than major streets.
BIKEWAYS — Bikeways shall serve both pedestrian and bicycle traffic
in areas where the majority of the adjoining lots do not have frontage
or access to a street. In general, those lots which do not front or have
access on the street in question are not the generating or terminating
point for the pedestrian or bicycle traffic. Bikeways shall be designed
to transport the majority of pedestrian or bike traffic through the area
as opposed to serving the adjoining lots as a sidewalk does. Bikeways
shall be constructed of bituminous pavement at least eight feet in width
in accordance with City specifications.
LOCAL STREETS — Local streets provide both land access service and
traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods and commercial and
industrial areas.
LOW USE STREETS — Low use streets comprise all facilities not
classified to a higher use. These streets serve small traffic volume and a
limited number of properties and provide access to the higher ordered
streets. Culs-de-sac and short streets are included in this classification.
MAJOR STREETS — Major streets serve the major centers of
community activity, contain the highest traffic volume corridors and are
through streets for long distances within the City. They shall include
all state trunk highways, county trunk highways and their in-town
extensions.
SIDEWALKS — Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, usually five
feet in width, with the thickness to be determined by City specifications.
§ 545-26 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-28
1:1022
§ 545-29. Streetlighting.
The developer shall pay to the City of Watertown the costs for installing
streetlights. Streetlighting must meet the City's standard specifications.
Payment for streetlights shall be made prior to the issuance of building
permits. In areas where underground electric facilities are installed, poles
for lighting may be ornamental. The subdivider shall provide street,
pedestrianway and bikeway lighting systems within the area being
Sidewalks shall be located as far from the traffic lane as is possible, but
not closer than six inches within the right-of-way line.
B. Required sidewalk location. The subdivider shall be required to install
sidewalks on both sides of all major streets and arterial streets and
those local streets where access needs to be obtained to and from uses,
such as, but not limited to, business establishments, schools, churches,
neighborhood parks, shopping districts, restaurants or high-density
multifamily residential developments. Local streets and low use streets,
other than cul-de-sac streets, shall have a sidewalk on the west side and
the north side only. Cul-de-sac streets need not have sidewalks, except
where access needs to be obtained to and from uses, such as, but not
limited to, business establishments, schools, churches, neighborhood
parks, shopping districts, restaurants or high-density multifamily
residential developments.
C. Construction standards.
(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, usually five feet in
width, in accordance with City specifications. Sidewalks shall be
four inches thick, except at driveway locations where they shall be
six inches thick. If at the time of installation the driveway location
is not known, the four-inch slabs shall be replaced with six-inch
slabs by the developer or owner once the driveway is located.
(2) Bikeways shall be constructed of bituminous pavement at least
eight feet in width, in accordance with City specifications.
(3) Sidewalks and bikeways constructed at street intersections or
within five feet of a legal crosswalk shall include provisions for curb
ramping as required by § 66.0909, Wis. Stats., and in accordance
with City specifications. Sidewalks and bikeways are to be laid to
the established grade of the street. The street edge of the sidewalk
or bikeway pavement shall be at an elevation above the top of the
curb determined by the City Engineer's staff.
(4) Bikeways shall be reviewed by the Public Works Commission on a
case-by-case basis. Maintenance of these bikeways shall be
incorporated into the developer's agreement.
(5) Sidewalks shall be installed for each lot prior to occupancy, except
that the entire required sidewalk network shall be installed within
two years of final plat recordation.
§ 545-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-29
1:1023
developed, upon consultation with the appropriate electric utility and as
approved by the Public Works Commission. All streetlighting will be
installed by the electric utility serving the City of Watertown.
§ 545-30. Street signs.
The developer shall pay to the City of Watertown the costs for installing all
street name signs, temporary street dead-end barricades and signs, all no
parking signs, all traffic control signs and pavement markings as required
by City standards prior to acceptance of the subdivision or submit a fee
deposit in lieu per City direction.
§ 545-31. Street trees.
Street trees are not required under this chapter.
§ 545-32. Buffer strips.
Where a plat, certified survey or planned development project contains a
buffer strip required by this chapter, the developer shall, prior to recording
of a final plat or certified survey or prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for a development project, install plantings in conformance with
this Code or shall file with the City Clerk/Treasurer a contract, guaranteed
by bond in an amount determined by the City Engineer, in which the
developer agrees to provide such plantings. The plantings are to be trees
and shrubs of the varieties required and shall be of sufficient density to
accomplish visual screening.
§ 545-33. Dedication and improvement of public parks and other
public sites. [Amended by Ord. No. 97-63; Ord. No. 99-13; Ord. No.
02-60; Ord. No. 05-2; Ord. No. 06-22A; Ord. No. 09-21A]
The requirements of this section are established to ensure that adequate
parks, open spaces and sites for other public uses are properly developed,
located and preserved as the City grows and that the cost of providing the
park and recreation sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional
people brought into the community by land development may be equitably
apportioned on the basis of the additional needs created by the
development. The requirements shall apply to all lands proposed for all
residential development, including those which do not involve an additional
land division.
A. Parkland dedication fees and land dedications.
(1) Any development approval which enables the creation of additional
dwelling units shall require compliance with this parkland
dedication fee and land dedication requirement. This would include
any land division which creates new lots. It would also include any
building permit for any dwelling unit per existing lot (single-family,
duplex, or other multifamily building). Except for developments
submitted to the City for approval prior to June 14, 2006, and after
§ 545-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-33
1:1024
September 7, 2016, each new development within the corporate
limits of the City shall be required to comply with the parkland
dedication requirements here stated, including the parkland
dedication fee imposed in lieu mechanism authorized under this
chapter (as applicable), as well as the subsections following hereto.
[Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
(2) In the design of a subdivision, including minor subdivisions, or
planned developments, provision shall be made for suitable sites of
adequate area for parks, playgrounds, open spaces, schools,
drainageways, stormwater management or treatment facilities and
other public purposes. Such sites as are shown on the Official Map,
Master Plan or Parks and Open Space Plan shall be made a part of
the design. Where such are not shown on said plans or map,
consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and
historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, ponds, streams, and
woodland, prairie and wetland plant and animal communities.
[Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
(3) The subdivider shall dedicate suitable land for the park, recreation
and open space needs of the development in accordance with
standards and recommendations contained in the Plan for Parks
and Open Space. This shall include the provision of pedestrian and
bikeway linkages necessary to provide access to park, recreation
and open space areas as determined by the Plan Commission and
the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission. All required land
dedications under this subsection are in addition to the dedications
or reservations required in § 545-24.
(4) The subdivider shall dedicate sufficient land area to provide
adequate park, playground, recreation and open space to meet the
needs to be created by and to be provided for the subdivision,
minor subdivision, or planned development project. At least 1,296
square feet of land shall be dedicated for each proposed residential
dwelling unit within the approved final subdivision, minor
subdivision or planned development project and 518 square feet of
land for each institutional residential unit.
(5) Where a definite commitment is made by the subdivider with
respect to the number of dwelling units to be constructed on any
parcel of land, the land dedication shall be based on that number.
Where no such commitment exists, the land dedication shall be
based on the maximum number of dwelling units permitted in the
zoning district, and the Plan Commission shall require additional
land dedications for the allowed increase in dwelling units based on
the following criteria:
(a) If the number of lots in the plat or survey is increased;
(b) If zoning classification is changed to increase the number of
dwelling units allowed; or
§ 545-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-33
1:1025
(c) If the committed number of dwelling units is increased by the
subdivider, developer or landowner.
(6) Any multifamily development involving three or more dwelling
units shall be required to provide adequate on-site recreation area
to address the recreational needs of anticipated residents. Said
recreation area shall be considered as the equivalent to "backyard"
area that is found on single-family and two-family lots. Specifically
the residential development shall provide a minimum of 500 square
feet per dwelling unit of usable recreation area in a location and
configuration deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission, upon
recommendation from the Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission. This requirement shall not apply to single-family
detached dwelling units nor to duplex or twin-home dwelling units.
(7) All subdivisions, minor subdivisions and planned development
projects are required to provide convenient pedestrian and bicycle
linkages to park and recreation sites. Where, in the opinion of the
Plan Commission, such linkages are required outside the public
street right-of-way, they shall be reserved by easement and
developed as an obligation of the subdivider or developer. The
development of linkages shall be counted toward the parkland
dedication requirements in Subsection A(4) above.
(8) Whenever a park site, recreation site or other public site that is
designated in the Park and Open Space Plan, Comprehensive Plan
or Official Map is of a larger area than the required dedication
established herein, the required dedication shall occur at the same
time as final plat approval. The remaining lands may be reserved by
the Common Council for a period not to exceed three years, unless
extended by mutual agreement. During such time period, the City
may, in its discretion, agree to purchase the reserved lands at the
fair market value established at the time of the final plat approval,
plus any real estate taxes accrued from the date of reservation.
(9) Any land to be dedicated as a requirement of this section shall be
reasonably adaptable for the intended park and recreation uses
and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be served.
Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of a proposed park and
recreation area shall include, but not be limited to, size, shape,
topography, geography, tree cover, access and location. The
determination of land suitability will be at the sole discretion of the
Plan Commission acting on the recommendation of the Park,
Recreation and Forestry Commission. All lands dedicated under
this section shall have at least 100 feet of frontage on a public
street. The Plan Commission and Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission may adjust this frontage requirement if better
alternatives for access are provided.
(10) At the discretion of the Plan Commission, acting on the
recommendation of the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission,
§ 545-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-33
1:1026
the Plan Commission may require the developer to pay a parkland
dedication fee in lieu of making the required land dedication, as
the parties may agree by mutual consent, which has been reduced
to writing in a developer's agreement, when the following findings
have been made:
(a) There is no land suitable for parks within the proposed
subdivision or planned development project;
(b) The dedication of land is not feasible;
(c) The dedication of land would not be compatible with the City's
Comprehensive Plan and Park and Open Space Plan; or
(d) The Commission determines that a cash contribution or
combination of land and fees will better serve the public
interest.
(11) The Plan Commission and the Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission may permit the subdivider to satisfy the dedication
requirements of this section by combining land dedication with a
parkland dedication fee payment, as the parties may agree by
mutual consent, which has been reduced to writing in a developer's
agreement.
(12) The amount of any parkland dedication fee imposed in lieu of land
dedication may be based on the lesser of either the fair market
value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required to
be dedicated or $256 for each institutional residential housing unit
and $641 each for all other dwelling unit types, as the parties may
agree by mutual consent, which has been reduced to writing in a
developer's agreement. [Amended 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-3]
(13) The amount of any parkland dedication fee imposed on the basis of
fair market value pursuant to Subsection A(12) above may be
determined as follows: The number of proposed residential
dwelling units within the plat shall be multiplied by the number of
square feet given in Subsection A(4) above, and the number of
proposed institutional residential dwelling units shall be multiplied
by the number of square feet given in Subsection A(4) above; then
the resulting product(s) shall be multiplied by the average value
per square foot of improved land in the proposed development. The
fair market value shall be determined by the City Assessor based on
the projected assessed value adjusted to market value in
accordance with current practices of the City Assessor. The fair
market value shall be established for the year in which the
parkland dedication fee is to be received by the City and
reestablished similarly for phased developments. If the subdivider
objects to such an evaluation, he may at his expense obtain an
appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser
approved by the City, which appraisal may be accepted by the
§ 545-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-33
1:1027
Common Council if found reasonable. Where applied to tax-exempt
development, this approach shall use the most comparable taxable
development, as determined by the City Assessor.
(14) All dedicated parklands shall be graded, topsoiled, seeded and
prepared by the subdivider per the direction and satisfaction of the
Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission or its designee. The
costs for this work shall be reimbursed to the subdivider at the time
of inspection and acceptance by the City. The reimbursement shall
be at a rate of $2,000 per acre.
(15) All dedicated parklands shall front a public street and be sited per
the direction and satisfaction of the Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission or its designee. The City shall reimburse the
subdivider for costs associated with public improvements such as
streets, curb, gutter, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, public water, and
sidewalks located within public rights-of-way directly adjacent to
dedicated parkland. This reimbursement shall be intended to cover
1/2 of said costs on a linear-foot basis. The costs for this work shall
be reimbursed to the subdivider at the time of inspection and
acceptance by the City. The reimbursement shall be at a rate of
$200 per linear foot of street frontage.
B. Recreation facilities improvement fees.
(1) The subdivider, developer or landowner shall pay a recreation
facilities improvement fee as set forth herein. "Recreation
facilities" means improvement of land for public parks, including
grading, seeding and landscaping, installation of utilities,
construction of sidewalks, purchase and installation of playground
and other recreational equipment, and construction or installation
of restroom facilities on land intended for public park purposes.
(2) The recreation facilities improvement fee shall be $506 for each
institutional residential housing unit and $1,264 each for all other
dwelling unit types. This fee shall be additional to the requirement
for parkland dedication or a fee payment in lieu of dedication.
[Amended 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-3]
C. Fee revenue administration. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-23]
(1) All monies collected from fee revenues and interest earned thereon
imposed under Subsection A or B above shall be used solely for the
purpose of paying the proportionate costs of providing public
parks, playgrounds, open spaces and athletic fields, together with
the supporting recreation facilities to expand or improve them, that
may become necessary due to increased land development within
the City. These capital costs may include the cost of land
acquisition, debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments
when the debt has been incurred for the purpose of proceeding
§ 545-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-33
1:1028
with designated public projects prior to the collection of all
anticipated fees for that project, legal, engineering and design
costs to reimburse the City for advances of other funds or reserves
as from time to time approved by the Common Council.
(2) The Common Council shall place any fee collected pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection A in a separate interest-bearing,
segregated fund to be used for land acquisition of adequate park,
playground, recreation, athletic fields and open space. The
Common Council shall place any fee collected pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection B in a separate, interest-bearing,
segregated fund to be used for recreation facilities improvements.
Monies spent may be expended in other neighborhoods or
community facilities in reasonable proximity to the subdivision, as
determined by the Common Council, upon recommendation by the
Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission.
(3) Revenues derived from funds collected from impact fees imposed
and collected but not used as statutorily required within the
applicable statutory period from the date of payment of the impact
fee, as prescribed in § 66.0617(9), Wis. Stats., shall be refunded on
a prorated, proportional basis, as determined by the Common
Council, to the then-current owner of record of the property with
respect to which the impact fee was imposed. [Amended
6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
(4) Any funds subject to a refund may be obtained upon application of
the then-current owner of record, who shall be entitled to return of
the original impact fee paid together with interest at the rate of
1.0% per year from the date of said payment to the date of said
refund. The owner of record must submit a written application for a
refund to the City Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Watertown within
180 days after the expiration of the applicable statutory time as
prescribed in § 66.0617(9), Wis. Stats. [Amended 6-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-17]
(5) The payment of an impact fee imposed under this section as a
condition of a permit for new construction or issuance of a zoning
permit, conditional use permit, or land division may be contested as
to the amount, collection, refund, or use of the impact fee to the
Watertown Public Works Commission, provided that the applicant
files a written notice of appeal in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer within 15 days of the approval of the full building permit
by the office of the Building Inspector for new construction or
issuance of any other permit or land division permit upon which the
impact fee is imposed. Such notice of appeal shall be entitled
"Notice of Appeal of Impact Fee" and shall state the applicant's
name, address, telephone number, address (if available) and legal
description of the land development upon which the impact fee is
imposed, and a statement of the nature of and reasons for the
appeal. Said notice of appeal of impact fee shall be immediately
§ 545-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-33
1:1029
forwarded by the Clerk/Treasurer of the City to the Watertown
Public Works Commission Chairperson. The Chairperson shall
schedule the appeal for consideration by the Watertown Public
Works Commission at a regular meeting as soon as reasonably
practicable under the circumstances and shall notify the applicant
of the time, date and place of such meeting in writing by regular
mail, deposited in the mail no later than at least three days before
the date of such meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the
Watertown Public Works Commission may adjust the amount,
collection, refund or use of the impact fee upon just and reasonable
cause shown. On and after June 14, 2006, and prior to September
7, 2016, all impact fees imposed under this chapter that are not
otherwise required to be paid by the developer or land owner
as provided above in this subsection shall be imposed upon each
buildable lot in a development and shall be payable in full, at the
annually adjusted rate then in effect, within 14 days of issuance
of any zoning, conditional use or building permit. After September
7, 2016, all impact fees imposed under this chapter that are not
otherwise required to be paid by the developer or land owner
as provided above in this subsection shall be imposed upon each
buildable lot in a development and shall be payable in full, at the
annually adjusted rate then in effect, at the time of issuance of
any zoning, conditional use or building permit under this chapter
or any other controlling authority. [Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-17]
(6) The fees imposed under Subsection A and B above shall be paid in
full by the subdivider, developer or owner of record of the land
development, unless expressly excepted under this section, at the
time of the issuance of a full building permit by the office of the
Building Inspector for any new construction.
(7) If the subdivider, developer or owner of record fails to make the
entire payment when due, the Building Inspector of the City shall
issue a stop order, pursuant to § 253-9 of the City of Watertown
Building Code, as from time to time amended, and shall refuse to
approve any plans or to perform any further inspections until the
fees are paid in full. The Building Inspector may also revoke the
entire building permit, pursuant to § 253-19 of the City of
Watertown Building Code, if such fees remain unpaid for longer
than three months after the due date. The unpaid balance of fees
shall bear interest at the rate of 1.0% per month from the date of
the full building permit issuance by the office of the Building
Inspector through the date of payment. No certificate of occupancy
may be issued for buildings on any parcel for which there are
unpaid fees. Unpaid fees shall be billed as special charges to the
property owner at the time of permit issuance and, if not so paid,
shall become a lien as provided in § 66.0627(4), Wis. Stats., and
Chapter 76, Article III, of the Code as of the date of such
delinquency and shall be automatically extended upon the current
§ 545-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-33
1:1030
or next tax roll as a delinquent tax against that real property parcel.
Alternatively, developers or landowners may, at their own option,
elect to either pay any or all of the imposed fees at the time of
recording or pay any or all of the imposed fees or special charges
at any other time prior to the issuance of the zoning, conditional
use or building permit.
(8) For all unplatted lands requiring a plat and for all land divisions,
rezonings or conditional use permits requiring a certified survey
map, no final plat or certified survey map shall be certified as
approved for recording unless the parkland dedication fee is
calculated and noticed on the face of the instrument to be recorded
for collection under this section. A notation shall be placed upon
the face of the plat, map, survey or other document to be recorded,
advising of the fees to be imposed on all buildable lots or
developments containing institutional residential housing units.
For all land divisions not requiring a plat or certified survey map,
no rezoning permit, conditional use permit or building permit shall
be issued for a land development unless the fees imposed under
this section are calculated and invoiced for collection.
(9) No subdivider, developer or owner of record of a vacant parcel,
single-family residence, condominium, duplex or multifamily
housing development may transfer, sell or convey such property
interest to any person or entity without first providing to such
person or entity actual written notice of the amount of the unpaid
fees imposed under this section and time schedule for payment of
such fees, pursuant to this Subsection C, unless the subdivider,
developer or owner of record has previously paid the parkland
dedication fees and recreation facilities improvement fees.
Inclusion of the notice under this subsection in the real estate
condition report furnished to a prospective purchaser of a vacant
parcel, single-family residence, condominium, duplex or
multifamily housing development shall be sufficient compliance
with this requirement.
(10) The timing of parkland acquisition and recreation facilities
development shall be at the discretion of the City, as recommended
by the Park, Recreation and Forestry Commission. However, where
parkland improvement fees and recreation facility improvement
fees have been acquired to enable the substantial development of
planned park and recreation facilities, the City shall make said
improvements within 10 years of the date of fee collection.
(11) Credit for private park and recreation areas.
(a) Where private park and recreation areas are provided in a
proposed planned development district, and such space is to be
privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the
development, such areas may be credited toward, but not to
exceed 25% of, the requirement of land dedication for park and
§ 545-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-33
1:1031
recreation purposes, as set forth in Subsection A and B above,
provided the City Plan Commission, acting upon the
recommendation of the Park, Recreation and Forestry
Commission, finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that
the following standards are met:
[1] That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas
required to be dedicated or maintained by this section and
Chapter 550, Zoning, shall not be included in the
computation of such private open spaces;
[2] That the private ownership and maintenance of the open
space is adequately provided for by written agreement;
[3] That the use of the private open space is restricted for
park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants
which run with the land in favor of the future owners of
property within the tract and which cannot be defeated or
eliminated without the consent of the Common Council;
[4] That the proposed private open space is reasonably
adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes,
taking into consideration such factors as size, shape,
topography, geology, access and location of the private
open space land; and
[5] That facilities proposed for the open space are in
substantial accordance with the recommendations of the
adopted Park and Open Space Plan. If the proposed private
park is in the service area of a park site designated in the
park plan or a site dedicated and/or developed as a public
park, then no credits will be given for private facilities.
(b) In making the evaluation of the credit for private recreation
facilities, the Plan Commission may retain independent
professional services (agreed upon by both parties) to
determine the amount of credit, if any, that should be allowed.
The fees for such independent evaluations shall be paid by the
developer.
(12) The current owner of a property on which an impact fee has been
paid may apply for a refund of such fee if the City has not used such
impact fee within the applicable statutory period from the date of
payment of the impact fee, as prescribed in § 66.0617(9), Wis.
Stats; or the building permit for which the impact fee has been paid
has lapsed for noncommencement of construction; or the project
for which a building permit has been issued has been altered in a
manner which has resulted in a decrease in the amount of the
impact fee due; or as otherwise authorized in this chapter. [Added
6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
§ 545-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-33
1:1032
§ 545-34. Contract requirements for installation of improvements.
D. Periodic review of fees. The Watertown Public Works Commission,
subject to approval by the Common Council of the City, shall review the
parkland improvement fee contained in Subsection A every two years.
The Public Works Commission, subject to approval by the Common
Council, shall make a recommendation whether to adjust the maximum
recreation facilities improvement fee, contained in Subsection B, per
dwelling unit annually for inflation during the annual budget process
before the Common Council by using the Consumer Price Index for
Wisconsin provided by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue as a
guide. The amount of either or both of these fees may be changed
depending on increases or decreases in the cost of living, the costs of
land acquisition, or the costs of construction as determined at such
times. Until changed by this process, the current fees shall stay in full
force and effect. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-23]
A. Before final approval of any plat located within the corporate limits of
the City of Watertown, the subdivider shall be required to enter into a
contract with the City agreeing to install all required improvements.
The subdivider shall file with said contract, subject to the approval of
the City Attorney, a bond, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of
credit, certified check or other security in an amount equal to the
estimate of the cost prepared by the City Engineer as a guarantee that
such improvements will be completed by the subdivider or his
contractors not later than 18 months from the date of recording of the
plat. As a further guarantee that all obligations for work on the
improvements are satisfied, the contractor and subcontractors who are
to be engaged in the construction of utilities or street improvements on
dedicated street rights-of-way shall be listed as qualified for such work
by the Public Works Commission. Governmental units to which these
bond and guarantee provisions apply may file, in lieu of said contract or
instrument of guarantee, a letter from officers authorized to act on its
behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section. The
contract shall also require the subdivider to pay all outstanding
assessments for public improvements previously installed and all area
charges for sanitary sewer and water mains, force mains and pumping
stations previously installed by the City. The subdivider shall provide for
connecting with water and sanitary sewer mains, stormwater drainage
facilities, curb and gutter, sidewalk and street improvements, walkways
and bikeways on all abutting streets and on any streets in the plat not
included in the contract which are located in previously approved and
developed phases of the plat.
B. In those cases where the Common Council determines it is in the
interest of the City of install improvements by City contract and at such
time as the City may designate, the subdivider shall petition the City for
water, sanitary sewer main, sanitary sewer laterals, curb and gutter,
sidewalk and street improvements. The cost of such improvements shall
§ 545-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-34
1:1033
§ 545-35. Documentation. [Amended by Ord. No. 05-17]
The subdivider shall furnish the City with a reproducible "as built" file in
digital AutoCad format (.dwg or .dxf file format) showing all improvements
for the plat prior to issuance of any building permits. This file shall be
tied to the Wisconsin State Plane Coordinate System, NAD83 South Zone,
U.S. Foot. The subdivider shall also furnish an itemized cost for the
infrastructure improvements in the plat prior to issuance of any building
permits.
§ 545-36. Compliance with Appendix A.
All improvements shall comply with the requirements of Appendix A
(attached) and all other requirements of the City of Watertown.211
§ 545-37. Restoration of disturbed areas; vegetation. [Added by
Ord. No. 03-7]
be paid by assessments to the benefitted properties. When
improvements are partially installed by City contract in lieu of the
preceding contract, the subdivider shall provide a contract and bond
for all other required improvements.
A. The subdivider shall seed and mulch all areas disturbed by mass site
grading and utility and infrastructure installation within two weeks of
completion of same or as soon as conditions allow.
B. The subdivider shall cut all vegetation within all platted subdivisions
once by each and every June 10 and August 25 or any other time when
vegetation exceeds eight inches in height in accordance with Chapter
446, Article III, of the City's Code. This requirement shall apply to all
lands still owned by the subdivider. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-23; 5-2-2017 by Ord. No.
17-11]
C. After review by the Weed Commissioner, if vegetation is not cut by
those dates stated above or as required by Chapter 446, Article III, the
Weed Commissioner shall notify the Building, Safety and Zoning
Department, and the subdivider, contractor or subcontractors shall not
be issued any new permits until vegetation is cut.
211. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Watertown Subdivision Requirements, is on file at the office of
the City Engineer.
§ 545-34 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-37
1:1034
ARTICLE IV
Variances and Appeals
§ 545-38. Variances.
A. In cases where a subdivision or minor subdivision is part of a planned
unit development for which a specific implementation plan containing
revised design standards is recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Common Council and recorded with the Dodge or
Jefferson County Register of Deeds, the waiver of or variance in the
design standards required by this section shall be considered to have
been granted.
B. Variances not related to a planned unit development may be granted by
the Common Council so that substantial justice may be done and that
the public interest is secured when, in its judgment, it would be
inappropriate to apply a provision of this chapter or when such
application would cause extraordinary hardship.
C. A variance may be granted by the Plan Commission to permit a parcel to
be created by a proposed land division in the extraterritorial review
area when it is shown that the application satisfies the following
standards:
(1) A finding of fact must be made that the purpose of the proposed
parcel is to be a lot for a dwelling unit which is to be occupied by a
person who, or a family at least one member of which, earns a
substantial part of his or her livelihood from farm operations on the
parcel and/or contributes work which is substantially needed in the
farm operation and is the parent or child of the farm operator or the
spouse of the farm operator; and
(2) A finding of public interest must be made that the proposed parcel
and development design is reasonable upon consideration of these
factors:
(a) The potential for conflict with agricultural use.
(b) The need of the proposed development for a location in an
agricultural area.
(c) The availability of alternative locations.
(d) Compatibility with existing or permitted development on
adjacent lands.
(e) The productivity of the lands involved.
(f) The location of the proposed development so as to reduce to a
minimum the amount of productive agricultural land
converted.
§ 545-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-38
1:1035
§ 545-39. Appeals.
(g) The need for public services created by the proposed
development.
(h) The availability of adequate public services and the ability of
affected local units of government to provide them without a
reasonable burden.
(i) The effect of the proposed development on water or air
pollution, soil erosion and rare or irreplaceable natural
resources.
(3) When the site is zoned Exclusive Agricultural (A-1) under the
Dodge or Jefferson County Zoning Ordinance, the Commission shall
defer to the county conditional use decision on the standards of
Subsection C(2), where such a county decision is needed to
establish the dwelling unit.
(4) The minimum parcel size allowable under this Subsection C by
variance is one acre, exclusive of any area dedicated to the public.
(5) If a variance is granted under this subsection, the division of land
shall be subject to all other pertinent provisions of this and related
ordinances.
D. Reasons and conditions for any waiver or variance granted shall be
entered in the minutes of the Common Council.
A. The following decisions of the Plan Commission may be appealed to the
Common Council:
(1) Rejection of a preliminary plat, a final plat or a certified survey
map.
(2) A determination that land is unsuitable for subdivision.
(3) The requirement of a preliminary plat for a land division.
B. The procedure for the filing and handling of the appeal shall be that
outlined in § 550-156 of the Zoning Code.
§ 545-38 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-39
1:1036
ARTICLE V
Definitions
§ 545-40. Definitions of terms.
The following terms, whenever they occur in this chapter, are defined
as follows. All other pertinent terms shall be as defined in Chapter 550,
Zoning, of the Code of the City of Watertown and in Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
ACT OF DIVISION — The division of a lot or parcel of land into two or more
parcels.
BIKEWAY — A general term describing any or all of the following defined
types of facilities used for bikes. A network of bikeways constitutes a bike
route system. Class designations are those in the Long Range Bikeway
Program:
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A map or plan of record of a minor subdivision
meeting all the requirements of § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and of this chapter.
CLOSED DRAINAGE BASIN — A drainage basin which, during periods of
normal rainfall, has no surface outlet.
COMMON COUNCIL — The City of Watertown Common Council.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A total site plan for an area of
land 80 acres or more in size under the control of a developer(s) at the time
of submission for review. Said plan specifies and illustrates the location,
relationship and nature of all uses, easements, streets, pedestrian paths,
bikeways and common open space.
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT — A real estate development,
redevelopment or ownership regime conversion project involving
establishment or alteration of the condominium form of ownership for all or
part of the development.
DEVELOPER — See "subdivider."
DIVISION OF LAND — The division of a lot or parcel of land into two or
more parcels.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicle access from private property to a public street.
ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDORS — Continuous open space systems based
on natural resources and environmentally important lands. The corridors
BIKE PATH (Class I) — A bike route completely apart from a street
used by motor vehicles and restricted to bicycles unless designated
otherwise.
A.
BIKE LANE (Class II) — A designated lane of a street, restricted to
bicycle usage and separated from motor vehicles by a painted line,
raised divider or curb.
B.
MIXED TRAFFIC ROUTE (Class III) — A route, designated by signs,
along streets used by motor vehicles and bicycles.
C.
§ 545-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-40
1:1037
are based primarily on streams, lakes, shorelands, floodplains, waterways
and wetlands.
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION — As defined in
§ 236.02(5), Wis. Stats. (three miles from corporate limits).
FINAL PLAT — The map or plan of record of a subdivision and any
accompanying material as required in § 545-6.
GOVERNING BODY — The City of Watertown Common Council.
GREENWAY — An open area of land included under the definition of
"parkway," the primary purpose of which is to carry stormwater on the
surface of the ground in lieu of an enclosed storm sewer. Greenways may
serve the following multiple public purposes in addition to their principal
use, including but not limited to vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm sewers, stormwater retention basins,
waterways, conservancy areas, environmental corridors, and park
development.
LAND DIVISION — The division of a lot or parcel of land into two or more
parcels. Also referred to as "division of land."
LAND IN ITS NATURAL UNDEVELOPED STATE — Land which has runoff
characteristics equivalent to runoff curve number (CN) 70, as used in the
runoff methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources
Conservation Service National Engineering Handbook.
MASTER PLAN — The comprehensive plan for guiding and shaping the
growth and development of the Watertown community, including all of the
component parts, as prepared by the Plan Commission and certified to the
Common Council. 212
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot or parcel of land for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or building development where the act
of division creates four or fewer parcels, lots or building sites, any one of
which is 35 acres or less in area. A minor subdivision of a lot or parcel shall
occur not more than once in five years.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map indicating the location, width and/or extent of
existing and proposed streets, highways, parkways, parks, waterways and
playgrounds, as adopted by the Common Council pursuant to § 62.23(6),
Wis. Stats.
PARCEL — Contiguous lands under the control of a subdivider(s), not
separated by streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way.
PARKWAY — Any right-of-way for vehicular traffic, including bicycles or
pedestrian traffic, or both, with full or partial control of access and usually
located within a park or a ribbon of park-like development. Said parkway
may include greenways required for stormwater drainage purposes where
the drainage improvement is to include park-like treatment and where
pedestrian or vehicular travel, including bicycles, may be permitted.
212. Editor's Note: In the City of Watertown, the document titled "City of Watertown
Comprehensive Plan" is on file at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 545-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-40
1:1038
PLAN COMMISSION — The City of Watertown Plan Commission.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — Any zoning district which allows
diversification and variation in land development to achieve an improved
living environment and to preserve open space.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map delineating the features of a proposed
subdivision as described herein, submitted to the Plan Commission for
preliminary consideration prior to the final plat.
PRIME AGRICULTURE LAND — Lands containing Class I, II and III soils
and other lands having a history of agricultural production.
REPLAT and RESUBDIVISION — The process of changing or the map which
changes the boundaries of a recorded plat or a part thereof. The legal
division of a larger block, lot or outlot within a recorded plat, without
changing the exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot, is not a replat.
See § 236.36, Wis. Stats.
STREET — A public way for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.
Arterial streets and highways. Those streets which provide for rapid
movement of concentrated volumes of traffic over relatively long
distances.
Principal arterials. Streets serving the major interstate and
interregional traffic corridors and providing the highest mobility
level and a high degree of access control.
(1)
Primary arterials. Streets serving major regions or connecting
important cities and major intracommunity corridors in the
metropolitan area. These routes provide high mobility and a high
degree of access control.
(2)
Standard arterials. Those streets which more commonly provide for
intermediate length trips, thus serving through traffic movement in
trade areas or feeding traffic to the principal and primary arterial
streets from lower activity areas not served by such routes.
(3)
A.
Collector streets. Streets which provide moderate-speed movement of
persons and goods between major arterials and/or activity centers.
They are basically local streets which because of directness of routing
and higher capacity receive higher volumes of traffic to be distributed
from or collected toward nearby arterial streets.
B.
Local streets. Streets designed for low speeds and low volumes which
provide access from low traffic-generating areas to collector and
arterial systems.
Industrial street. A local street serving an industrial, office or
commercial area as defined in Chapter 550, Zoning.
(1)
C.
§ 545-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-40
1:1039
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something
having permanent location on the ground, excepting public utility facilities
and appurtenances attached thereto.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
estate, trust or other legal entity requesting review or action on a plat,
minor subdivision or condominium.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or of building development, where:
URBAN SERVICE AREA — That area which the City of Watertown that the
Common Council has designated as the area within which it expects the
provision of the full range of urban facilities and services. For purposes
of this chapter, the full range of services includes, but is not limited to,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water supply and distribution, fire service
and police, parks and open space, recreation, schools and transportation.
The designated urban service area may include areas in which other local
governments will provide these services consistent with the land use plans
for Dodge and Jefferson Counties and policies of the City of Watertown.
WATERWAYS — Rivers, streams, creeks, ditches, drainage channels,
watercourses, lakes, bays, ponds, impoundment reservoirs, retention and
detention basins, marshes and other surface water areas, regardless of
whether the areas are natural or artificial.
Residential streets.
(a) Residential, typical. A standard residential street.
Residential, major. A street located within and/or between
plats or other residential development which serves to connect
local streets to collector or arterial streets.
(b)
(2)
Marginal access streets (frontage roads). Streets parallel and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways which provide access to abutting
properties and separation from through traffic.
D.
Alley. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
E.
F. Cul-de-sac streets. Streets closed at one end with turnarounds.
Dead-end streets. Streets closed at one end without turnarounds. These
are prohibited.
G.
The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 35
acres each or less in area; or
A.
The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 35
acres each or less in area by successive divisions within a period of five
years.
B.
§ 545-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-40
1:1040
ZONING CODE — Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the City of
Watertown.
§ 545-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-40
1:1041
Chapter 550
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 24, Art. I.
Adult entertainment establishments — See
Ch. 205.
Airport — See Ch. 211.
Building construction — See Ch. 253.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 288.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 303.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 319.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 325.
Impact fees — See Ch. 341.
Plumbing — See Ch. 419.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 453.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 457.
Trees — See Ch. 484.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 497.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 512.
Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning — See Ch. 532.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 545.
§ 545-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 545-40
1:1042
ARTICLE I
Introduction and Definitions
§ 550-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "City of Watertown
Zoning Ordinance" except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as
"this chapter."
§ 550-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the State
of Wisconsin Statutes. Specific statutory references are provided within
the body of this chapter solely as a means of assisting the reader. Such
references are not to be considered as all-inclusive and shall in no manner
be construed so as to limit the application or interpretation of this chapter.
§ 550-3. Legislative intent.
In enacting this chapter, special attention has been given to ensuring a
direct relationship of these regulations to the City of Watertown's
Comprehensive Plan. The general intent of this chapter is to implement
certain goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, which are best
addressed through zoning approaches, as enabled by State of Wisconsin
Statutes.
§ 550-4. Rationale; appearance of ordinance text.
§ 550-5. Purpose.
A. Rationale. Throughout this chapter, paragraphs labeled "Rationale" are
included to ensure a complete understanding of the purpose and
reasoning of the City in adopting that particular portion of this chapter.
Each Rationale is intended as an official statement of the legislative
findings or purposes and shall be treated in the same manner as other
aspects of legislative history and shall serve to guide the administrative
and judicial interpretation of this chapter. The specific rationale
expressed in each Rationale section is not intended to be exhaustive,
and other nonexplicit rationale may also be applicable.
B. Appearance of ordinance text. Any underlined, boldfaced, italicized,
alternative point-sized and/or capitalized typefaces used in this chapter
are inserted only for convenience and are in no way to be construed as
part of the provisions of this chapter or as a limitation on the scope of
the particular sections or subsections to which they refer.
A. The overall purpose of this chapter is to implement the City of
Watertown Comprehensive Plan to the extent possible under zoning, as
authorized by State of Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-5
1:1043
§ 550-6. Separability and nonliability.
B. This chapter is designed to control and lessen congestion in the streets;
to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health
and the general welfare; to promote adequate light and air; to
encourage the protection of groundwater resources; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
preserve, protect and promote property values; to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks
and other public facilities; and to preserve burial sites as defined in
§ 157.70(1), Wis. Stats.
C. Specifically, this chapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare
by implementing certain goals and objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan. Additional purposes of this chapter are specified throughout this
chapter.
Rationale: In developing the specific regulations of this chapter, much
effort has gone into balancing the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan. The current status of this chapter and its
components (including the Official Zoning Map) represents the
cohesive result of carefully considered plan implementation practices.
Amendments to these provisions and/or the Official Zoning Map shall
seriously consider the effect of such changes on the interrelationships
which exist within this chapter and between this document, the
Comprehensive Plan, and related long-range planning policies and
programs. (See §§ 550-140 and 550-141.)
A. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Common Council that the
several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the
following:
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said
judgment.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any portion of this chapter to a particular property,
water, building or structure, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other property, water, building
or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
(3) If any requirement or limitation attached to an authorization given
under this chapter is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the
authorization would not have been granted without the
requirement or limitation and, therefore, said authorization shall
also be invalid.
§ 550-5 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-6
1:1044
§ 550-7. Abrogation.
It is not intended that this chapter abrogate or interfere with any
constitutionally protected vested right. It is also not intended that this
chapter abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
§ 550-8. Rules of interpretation.
B. The City does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas
designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and
hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the City, its
officers, employees, agents or representatives for any flood damages,
sanitation problems or structural damages.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and welfare, and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the City, and shall not be construed to be a
limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the City of
Watertown.
B. Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision
of this chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this
chapter, no land shall be developed or used and no structure erected or
maintained in violation of any state or federal regulations.
C. No structure, land, water or air shall hereafter be used and no structure
or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered
without a zoning permit, except minor structures, and without full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
local, county and state regulations.
D. Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans,
construction, size or designated use of any building or part thereof for
which a zoning or building permit has been issued before the effective
date of this chapter and the construction of which shall have been
started within six months from the date of such permit.
E. Except as provided in this chapter, under provisions for nonconforming
uses (Article V), nonconforming developments (§ 550-77), substandard
lots (§ 550-84), and nonconforming structures and buildings (§ 550-85),
no building, structure, development or premises shall be hereinafter
used or occupied and no applicable permit granted that does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 550-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-8
1:1045
§ 550-9. Jurisdiction.
This chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate limits
of the City of Watertown.
§ 550-10. Reenactment and repeal.
§ 550-11. Effective date.
All plans approved under previous zoning regulations shall be valid and
may be used to obtain permits for a period of not more than one year
after the effective date of this chapter, except where subject to developer's
agreement provisions. This chapter shall become effective upon passage
and posting according to law, following the date of repeal and reenactment
of the Official Zoning Map, which was adopted June 17, 2003.
§ 550-12. Introduction to word usage, abbreviations and definitions.
The purpose of §§ 550-13 through 550-15 is to define words, terms and
phrases contained in this chapter which are essential to the understanding,
administration and enforcement of this chapter and which are not part of
common English usage.
F. In cases of mixed occupancy or mixed use, the regulations for each land
use shall apply to the portion of the structure or land so occupied or so
used.
G. Except for outlots authorized under the City's Land Division
Regulations213 to contain permanently protected green space area, no
yard or other open space shall be considered as providing a yard or
open space for a building or structure on any other lot.
A. This chapter, in part, carries forward by reenactment some of the
provisions of the regulations governing zoning and related matters,
being previously known collectively as the "Zoning Code," Chapter 18
of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Watertown, adopted prior to
the effective date of this chapter. It is not the intention of this chapter to
repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force such existing
provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder
are preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by
specific provisions of this chapter or altered by the Official Zoning Map.
B. All provisions of Chapter 18 of the City of Watertown Code of
Ordinances which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed.
C. The adoption of this chapter shall not adversely affect the City's right to
prosecute any violation of the predecessor zoning ordinance, provided
the violation occurred while that chapter was in effect.
213. Editor's Note: See Ch. 545, Subdivision of Land.
§ 550-8 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-13
1:1046
§ 550-13. Word usage.
The interpretation of this chapter shall abide by the provisions and rules of
this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise or where
the result would clearly be inconsistent with the manifest intent of this
chapter.
§ 550-14. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations in this chapter are intended to have the
following meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
ac acre
CB Central Business (zoning district)
CR-10ac Countryside Residential (zoning district)
db decibel
du dwelling unit
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
B. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the single number.
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
D. The words "shall," "must" and "will" are mandatory.
E. The words "may," "can" and "might" are permissive.
F. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, associations, trusts and any other legal entity.
G. The word "City" shall mean the City of Watertown, Wisconsin.
H. The word "County" shall mean the Counties of Dodge and Jefferson,
Wisconsin.
I. The word "State" shall mean the State of Wisconsin.
J. The word "Commission" shall mean the City of Watertown Plan
Commission.
K. The words "Council," "City Council" and "Common Council" shall refer
to the City of Watertown Common Council.
L. The word "Board" shall mean the City of Watertown Zoning Board of
Appeals.
M. If there is any ambiguity between the text of this chapter and any
caption, illustration or table, the text shall control.
§ 550-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-14
1:1047
Abbreviation Meaning
ER-1 Exurban Residential-1 (zoning district)
FAR floor area ratio
ft. foot
GB General Business (zoning district)
GI General Industrial (zoning district)
GSA gross site area
ISR impervious surface ratio
LSR landscape surface ratio
max. maximum
MBS maximum building size
MGD maximum gross density
min. minimum
MH maximum height
MLA maximum lot area
MSA minimum site area
MR-8 Multifamily Residential-8 (zoning district)
MR-10 Multifamily Residential-10 (zoning district)
na not applicable
NB Neighborhood Business (zoning district)
NO Neighborhood Office (zoning district)
NDA net developable area
nonres. nonresidential
PB Planned Business (zoning district)
PD (_-_) Planned Development (zoning district)
PI Planned Industrial (zoning district)
PO Planned Office and Institutional (zoning district)
res residential
RPA resource protection area
RH Rural Holding (zoning district)
SNR Senior Residential (zoning district)
SR-4 Single-Family Residential-4 (zoning district)
sf or sq. ft. square feet
TR-6 Two-Family Residential-6 (zoning district)
8- eight or fewer
9+ nine or more
16+ 16 or more
§ 550-14 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-14
1:1048
Abbreviation Meaning
#F number of floors
- or fewer
+ or more
§ 550-15. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section.
Definitions provided by this section include:
ABUTTING — Having a common border with or being separated from such
common border by an alley or easement.
ACCESS — A means of vehicular or nonvehicular approach, i.e., entry to or
exit from a property, street or highway.
ACCESS, DIRECT — A condition of immediate physical connection resulting
from adjacency of a road or right-of-way abutting a property.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — See § 550-56AA.[Added 9-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-10]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to,
and serving, the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily
incidental thereto. See § 550-45C.
ACCESS, SECONDARY — A means of vehicular or nonvehicular approach,
entry to or exit from property from a source other than a public street or
highway.
ACCESS STANDARDS — See § 550-105.
ACRE — Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
ACTIVE OUTDOOR PUBLIC RECREATIONAL (LAND USE) — See
§ 550-51B.
ACTIVITY CENTER — An area that is typified by a concentration of
nonresidential and/or multifamily development.
ADDITION — Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter and/or
height of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing
wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire
wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new
construction.
ADJACENT — Abutting, or being located directly across a right-of-way from,
a separate lot.
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT — See § 550-21.
AGRICULTURAL LAND USE(S) — See § 550-50.
AGRICULTURAL SERVICES (LAND USE) — See § 550-50D.
AIR POLLUTION STANDARDS — See § 550-113.
§ 550-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1049
AIRPORT (LAND USE) — See § 550-54B.
ALLEY — A public right-of-way, usually of reduced width, which affords a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
AMENDMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — See § 550-141.
AMENDMENT OF ZONING REGULATIONS — See § 550-140.
ANIMAL UNIT — A measure that represents a common denominator for
the purpose of defining a husbandry or intensive agricultural land use. The
animal unit measure relates to the carrying capacity of one acre of land and
is related to the amount of feed various species consume and the amount
of waste they produce. The following table indicates the number of common
farm species that comprise a single animal unit:[Amended 10-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
Animal Unit Table
Type of
Livestock
Number of
Animals/
Animal
Unit
Type of
Livestock
Number
of
Animals/
Animal
Unit
Type of
Livestock
Number
of
Animals/
Animal
Unit
Horse (> 2
years)
1 Calves (< 1
year)
5 Lambs 14
Colt (< 2
years)
2 Brood sow
or boar
2 Chickens 200
Cattle (> 2
years)
1 Hogs (up to
220
pounds)
3 Other
poultry
200
Cattle (< 2
years)
2 Sheep 10
Source: The Stockman's Handbook
APARTMENT — See § 550-49A(7).
APPEAL — A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination,
order or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this chapter as expressly
authorized by the provisions of § 550-148.[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
ARTERIAL STREET — See "street, arterial."
AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION — The average level of the finished
surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or
structure.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The one-hundred-year flood.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1050
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground but
having 1/2 or less of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT (LAND USE) — See § 550-52L.
BEDROOM — A room in a residence marketed, designed or otherwise likely
to function primarily for sleeping.
BLANKET VARIANCE — A variance which is automatically granted by
a provision of this chapter in order to reduce the creation of legal
nonconforming developments (see § 550-77) or legal nonconforming
residential structures (see § 550-85).
BOARDINGHOUSE (LAND USE) — See § 550-52O.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS — See § 550-146.
BUFFERYARD — Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation,
fencing and berming which results in a reduction of visual and other
interaction with an adjoining property. See Article X.
BUILDING — A structure built, maintained or intended for use for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. The term
is inclusive of any part thereof. Where independent units with separate
entrances are divided by shared walls, each unit is a building.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building which:
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by principal and
accessory buildings, including all structures with a roof.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — A component of a group development which
conforms to the lot lines of developments which are not group
developments, in that required minimum setback distances are measured
from the building envelope line. (Refer to Article VI.)
BUILDING FRONT — That exterior wall of a building which faces the front
lot line of the lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the lowest elevation of
the adjoining ground level or the established grade, whichever is lower, to
the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deckline of a mansard roof, to
a point of the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the
A. Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use;
Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or
use served;
B.
Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served
except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this chapter;
and
C.
Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any portion
of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an
accessory use is not an accessory building.
D.
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1051
uppermost point on a round or other arch-type roof, or to the midpoint
distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. Unless excepted by
specific provisions in this chapter, building height includes the height of any
structures attached to a building.
BUILDING LINE — A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or road
right-of-way line, located a sufficient distance therefrom to provide the
minimum yards required by this chapter. The building line determines the
area in which buildings are permitted, subject to all applicable provisions of
this chapter. This is also referred to as a "setback."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted, or in which is
intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest distance between two buildings.
See "minimum building separation."
BUILDING SIZE — The total gross floor area of a building, including
basements but not crawl spaces. See "maximum building size."
BULK (OF A BUILDING) — The combination of building height, size and
location on a lot.
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department of Natural Resources pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and
which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original
ordinary high-water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the
floodway provisions of this chapter.
CAFETERIA, COMPANY (LAND USE) — See § 550-56D.
CALIPER — A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of
its trunk measurement 1/2 foot above natural grade. Used for trees in a
nursery setting.
CAMPGROUND (LAND USE) — See § 550-52N.
CANDLEPOWER — The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one
foot distant from a light source to an intensity of one footcandle. Maximum
(peak) candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by any
lamp, light source or luminaire.
CARETAKER'S RESIDENCE — A dwelling unit which is used exclusively
by either the owner, manager or operator of a principal permitted use and
which is located on the same parcel as the principal use. See § 550-56W.
CARPORT (LAND USE) — An open-sided, roofed vehicle shelter, usually
formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building. See § 550-56C.
CELLAR — That portion of the building having more than 1/2 of the floor-toceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CENTRAL BUSINESS (CB) DISTRICT — See § 550-34.
CLEAR-CUTTING (LAND USE) — See § 550-50G.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1052
CLERESTORY WINDOW — A window in which the lowest glassed area is a
minimum of seven feet above the level of the floor located directly under the
window.
CLIMAX TREE — A tree that would occupy the uppermost canopy of a forest
in a natural ecological situation. These trees are often referred to as shade
trees. Examples include hickory, oak, maple, etc. See § 550-95.
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL BOARDING (LAND USE) — See § 550-52J.
COMMERCIAL APARTMENT (LAND USE) — See § 550-56A.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT(S) — See § 550-17.
COMMERCIAL INDOOR LODGING (LAND USE) — See § 550-52K.
COMMERCIAL LAND USE(S) — See § 550-52.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle used for business or
institutional purposes or having painted thereon or affixed thereto a sign
identifying a business or institution or a principal product or service of a
business or institution. Agricultural equipment used as part of a permitted
agricultural principal use shall not be considered as a commercial vehicle.
COMMUNICATION TOWER (LAND USE) — See § 550-55C.
COMMUNITY CHARACTER — The impression that an area makes in regard
to the type, intensity, density, quality, appearance and age of development.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT (LAND USE) — See § 550-51G
through I.
COMPANY-PROVIDED ON-SITE RECREATION (LAND USE) — See
§ 550-56E.
COMPOSTING OPERATION (LAND USE) — See § 550-53F.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Watertown, Wisconsin, adopted August 1, 2000, as amended through
current version.214[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016
by Ord. No. 16-24]
CONDITIONAL USE — A land use that requires a conditional use permit in
order to develop. See § 550-45B. See § 550-142 for applicable procedures.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS STANDARDS — See § 550-121.
CONSTRUCTION, START OF — The installation of foundation footings and/
or materials for road construction.
CONTRACTOR'S ON-SITE EQUIPMENT STORAGE (LAND USE) — See
§ 550-57D.
CONTRACTOR'S PROJECT OFFICE (LAND USE) — See § 550-57C.
214. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, the terms “Comprehensive Master Plan” and
“Master Plan” were changed to “Comprehensive Plan” 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
readopted 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24.
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1053
CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — See § 550-49A.
COUNTRYSIDE RESIDENTIAL (CR-10AC) DISTRICT — See § 550-22.
CULTIVATION (LAND USE) — See § 550-50A.
CUSTOMER ACCESS AREA — An exterior door or group of exterior doors
that are available for customer entry or exit during business hours. Any
exterior door or group of exterior doors located more than 100 feet from
the nearest exterior door or group of doors shall be considered a separate
customer access area.
DAY CARE — See "family day-care home," "intermediate day-care home" or
"group day-care center."
DECK — A structure that has no roof or walls; it can be attached or
detached to the principal structure. If attached or serving as a second exit,
it is required to have main supports and continuous footings below grade
by 48 inches and must be raised above grade and must comply with the
principal setback requirements or as modified by § 550-82D. If detached, it
shall be an accessory structure.
DEDICATION — The transfer of property interest from private to public
ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee simple interest
or of a less than fee simple interest, including an easement.
DENSITY — A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per acre.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land
proposed for inclusion in a development, including an optionee or contract
purchaser.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any
buildings or land; any extension of any use of land; or any clearing, grading
or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant
to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT PAD — The area of a lot where site disruption will occur,
including building areas, paved areas, yards and other areas of nonnative
vegetation, and areas devoted to septic systems.
DISPOSAL LAND USE(S) — See § 550-53.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER (LAND USE) — See § 550-54D.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development and the
means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation
of flooding.
DRAINAGE STANDARDS — See § 550-120.
DRAINAGE STRUCTURE (LAND USE) — See § 550-56R.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1054
DRAINAGEWAYS — Nonnavigable aboveground watercourses, detention
basins and/or their environs which are identified by the presence of one or
more of the following: all areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high-water
mark of a "perennial stream" as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic
maps for the City of Watertown and its environs; all areas within 50 feet of
the ordinary high-water mark of an "intermittent stream" or "open channel
drainageway" as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the City
of Watertown and its environs. See § 550-90.
DRIPLINE — Outer perimeter edge of a tree canopy as transferred
perpendicularly to ground level.
DRIVE-IN THEATER (LAND USE) — See § 550-52I.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
which is outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above
the regional flood elevation and wide enough to accommodate wheeled
vehicles.
DUPLEX — See § 550-49A(2).
DWELLING — A building or one or more portions thereof containing one
or more dwelling units, but not including habitations provided in
nonresidential uses such as lodging uses and commercial campgrounds.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A dwelling joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a shared wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms providing or intended to
provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family.
DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION — The narrowest distance between two
dwelling units. See "minimum dwelling unit separation."
EASEMENT — Written authorization, recorded in the Register of Deeds'
office, from a landowner authorizing another party to use any designated
part of the landowner's property for a specified purpose.
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION STANDARDS — See § 550-115.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have its lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, columns (post and piers), shear walls or breakaway
walls.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, building, use or development in a
floodway, easement, right-of-way or neighboring property.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY — Any facility, temporary or
permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the
prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water
pollutants, solid waste or thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants,
including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1055
property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable
pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by
other pollution control facilities.
ENVIRONS (OF CITY OF WATERTOWN) — The area in which the City of
Watertown exercises extraterritorial powers.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and/or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Facilities that are:
EXPLOSION STANDARDS — See § 550-117.
EXTERIOR COMMUNICATION DEVICES (LAND USE) — See § 550-56V.
EXTRACTION USE (LAND USE) — See § 550-55D.
EXTRATERRITORIAL AREA — The area outside of the City limits in which
the City of Watertown may exercise extraterritorial powers of planning, land
division and/or zoning review.
EXURBAN RESIDENTIAL (ER-1) DISTRICT — See § 550-23.
FAMILY — One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit as a
traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional family. It shall
be a rebuttable presumption that four or more persons living together in
a single dwelling unit who are not related by blood, adoption or marriage
do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional family. In
determining the functional equivalent of a traditional family, the following
criteria shall be present: 1) the group shares the entire dwelling unit; 2)
the group lives and cooks together as a single housekeeping unit; 3) the
group shares expenses for food, rent, utilities or other household expenses;
4) the group is permanent and stable and not transient or temporary in
nature; 5) any other factor reasonably related to whether the group is the
functional equivalent of a family. This definition is not intended to prohibit
group homes or community living arrangements that are determined to be
protected by the Federal Fair Housing Law, provided that such facilities
are licensed and permitted under the authority of the State Department of
Health Services or the State Department of Children and Families or other
state department or agency. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME (LAND USE) — See § 550-56K.
FARM RESIDENCE (LAND USE) — See § 550-56B.
FEES — See § 550-157.
A. Owned or maintained by public utility companies or public agencies;
Located in public ways or in easements provided for the purpose or on
a customer's premises and not requiring a private right-of-way; and
B.
Reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate water, sewer, gas,
electric, communication or similar services to adjacent customers, not
including any cross-country line on towers.
C.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1056
FENCE, SOLID — Any fence which is greater than ninety-percent opaque.
Such fences include basket-weave fences, stockade fences, plank fences and
similar fences, but not picket fences or other similar fences that can be seen
through.
FENCING STANDARDS — See § 550-123.
FILLING (LAND USE) — See § 550-56S.
FIRE STANDARDS — See § 550-117.
FIRST HABITABLE FLOOR — The top surface above an unfinished
basement, cellar or crawl space that is intended for living quarters.
FLOODPLAIN AND RELATED TOPICS — See § 550-88.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building, including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements
and attached accessory buildings, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators,
unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized as dead storage,
heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space.
Measurements shall be made from the inside of the exterior walls and to the
center of interior walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio calculated by dividing the total floor
area of all buildings on a site by the gross site area. See "maximum floor
area ratio."
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle.
FREEBOARD — Represents a factor of safety usually expressed in terms
of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard
compensates for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors may include, but
are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology
of the watershed, and loss of flood storage areas due to development and
the sedimentation of a river bed or streambed.
FREIGHT TERMINAL (LAND USE) — See § 550-54C.
GARAGE (RESIDENTIAL) — A detached accessory building or portion of the
principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing
passenger vehicles, trailers or one truck of a rated capacity not in excess of
10,000 pounds. See § 550-56C.
GAS STATION — See in-vehicle sales or service.
GENERAL BUSINESS (GB) DISTRICT — See § 550-33.
GENERAL FLOOR PLANS — A graphic representation of the anticipated
utilization of the floor area within a building or structure, but not
necessarily as detailed as construction plans.
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (GI) DISTRICT — See § 550-36.
GENERAL TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES (LAND USE) — See § 550-57A.
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1057
GLARE — The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
GLARE STANDARDS — See § 550-116.
GROSS DENSITY — The result of dividing the number of dwelling units
located on a site by the gross site area. See "maximum gross density."
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area on all levels of a building.
GROSS SITE AREA (GSA) — The total area of a site available for inclusion in
calculations of the maximum permitted density or intensity of development.
GROUP DAY-CARE CENTER (LAND USE) — See § 550-52M.
GROUP DEVELOPMENT — See Article VI.
HABITABLE BUILDING — Any building or portion thereof used for human
habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements of
Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. Class 1 notice is the minimum required for appeals,
published once at least one week (seven days) before hearing. Class 2
notice is the minimum required for all zoning ordinances and amendments,
including map amendments, published twice, once each week consecutively,
the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or
bylaws may require additional notice exceeding these minimums.
HEAT STANDARDS — See § 550-116.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (HI) DISTRICT — See § 550-37.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (LAND USE) — See § 550-55B.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE — See "building height."
HELIPORT (LAND USE) — See § 550-54B.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Any danger to human life or public
health or the potential for any significant economic loss to a structure or its
contents.
HOLDING ZONE — A zoning district designed to limit development
potential until adequate public services and infrastructure are provided.
HOME OCCUPATION (LAND USE) — See § 550-56J.
HOTEL — See "commercial indoor lodging."
HUSBANDRY (LAND USE) — See § 550-50B.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Areas designed and installed to prohibit
infiltration of stormwater. Homes, buildings and other structures, as well
as concrete, brick, asphalt and similar paved surfaces are considered
impervious. Gravel areas and areas with landscaped pavers which are
intended for vehicular traffic are considered to be impervious.
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation, equal or greater than 0.01 foot, resulting in
comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1058
attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness
factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
INDOOR COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT (LAND USE) — See § 550-52H.
INDOOR INSTITUTIONAL (LAND USE) — See § 550-51C.
INDOOR MAINTENANCE SERVICE (LAND USE) — See § 550-52E.
INDOOR SALES (LAND USE) — See § 550-52C.
INDOOR SALES ACCESSORY TO LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE (LAND USE) —
See § 550-56I.
INDOOR SERVICE (LAND USE) — See § 550-52C.
INDOOR STORAGE (LAND USE) — See § 550-53A.
INDOOR WHOLESALING (LAND USE) — See § 550-53A.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT(S) — See § 550-17.
INDUSTRIAL LAND USE(S) — See § 550-55.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Development located in areas that are largely
developed already.
INSTITUTIONAL LAND USE(S) — See § 550-51.
INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — See § 550-49B.
INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Institutional residential land uses
include group homes, convents, monasteries, nursing homes, convalescent
homes, limited care facilities, rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses
not considered to be community living arrangements under the provisions
of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. See §§ 550-49B and 550-51F.
INTENSITY — A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area or
landscaped area on a lot or site compared to the gross area of the lot or site.
INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL (LAND USE) — See § 550-50C.
INTERMEDIATE DAY-CARE HOME (LAND USE) — See § 550-56L.
INTERPRETATION — See § 550-148 for application procedures and
§ 550-154B(14).
IN-VEHICLE SALES (LAND USE) — See § 550-52G.
IN-VEHICLE SALES AS ACCESSORY USE (LAND USE) — See § 550-56G.
IN-VEHICLE SERVICE (LAND USE) — See § 550-52G.
IN-VEHICLE SERVICE AS ACCESSORY USE (LAND USE) — See § 550-56G.
JUNKYARD (LAND USE) — See § 550-53D.
LAKESHORE — Those lands lying within the following distances from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond
or flowage and 300 feet from a river or stream or to a landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is the greater. Lakeshores shall not include
those lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where such lands are not
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1059
adjacent to a navigable stream or river; those parts of such drainage ditches
adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching or had
no previous stream history; and such lands are maintained in nonstructural
agricultural use. See § 550-90.
LANDSCAPED AREA — The area of a site which is planted and continually
maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants,
native or introduced ground covers, shrubs, bushes and trees. "Landscaped
area" includes the area located within planted and continually maintained
landscaped planters.
LANDSCAPE POINT — See § 550-95.
LANDSCAPE SURFACE AREA RATIO (LSR) — The percentage of the gross
site area or lot area which is preserved as permanently protected
landscaped area.
LAND USE — The type of development and/or activity occurring on a piece
of property.
LARGE-SCALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION — A large-scale
facility devoted primarily to production of fermented malt beverages at or
above 300,000 barrels per calendar year (or as established by § 125.29, Wis.
Stats.) or the production of wine, distilled spirits, or any other alcoholic
beverage at or above 25,000 gallons per calendar year. Such facilities
may include indoor or outdoor tasting or sampling facilities for products
produced on site and sale of other products directly related to on-site
activities.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-6]
LAWN CARE (LAND USE) — See § 550-56T.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LAND USE) — See § 550-55A.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL INCIDENTAL TO INDOOR SALES — See § 550-56I.
LIGHTING STANDARDS — See § 550-110.
LOADING STANDARDS — See § 550-108.
LOCAL COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREET — See "street, local residential."
LOCAL STREET — See "street, local."
LODGING MARKETPLACE — See 66.0615(1)(bs), Wis. Stats.[Added
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
LOT — A parcel of land that is undivided by any street or private road; is
occupied by or designated to be developed for one building or principal use;
and contains the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to such
building, use or development, including such open spaces and yards. See
"parcel."
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property boundaries of a
recorded lot.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1060
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or
more intersection streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of
a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has
more than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured and the minimum
lot width required by this chapter shall be provided at each such line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — The property line (including the vertical plane established by
the line and the ground) bounding a lot, except that where any portion of
a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way,
the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this
chapter.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line that abuts a public or private street rightof-
way. In the case of a lot having two or more street frontages, the lot line
along the street from which the house is addressed shall be the front lot line
and the other lot line or lines shall be street side lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR — In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal-shaped
lots, that lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line
of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line
20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot
line. In the case of lots which have frontage on more than one road or street,
the rear lot line shall be selected by the property owner.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line, a street
side lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET SIDE — Any lot line that abuts a public or private street
right-of-way which is not the front lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — A platted lot or lot described in a certified survey map
or in a metes and bounds description, which has been approved by the City
or by Dodge or Jefferson County and has been recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds of the County or was created prior to September 15,
1978.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
substantially parallel streets (one or more of which may be a portion of a
cul-de-sac).
LOT WIDTH — The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines
of a lot, measured parallel to the front lot lines and at the rear of the
required front yard. See "minimum lot width."
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest enclosed floor (including basement). Any
unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles,
building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosed area is not
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1061
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — A guarantee of facilities or work to either
ensure the correction of any failures of any improvements required
pursuant to this chapter or to maintain the same.
MAXIMUM ACCESSORY BUILDING COVERAGE — The largest permitted
area of all accessory buildings on a lot.
MAXIMUM BUILDING COVERAGE — The largest permitted area of all
buildings on a lot.
MAXIMUM BUILDING SIZE (MBS) — The largest permitted total gross
floor area a building may contain. See "building size."
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The largest amount of floor area
permitted on a lot. See "floor area ratio."
MAXIMUM GROSS DENSITY (MGD) — The maximum number of dwelling
units permitted per acre of gross site area. See "gross density."
MAXIMUM HEIGHT — The maximum height of the highest portion of any
structure. See "height of structure."
MIGRANT LABOR CAMP (LAND USE) — See § 550-56M.
MINIMUM BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest permitted building
separation.
MINIMUM DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION — The narrowest permitted
dwelling unit separation.
MINIMUM FLOOR ELEVATION — The lowest elevation permissible for the
construction, erection or other placement of any floor, including a basement
or cellar floor, but not a crawl-space floor.
MINIMUM LANDSCAPE SURFACE RATIO (LSR) — The lowest permitted
landscape surface ratio. See "landscape surface ratio."
MINIMUM LOT AREA (MLA) — The minimum size lot permitted within the
specified zoning district and development option.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — The smallest permissible lot width for the
applicable dwelling unit type or nonresidential development option.
MINIMUM SETBACK — The narrowest distance permitted from a street,
side or rear property line to a structure.
MINIMUM SITE AREA (MSA) — The minimum gross site area in which the
specified development option may occur. See "gross site area (GSA)."
MINI WAREHOUSE — See § 550-53C.
MINOR STRUCTURE — See "structure, minor."
MOBILE HOME (LAND USE) — See § 550-49A(8).
MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — See § 550-49D.
MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — See § 550-49C.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1062
MOBILE HOME SALES — See § 550-52D.
MOTEL — See "commercial indoor lodging."
MOTOR COURT — See "commercial indoor lodging."
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL — See "freight terminal."
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL-10 (MR-10) DISTRICT — See § 550-27.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL-8 (MR-8) DISTRICT — See § 550-26.
MULTIPLEX — See § 550-49A(6).
NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS —
Zoning districts which primarily identify and regulate the disturbance of
areas containing protected natural resources. See §§ 550-39 and 550-40.
See "overlay zoning district."
NAVIGABLE WATER — Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland
lakes within Wisconsin, and all rivers, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages
and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the
Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws
of this state. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has declared navigable all
bodies of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with
levels of flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of
the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. [Muench v. Public
Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952), and DeGaynor and Co., Inc. v.
Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)] For the purposes
of this chapter, rivers and streams will be presumed to be navigable if
they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the
United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has made a determination that
the waterway is not, in fact, navigable.
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS (NB) DISTRICT — See § 550-31.
NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE (NO) DISTRICT — See § 550-29.
NET DEVELOPABLE AREA (NDA) — The area of a site that may be
disturbed by development activity. Net developable area is the result of
subtracting required resource protection area (RPA) from the gross site
area (GSA).
NOISE STANDARDS — See § 550-112.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building or other
structure which was lawfully existing under ordinances or regulations
preceding this chapter but which would not conform to this chapter if
the building or structure were to be erected under the provisions of this
chapter.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT — A lawful development approved
under ordinances or regulations preceding the effective date of this chapter
but which would not conform to this chapter if the development were to be
created under the current provisions of this chapter. See § 550-77.
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1063
NONCONFORMING USE — An active and actual use of land, buildings
or structures which was lawfully existing prior to this chapter, which has
continued as the same use to the present, and which does not comply with
all the applicable regulations of this chapter. See Article V.
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT(S) — See § 550-17.
NONRESIDENTIAL LAND USE(S) — See §§ 550-50 to 550-55.
NOXIOUS MATERIALS STANDARDS — See § 550-118.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL — Material capable of causing injury
to living organisms by chemical reaction or capable of causing detrimental
effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which physically blocks
the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development by itself or in
conjunction with any future similar development will cause an increase in
regional flood height.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — See § 550-146.215[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
ODOR STANDARDS — See § 550-114.
OFFICE (LAND USE) — See § 550-52A.
OFFICE DISTRICT — See § 550-17.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted and designated by the City as being the
"Official Map" pursuant to § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map adopted and designated by the City as
being the "Official Zoning Map." See §§ 550-18, 550-19 and 550-40.
OFF-SITE PARKING LOT (LAND USE) — See § 550-54A.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question, except in the context of "on-site
detention," when the term means within the boundaries of the development
site as a whole.
ON-SITE AGRICULTURAL RETAIL (LAND USE) — See § 550-50E.
ON-SITE PARKING LOT (LAND USE) — See § 550-56N.
ON-SITE REAL ESTATE SALES OFFICE (LAND USE) — See § 550-57F.
OPACITY — The degree to which vision is blocked by a bufferyard. Opacity
is the proportion of a bufferyard's vertical plane that obstructs views into
an adjoining property.
OPEN SALES LOT — An unenclosed portion of a lot or lot of record where
goods are displayed for sale, rent or trade.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore of a
body of water up to which the presence and action of surface water is so
215. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, the term “certificate of occupancy” was changed
to “occupancy permit” 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; readopted 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1064
continuous as to leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or
prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or
other easily recognized characteristics.
OTHER PERMANENTLY PROTECTED GREEN SPACE — Permanently
protected green space areas which are not constrained by one of the
protected natural resources (wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes,
lakeshores, drainageways and woodlands). Examples include portions of
private lots, outlots or parcels commonly held by a property owners'
association which are deed-restricted from site disruption.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY (LAND USE) — See § 550-57B.
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT (LAND USE) — See
§ 550-52I.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY (LAND USE) — See § 550-52D.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY INCIDENTAL TO INDOOR SALES (LAND USE) — See
§ 550-56F.
OUTDOOR INSTITUTIONAL (LAND USE) — See § 550-51D.
OUTDOOR MAINTENANCE SERVICE (LAND USE) — See § 550-52F.
OUTDOOR SALES OF FARM PRODUCTS (LAND USE) — See § 550-57G.
OUTDOOR STORAGE (LAND USE) — See § 550-53B.
OUTDOOR STORAGE OF FIREWOOD STANDARDS — See § 550-126.
OUTDOOR WHOLESALING (LAND USE) — See § 550-53B.
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT — A zoning district which imposes uniform
restrictions on all properties within its area which are in addition to the
restrictions specific to the standard zoning districts described in § 550-17,
as well as the general restrictions of this chapter. See §§ 550-39, 550-40,
550-41, 550-42 and 550-43.
OWNER — The person, persons or entity having the right of legal title to a
lot or parcel of land.
PAD, DEVELOPMENT — See "development pad."
PARCEL — The area within the boundary lines of a lot. See "lot."
PARKING AREA POD — An area of parking spaces within a parking lot
substantially separated from other areas of the parking lot by landscaped
islands or medians. See § 550-96C(3).
PARKING LOT DESIGN STANDARDS — See § 550-107F(9).
PARKING REQUIREMENTS — See § 550-107G(3).
PARKING SPACE DESIGN STANDARDS — See § 550-107F(7).
PARKING STANDARDS — See § 550-107.
PASSIVE OUTDOOR PUBLIC RECREATIONAL (LAND USE) — See
§ 550-51A.
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1065
PENALTY — See § 550-158.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — A financial guarantee to ensure that all
improvements, facilities or work required by this chapter will be completed
in compliance with this chapter, regulations and the approved plans and
specifications of a development.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — Criterion established to control and limit
the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. See
Article XI.
PERIPHERAL SETBACK — The distance between a structure and the
boundary of a development option.
PERMANENTLY PROTECTED GREEN SPACE — An area in which site
disruption and/or development is strictly limited. See § 550-47D.
PERMITTED BY RIGHT, USE — See § 550-45A.
PERSONAL SERVICE(S) (LAND USE) — See § 550-52B.
PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITY (LAND USE) — See § 550-53C.
PIERS and WHARFS — See § 550-58M.
PLAN COMMISSION — The Plan Commission of the City of Watertown. See
also § 550-155.
PLANNED BUSINESS (PB) DISTRICT — See § 550-32.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD_-_) DISTRICT — See § 550-38.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL (PI) DISTRICT — See § 550-35.
PLANNED OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL (PO) DISTRICT — See § 550-30.
POD — See "parking area pod."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See "building, principal."
PRINCIPAL USE — Any and all of the primary uses of a property treated as
a use permitted by right or as a conditional use (rather than as an accessory
use or a temporary use) per §§ 550-49 to 550-55.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL KENNEL (LAND USE) — See § 550-56P.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITY (LAND USE) — See
§ 550-56O.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL STABLE (LAND USE) — See § 550-56Q.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE(S) (LAND USE) — See § 550-52B.
PROTECTED NATURAL RESOURCES — Resources such as floodways,
flood-fringes, floodplain conservancy areas, wetlands, drainageways,
woodlands, steep slopes and lakeshores, which are protected by the
provisions of this chapter. See § 550-39.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement, facility or service, together
with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to
provide for public needs such as streets, roads, alleys or pedestrian walks
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1066
or paths, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and
distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility
and energy services.
PUBLIC SERVICES AND UTILITIES (LAND USE) — See § 550-51E.
RECORDED LOT — See "lot of record."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall include boats, boats with trailers, motor
homes, motor coaches, pickup campers, camping trailers, travel trailers,
fifth-wheel trailers, large utility trailers, race cars and their trailers, canoes
or kayaks and their trailers, tent campers, folding campers, utility trailers,
carnival equipment and its trailers, snowmobiles, motorized dirt bikes,
all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), motorized go-carts, and cases or boxes used
to transport recreational vehicles or their equipment, as well as similar
equipment and vehicles.[Amended by Ord. No. 08-11]
RELOCATABLE BUILDING (LAND USE) — See § 550-57E.
REQUIRED RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA (RPA) — The area of a site
which may not be disturbed by development activity and which must also
be reserved as permanently protected green space. Required resource
protection area is the result of subtracting the net developable area (NDA)
from the gross site area (GSA).
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, residential
collector."[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-24]
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT(S) — See § 550-17.
RESIDENTIAL LAND USE(S) — See § 550-49.
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED — A property located in a residential district per
§ 550-17.
RESTAURANT — See "indoor commercial entertainment."
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — See "in-vehicle sales and service."
RESTRICTIVE, MORE (LESS) — A regulation imposed by this chapter is
more (less) restrictive than another if it prohibits or limits development to a
greater (lesser) extent or by means of more (less) detailed specifications.
RURAL HOLDING (RH) DISTRICT — See § 550-21.
SALVAGE YARD (LAND USE) — See § 550-53D.
SCALE (OF DEVELOPMENT) — A term used to describe the gross floor
area, height or volume of a single structure or group of structures.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
result of erosion.
SELECTIVE CUTTING (LAND USE) — See § 550-50F.
SENIOR RESIDENTIAL (SNR) DISTRICT — See § 550-28.
SEPTIC SYSTEMS (LAND USE) — See § 550-56U.
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1067
SETBACK — The shortest distance between a building's or structure's
exterior and the nearest point on the referenced lot line. See "minimum
setback."
SEWAGE SYSTEM, PRIVATE — A privately owned sewage treatment and
disposal system serving a single structure with a septic tank and soil
absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. This term
also means an alternative sewage system approved by the state, including
a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a
system serving more than one structure, or a system located on a different
parcel than the structure.
SEWAGE SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A sewage treatment and disposal system
approved by the State Department of Natural Resources and maintained by
a public agency authorized to operate such systems. This includes the City
of Watertown sewer system.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE (LAND USE) — See § 550-52P.
SHOPPING CENTER — See "group development."
SHORELAND AND RELATED TOPICS — See § 550-89.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — See § 550-56Y.[Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
SHRUB — A low-lying deciduous or evergreen plant. See § 550-100.
SIGN — See Article XII and § 550-144.[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
16-18]
SIGNAL-RECEIVING ANTENNA (SATELLITE DISHES) STANDARDS — See
§ 550-124.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT — See § 550-49A(1).
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL-4 (SR-4) DISTRICT — See § 550-24.
SITE AREA — See "gross site area."
SITE PLAN — See § 550-145. See also § 550-145 for applicable procedures.
SKYLIGHT — A window or other paned area located on the ceiling or roof
of a structure.
SMALL-SCALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION — A small-scale
facility devoted primarily to production of fermented malt beverages at a
level of less than 300,000 barrels per calendar year, or the production of
less than 25,000 gallons of wine, distilled spirits, or any other alcoholic
beverage per calendar year. Such facilities may include tasting or sampling
facilities for products produced on site and sale of other products directly
related to on-site activities.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-6]
STABLE, COMMERCIAL — See "commercial animal boarding."
STABLE, PRIVATE — See "private residential stable."
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE (SIC) — The numeric
code for categorizing land uses developed by the United States Department
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1068
of Commerce. SIC codes in this chapter are based on the listing contained
within the 1987 manual.
STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS — Zoning districts which primarily
regulate the use of land and intensity or density of such use. See §§ 550-17,
550-18 and 550-20 to 550-38.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit is issued,
provided the actual start of activity was within 730 calendar days of the
permit date. The actual start of activity means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on the site, such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations; nor does it include the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main
structure.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas which contain a gradient of 12% or greater
(equivalent to a ten-foot elevation change in a distance of 83 feet or less),
as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the City of Watertown
and its environs. See § 550-92.
STORAGE LAND USE(S) — See § 550-109.
STORAGE STANDARDS — See § 550-109.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Neither a basement nor
a cellar shall be counted as a story.
STREET — Unless specifically designated otherwise by the City, any public
or private way that is dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian and
vehicular use which is 22 feet or more in width if it exists at the time of
enactment of this chapter, or any such public right-of-way 60 feet or more
in width when established after the effective date of this chapter.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street which is anticipated to carry in excess
of 5,000 vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds ranging
from 30 to 45 miles per hour, and which is used for travel between areas
within and outside the City and is defined specifically as such on the Zoning
Map.[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24]
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which is anticipated to carry from 2,500
to 5,000 vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds ranging from
25 to 35 miles per hour, which serves a collecting function by distributing
traffic between local streets and arterial streets and is defined specifically
as such on the Zoning Map.
STREET LINE — See "lot line, front."
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1069
STREET, LOCAL — A street which is anticipated to carry less than 2,500
vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds up to 25 miles per
hour, and which provides access to abutting property and primarily serves
local traffic and is defined specifically as such on the Zoning Map.
STREET, LOCAL RESIDENTIAL — A local street serving primarily to collect
traffic originating directly from residential driveways and private
residential courts and streets.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR — A collector street serving primarily
residential land uses which primarily serves to connect local residential
streets to collector or arterial streets.
STRIP DEVELOPMENT — A pattern of land uses typified by nonresidential
and/or multifamily development located along one or both sides of a street
which is generally only one lot deep and which is characterized by many
curb cuts, low green space ratios, low landscape surface ratios, high floor
area ratios, and/or low quantities of landscaping.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something
having a permanent location on the ground, excepting public utility fixtures
and appurtenances.
STRUCTURE, MINOR — A structure accessory to a principal use having a
limited impact on a site, such as a children's swing set, clothesline, trellis,
birdhouse or similar use.
SUBSTANDARD LOT — A lot of record which lawfully existed prior to
this chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the
lot were to be created under the current provisions of this chapter. See
§ 550-84.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any structural repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and
is being restored, before the damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include either:
Any project to improve a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary or safety code specifications solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving
preservation by the Wisconsin State Historical Society or listed on
the National Register of Historic Places.
(2)
A.
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs,
modifications or additions. Such ordinary maintenance repairs include
internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and the
replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components.
(For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
B.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1070
SWALE — A linear depression in land running downhill or having a marked
change in contour direction in which sheet runoff would collect and form a
temporary watercourse.
TEMPORARY USE — A land use which is present on a property for a limited
and specified period of time. See § 550-57. See also § 550-143 for applicable
procedures.
TOURIST or TRANSIENT — A person who travels to a location away from
his or her permanent address, regardless if the tourist or transient is there
for the season, the month, a week, a day, or less.[Added 9-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-10]
TOURIST ROOMING HOUSE — See § 550-56Z.[Added 9-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-10]
TOWNHOUSE — See § 550-49A(5).
TOXIC MATERIALS STANDARDS — See § 550-118.
TRANSPORTATION LAND USE(S) — See § 550-54.
TRUCK STOP — See "in-vehicle sales and service."
TWIN HOUSE — See § 550-49A(3).
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL-6 (TR-6) DISTRICT — See § 550-25.
TWO-FLAT HOUSE — See § 550-49A(4).
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — The circumstance where special conditions
affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made
strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage,
height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the
purposes of this chapter.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — See "accessory use."
USE, CONDITIONAL — See "conditional use."
USE, PRINCIPAL — See "principal use."
UTILITY SHED (LAND USE) — See § 550-56C.
UTILITY VEHICLE — A vehicle designed and used primarily for the
transport of equipment and/or materials.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter granted pursuant to § 550-147.
VIBRATION STANDARDS — See § 550-111.
VIOLATION — See § 550-158.
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.)
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:1071
VISIBILITY STANDARDS — See § 550-106.
WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY (LAND USE) — See § 550-53E.
WASTE MATERIALS STANDARDS — See § 550-119.
WETLAND — See § 550-89.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS STANDARDS — See § 550-125.
WISCONSIN WETLAND INVENTORY MAP — Maps prepared by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
WOODLAND — Areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum
of 80% of an area of one acre or more, as shown on USGS 7.5-minute
topographic maps for the City of Watertown and its environs. See § 550-91.
WORKING DAYS — Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday,
excluding holidays granted by the City of Watertown to its department
heads.
YARD — A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky, except
as expressly permitted in this chapter. A yard shall extend along a lot line
and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-ofway
line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which
such lot is located.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a
depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot
is located.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line between the front
and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The person authorized and charged by the
City with the administration of this chapter. See § 550-154.216
ZONING DISTRICT CATEGORIES — See § 550-17.
ZONING DISTRICT(S) — See § 550-17.
ZONING MAP — See "Official Zoning Map" above and see § 550-18.
216. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, the term “Zoning Inspector” was changed to
“Zoning Administrator” 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; readopted 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24.
§ 550-15 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-15
1:1072
ARTICLE II
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 550-16. Purpose.
The area located within the jurisdiction of this chapter (see § 500-9) is
hereby divided into zoning districts of such number and community
character as are necessary to achieve compatibility of land uses within
each district, to implement the officially adopted City of Watertown
Comprehensive Plan, and to achieve the other purposes of this chapter (see
§ 550-5).
§ 550-17. Standard zoning districts and standard zoning district
categories.
For the purpose of this chapter, all areas within the jurisdiction of this
chapter (see § 500-9) are hereby divided into the following standard zoning
districts and standard zoning district categories, which shall be designated
as follows:
A. Agricultural districts.
(1) Rural Holding (RH) District.
B. Residential districts.
(1) Countryside Residential-10 (CR-10ac) District.
(2) Exurban Residential-1 (ER-1) District.
(3) Single-Family Residential-4 (SR-4) District.
(4) Two-Family Residential-6 (TR-6) District.
(5) Multifamily Residential-8 (MR-8) District.
(6) Multifamily Residential-10 (MR-10) District.
(7) Senior Residential (SNR) District.
C. Nonresidential districts.
(1) Office districts.
(a) Neighborhood Office (NO) District.
(b) Planned Office and Institutional (PO) District.
(2) Commercial districts.
(a) Neighborhood Business (NB) District.
(b) Planned Business (PB) District.
(c) General Business (GB) District.
§ 550-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-17
1:1073
§ 550-18. Map of standard zoning districts. [Amended by Ord. No.
03-22]
Standard zoning districts established by this chapter are shown on the
Official Zoning Map of the City of Watertown dated June 3, 2003, which,
together with all explanatory materials thereon, is hereby made part of this
chapter.217
§ 550-19. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any
zoning district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of
Watertown:
(d) Central Business (CB) District.
(3) Industrial districts.
(a) Planned Industrial (PI) District.
(b) General Industrial (GI) District.
(c) Heavy Industrial (HI) District.
D. Planned development districts.
(1) Planned Development District (year-order of approval in that year),
e.g., PD 97-2.
A. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the limits of any city, village, town or county boundary shall be
construed as following such limits.
B. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the
center line of such streets or railroad lines.
C. Zoning district boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following platted lot lines or other property lines as shown on the City
of Watertown or County of Dodge and Jefferson Tax Maps shall be
construed as following such lines.
D. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the center lines of streams, rivers or other continuously
flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel
center lines of such watercourses, and in the event of a natural change
in the location of such streams, rivers or other watercourses, the zoning
district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel center
line.
217. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file with the Engineering Department.
§ 550-17 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-19
1:1074
§ 550-20. Purpose and intent of standard zoning districts.
The following sections specify the purpose and intent of the standard zoning
districts established by this chapter.
§ 550-21. Rural Holding (RH) District.
E. Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following ridgelines or watershed boundaries shall be construed as
following such lines.
F. Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from any of the features
listed in Subsections A through E above shall be construed to be at such
distances therefrom as are shown on the Official Zoning Map.
G. Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district
boundary line, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the location of the
line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit
development that is solely of a rural community character. The land use
standards for this district permit very low-density single-family
residential development at a density of one dwelling unit for every 35
gross acres, as well as a variety of agricultural and agricultural-support
land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed
to ensure that development requiring even a minimum of urban
services does not occur until such services are available. As such, the
Rural Holding (RH) District shall serve either as a designation which
preserves and protects agricultural activities or as a "holding zone"
which provides for an interim land use (agriculture) that will easily
permit further development (with rezoning to another district) at the
appropriate time.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the protection of
agricultural activities and a very low-density residential area for those
who want to live in a rural environment and who retain enough land
with their residence to ensure that the rural environment is
maintained as long as the Rural Holding (RH) District designation is
retained. In this manner, even if all property were developed in a
given area with the Rural Holding (RH) District designation, the rural
community character of that area would still be maintained.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: thirty-five-acre lot.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) On-site agricultural retail.
(d) Selective cutting.
§ 550-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-21
1:1075
(e) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(f) Active outdoor public recreation.
(g) Public services and utilities.
(h) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Single-family: one-acre lot (for lots smaller than 35 acres,
remainder of 35 acres must be deed-restricted with a
conservation easement prohibiting subsequent development of
additional principal structures unless rezoned for higherdensity
development).
(b) Husbandry.
(c) Intensive agriculture.
(d) Agricultural services.
(e) Clear-cutting.
(f) Indoor institutional (church and school only).
(g) Outdoor institutional.
(h) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(i) Commercial animal boarding.
(j) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(k) Campground.
(l) Junkyard or salvage yard.
(m) Waste disposal facility.
(n) Composting operation.
(o) Airport/heliport.
(p) Communication tower.
(q) Extraction use.
(r) Sexually oriented land use. [Amended by Ord. No. 03-37]
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Detached residential garage, carport or shed.
§ 550-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-21
1:1076
(c) Home occupation.
(d) Family day-care home.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) Private residential recreational facility.
(g) Drainage structure.
(h) Filling.
(i) Lawn care.
(j) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Outdoor display incidental.
(b) Intermediate day-care home.
(c) Migrant labor camp.
(d) Private residential kennel.
(e) Private residential stable.
(f) Septic systems.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
(5) Outdoor sales of farm products.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses.
(1) Residential density and intensity requirements:
(a) Minimum zoning district area: 35 acres.
(b) Maximum gross density (MGD): 0.03 du/acre.
§ 550-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-21
1:1077
(c) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 90%.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 10,000 square feet or 5%,
whichever is greater.
(e) Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 35 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Front or street side lot line to house: 35 feet; 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 35 feet; 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage: 50 feet.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage: 100
feet.
[5] Rear lot line to house or attached garage: 100 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: 50 feet.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: 50 feet.
(e) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(f) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
(g) Minimum dwelling unit separation: 100 feet.
(h) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 35 feet.
(i) Maximum height of accessory structure: 15 feet.
(j) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces):
[1] Four spaces if located on street with standard pavement
width.
§ 550-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-21
1:1078
[2] Eight spaces if located on street with reduced pavement
width.
(k) Minimum dwelling core dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): five.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.60.
(d) Minimum zoning district area: 40,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet (20,000 square feet
permitted as a conditional use).
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet (100 feet permitted as a
conditional use); minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet; 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 30 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 15 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 30 feet; 20 feet of separation
between hangars and/or other buildings typically unoccupied
by persons.
§ 550-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-21
1:1079
§ 550-22. Countryside Residential (CR-10ac) District.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit
development that has a very-low-density countryside community
character. Unlike the case for the Rural Holding (RH) District, the land
use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached
residential development and a variety of related institutional land uses
and are not oriented to a wide range of agricultural activities. Density
and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the
Countryside Residential (CR-10ac) District shall serve as a designation
that preserves and protects the countryside community character of its
area. A variety of residential development options are available in this
district, with a maximum gross density (MGD) of one dwelling unit for
every 10 gross acres.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection
of a very-low-density residential area for those who want to live in a
countryside environment and retain enough land with their residence
or in their development to ensure that the countryside character is
maintained as long as the CR-10ac District designation is retained,
regardless of how much development occurs within that area.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: thirty-five-acre lot.
(b) Single-family, lot of 40,000 to 70,000 square feet (for parcels
containing the unbuilt remainder of the original acreage
parcel; the parcel containing the remainder of the original
acreage must be deed-restricted with a conservation easement
in favor of the City of Watertown prohibiting subsequent
development of additional principal structures unless rezoned
for higher-density development; density within any land
division in this zoning district must remain at or under a
maximum density of one dwelling unit per 10 acres).
(c) Cultivation.
(d) Selective cutting.
(e) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(f) Active outdoor public recreation.
(g) Public services and utilities.
§ 550-21 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-22
1:1080
(h) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Indoor institutional.
(c) Outdoor institutional.
(d) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Detached residential garage, carport or shed.
(c) Home occupation.
(d) Family day-care home.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) Private residential recreational facility.
(g) Drainage structure.
(h) Filling.
(i) Lawn care.
(j) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Intermediate day-care home.
(b) Private residential kennel.
(c) Private residential stable.
(d) Septic systems.
(e) Caretaker's residence.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
§ 550-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-22
1:1081
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses.
(1) Residential density requirements:
(a) Minimum zoning district area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum gross density (MGD): 0.10 du/acre.
(c) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 80%.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(e) Maximum accessory building coverage: 5%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front or street side lot line to house, single-family: 25 feet,
40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially
mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage: 30 feet.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage: 60
feet.
[5] Rear lot line to house/attached garage: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line or 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line or 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
§ 550-22 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-22
1:1082
(f) Minimum dwelling unit separation: 60 feet.
(g) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 35 feet.
(h) Maximum height of accessory structure: 15 feet.
(i) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces): three.
(j) Minimum dwelling core dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 80%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.10.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 40,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 35 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 30 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 30 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
§ 550-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-22
1:1083
§ 550-23. Exurban Residential-1 (ER-1) District.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 60 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit
development that has a low-density estate community character. The
land use standards for this district permit primarily single-family
detached residential development and a variety of related institutional
land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed
to ensure that the Exurban Residential-1 District shall serve as a
designation that preserves and protects the estate character of its area.
Rationale: This district provides for the permanent protection of a
low-density residential area for those who want to live in an estate
environment and retain enough land with their residence or in their
development to ensure that the estate community character is
maintained as long as the ER-1 District designation is retained,
regardless of how much development occurs within that area.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family, lot of 40,000 square feet.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Selective cutting.
(d) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(e) Active outdoor public recreation.
(f) Public services and utilities.
(g) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Indoor institutional.
(c) Outdoor institutional.
(d) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
§ 550-22 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-23
1:1084
(e) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Detached garage, carport or shed.
(c) Home occupation.
(d) Family day-care home.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) Private residential recreational facility.
(g) Drainage structure.
(h) Filling.
(i) Lawn care.
(j) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Intermediate day-care home.
(b) Private residential kennel.
(c) Septic systems.
(d) Caretaker's residence.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses.
(1) Residential density and intensity requirements:
§ 550-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-23
1:1085
(a) Minimum zoning district area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum gross density (MGD): 1.00 du/acre.
(c) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 60%.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(e) Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front or street side lot line to house: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage: 30 feet.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage: 60
feet.
[5] Rear lot line to house/attached garage: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(e) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(f) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
(g) Minimum dwelling unit separation: 60 feet.
(h) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 35 feet.
(i) Maximum height of accessory structure: 15 feet.
(j) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces): three spaces per dwelling unit.
§ 550-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-23
1:1086
(k) Minimum dwelling core dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 60%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.10.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 40,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet; 20,000 square feet with
a conditional use permit.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 30 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 30 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line or 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line or 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 60 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
§ 550-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-23
1:1087
§ 550-24. Single-Family Residential-4 (SR-4) District.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit
development that has a moderate-density community character. Density
and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the
Single-Family Residential-4 (SR-4) District shall serve as a designation
that preserves and protects the residential community character of its
area. Residential development with a maximum gross density (MGD) of
four dwelling units per gross acre is available within this district.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection
of a moderate-density residential area for those who want to live in
a suburban residential environment and who retain enough land with
their residence or in their development to ensure that the community
character is maintained as long as the SR-4 District designation is
retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that
area.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: lot of 8,000 square feet.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Selective cutting.
(d) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(e) Active outdoor public recreation.
(f) Public services and utilities.
(g) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-24]
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Indoor institutional.
(c) Outdoor institutional.
(d) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(e) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
§ 550-23 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-24
1:1088
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Home occupation.
(d) Family day-care home.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) Private residential recreational facility.
(g) Drainage structure.
(h) Filling.
(i) Lawn care.
(j) Exterior communication devices.
(k) Keeping and raising of chickens. [Added 10-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-34]
(l) Short-term rental. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Intermediate day-care home.
(b) Accessory dwelling unit. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses.
(1) Residential density and intensity requirements:
(a) Minimum zoning district area: 8,000 square feet.
§ 550-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-24
1:1089
(b) Maximum gross density (MGD): 4.00 du/acre.
(c) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 50%.
(d) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(e) Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Front or street side lot line to house: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage: 10% lot width or
a minimum of eight feet, up to 14 feet.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage: 16
feet.
[5] Rear lot line to house or attached garage: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line or 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line or 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(e) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(f) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
(g) Minimum dwelling unit separation: 12 feet.
(h) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 35 feet.
(i) Maximum height of accessory structure: 15 feet.
(j) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces): three.
§ 550-24 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-24
1:1090
(k) Minimum dwelling size: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements.
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 50%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.15.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 14,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three from property
line; 10 feet from alley.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 16 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
§ 550-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-25
1:1091
§ 550-25. Two-Family Residential-6 (TR-6) District.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit
development that has a moderate-density community character. The
land use standards for this district permit both single-family detached
residential development and twin house/duplexes permitted by right
and two-flat, mobile home parks, and mobile home subdivisions
permitted as conditional use. Density and intensity standards for this
district are designed to ensure that the Two-Family Residential-6
District shall serve as a designation that preserves and protects the
moderate-density residential community character of its area. Various
residential development options are available in this district, with a
maximum gross density (MGD) of six dwelling units per gross acre.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection
of an area for those who want to live in a moderate-density residential
environment and who retain enough land with their residence or in
their development to ensure that the desired community character
is maintained as long as the TR-6 District designation is retained,
regardless of how much development occurs within that area. As such,
this district is intended to provide the principal location for a wide
range of single-family attached dwelling types, including single-family,
duplexes, twin houses and two-flats.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: lot of 8,000 square feet.
(b) Twin house/duplex: 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(c) Cultivation.
(d) Selective cutting.
(e) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(f) Active outdoor public recreation.
(g) Public services and utilities.
(h) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(i) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Two-flat: lot of 9,000 square feet.
(b) Mobile home development or park: lot of 8,000 square feet.
(c) Clear-cutting.
(d) Indoor institutional.
§ 550-25 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-25
1:1092
(e) Outdoor institutional.
(f) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(g) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Home occupation.
(d) Family day-care home.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) Private residential recreational facility.
(g) Drainage structure.
(h) Filling.
(i) Lawn care.
(j) Exterior communication devices.
(k) Keeping and raising of chickens. [Added 10-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-35]
(l) Short-term rental. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Intermediate day-care home.
(b) Accessory dwelling unit. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
§ 550-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-25
1:1093
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses.
(1) Residential density and intensity requirements. For single-family
dwellings, see the SR-4 District.
(a) Conventional development.
[1] Minimum zoning district area: 9,000 square feet.
[2] Maximum gross density (MGD): 6.00 du/acre.
[3] Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 50%.
[4] Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
[5] Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(b) Mobile home park/development.
[1] Minimum zoning district area: 10 acres.
[2] Maximum gross density (MGD): 5.00 du/acre.
[3] Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 50%.
[4] Maximum building coverage: 40%.
[5] Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet (except for twin homes at
4,500 square feet per dwelling unit).
(b) Minimum lot width: 85 feet.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front or street side lot line to house: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage: 10% lot width or
a minimum of eight feet, up to 14 feet.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage: 18
feet or zero feet along common wall.
[5] Rear lot line to house or attached garage: 25 feet.
§ 550-25 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-25
1:1094
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(e) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(f) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
(g) Minimum dwelling unit separation: 12 feet or zero feet along
common wall.
(h) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 35 feet.
(i) Maximum height of accessory structure: 15 feet.
(j) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces): three.
(k) Minimum dwelling size: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 30%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.22.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 14,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 40 feet.
§ 550-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-25
1:1095
§ 550-26. Multifamily Residential-8 (MR-8) District.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 16 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit
development that has a higher-density community character. The land
use standards for this district permit single-family detached, twin
house/duplex, two-flats, townhouses and multiplexes permitted by right
and related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for
this district are designed to ensure that the Multifamily Residential-8
District shall serve as a designation that preserves and protects the
community character of its area. A variety of residential development
options are available in this district, with a maximum gross density
(MGD) of eight dwelling units per gross acre.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection
of an area for those who want to live in a higher-density residential
environment and who retain enough land with their residence or in
their development to ensure that the urban community character is
maintained as long as the MR-8 District designation is retained,
regardless of how much development occurs within that area. As such,
it is intended to provide the principal location for mixed residential
development.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: lot of 8,000 square feet.
(b) Twin house/duplex: 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
§ 550-25 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-26
1:1096
(c) Two-flat: lot of 9,000 square feet.
(d) Townhouse: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(e) Multiplex: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(f) Cultivation.
(g) Selective cutting.
(h) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(i) Active outdoor public recreation.
(j) Public services and utilities.
(k) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(l) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Apartment: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(b) Institutional residential.
(c) Clear-cutting.
(d) Indoor institutional.
(e) Outdoor institutional.
(f) Community living arrangement (16 or more residents).
(g) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(h) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(i) Boardinghouse.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Home occupation.
(d) Family day-care home.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) Private residential recreational facility.
§ 550-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-26
1:1097
(g) Drainage structure.
(h) Filling.
(i) Lawn care.
(j) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Intermediate day-care home.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses. For single-family dwellings,
see the SR-4 District. For two-family dwellings, see the TR-6 District.
(1) Residential density and intensity requirements:
(a) Minimum zoning district area: 16,500 square feet.
(b) Maximum gross density (MGD): 8.00 du/acre.
(c) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 50%.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(e) Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 20 feet for townhouse on interior
of row; 30 feet for townhouse on end of row.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet; 20 feet for townhouse on
interior of row; 30 feet for townhouse on end of row.
(d) Minimum setbacks:
§ 550-26 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-26
1:1098
[1] Front or street side lot line to house: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage: 10% lot width or
a minimum of eight feet, up to 14 feet.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage: 20
feet or zero feet along common wall.
[5] Rear lot line to house or attached garage: 30 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
(e) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(f) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
(g) Minimum dwelling unit separation: 20 feet or zero feet along
common wall.
(h) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 35 feet, greater with
conditional use permit.
(i) Maximum height of accessory structure: 18 feet.
(j) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces): 2.5 per three-bedroom; two per two-bedroom, onebedroom
or efficiency.
(k) Minimum dwelling core dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.275.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 14,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
§ 550-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-26
1:1099
§ 550-27. Multifamily Residential-10 (MR-10) District.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 20 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit
development that has a higher-density community character. The land
use standards for this district permit single-family detached, twin
house/duplex, two flats, townhouses, multiplexes and apartments
permitted by right and related institutional land uses. Density and
intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the
Multifamily Residential-10 District shall serve as a designation that
preserves and protects the community character of its area. A variety of
residential development options are available in this district, with a
maximum gross density (MGD) of 10 dwelling units per gross acre.
§ 550-26 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-27
1:1100
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection
of an area for those who want to live in a higher-density residential
environment and who retain enough land with their residence or in
their development to ensure that the urban community character is
maintained as long as the MR-10 District designation is retained,
regardless of how much development occurs within that area. As such,
it is intended to provide the principal location for mixed residential
development.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: lot of 8,000 square feet.
(b) Twin house/duplex: 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(c) Two-flat: lot of 9,000 square feet.
(d) Townhouse: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(e) Multiplex: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(f) Apartment: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(g) Cultivation.
(h) Selective cutting.
(i) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(j) Active outdoor public recreation.
(k) Public services and utilities.
(l) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(m) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Apartment: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit (five- to twentyfour-
unit building).
(b) Institutional residential.
(c) Clear-cutting.
(d) Indoor institutional.
(e) Outdoor institutional.
(f) Community living arrangement (16 or more residents).
§ 550-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-27
1:1101
(g) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(h) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(i) Boardinghouse.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Home occupation.
(d) Family day-care home.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) Private residential recreational facility.
(g) Drainage structure.
(h) Filling.
(i) Lawn care.
(j) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Intermediate day-care home.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses. For single-family dwellings,
see the SR-4 District. For two-family dwellings, see the TR-6 District.
For three- to four-unit multifamily dwellings, see the MR-8 District.
(1) Residential density and intensity requirements:
§ 550-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-27
1:1102
(a) Minimum zoning district area: 13,100 square feet.
(b) Maximum gross density (MGD): 10.00 du/acre.
(c) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 50%.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 40%
(e) Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 20 feet for townhouse on interior
of row; 30 feet for townhouse on end of row.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet; 20 feet for townhouse on
interior of row; 30 feet for townhouse on end of row.
(d) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front or street side lot line to house: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage: 10% lot width or
a minimum of eight feet, up to 14 feet.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage: 50
feet or zero feet along common wall.
[5] Rear lot line to house or attached garage: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(e) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(f) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
(g) Minimum dwelling unit separation: 20 feet or zero feet along
common wall.
(h) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 35 feet, greater with
conditional use permit.
§ 550-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-27
1:1103
(i) Maximum height of accessory structure: 18 feet.
(j) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces): 2.5 per three-bedroom; two per two-bedroom, onebedroom
or efficiency.
(k) Minimum dwelling core dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.275.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 14,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
§ 550-27 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-27
1:1104
§ 550-28. Senior Residential (SNR) District.
(f) Minimum building separation: 20 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit senior
institutional residential development, including market-rate and nonmarket-
rate senior housing. Housing units that are not institutional or
senior housing shall not be permitted in this district. These prohibited
uses include market-rate and affordable or subsidized housing for
nonsenior and noninstitutional residents.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the construction of
multiple-unit developments intended for use as housing for elderly
persons or elderly households, defined as 55 years or older, in a higherdensity
setting in areas containing adequate public utilities, public
services and community facilities with the specific needs of the elderly
in mind. As such, it is intended to provide the principal location for
institutional residential development.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved for
seniors): lot of 8,000 square feet.
(b) Twin house/duplex (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved for
seniors): 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(c) Two-flat (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved for seniors): lot
of 9,000 square feet.
(d) Townhouse (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved for seniors):
5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or four-unit
building).
(e) Multiplex (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved for seniors):
5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or four-unit
building).
(f) Apartment (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved for seniors):
4,350 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or four-unit
building).
(g) Cultivation.
(h) Selective cutting.
§ 550-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-28
1:1105
(i) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(j) Active outdoor public recreation.
(k) Public services and utilities.
(l) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Apartment (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved for seniors):
4,350 square feet per dwelling unit (five- to twenty-four-unit
building).
(b) Institutional residential (deed-restricted or otherwise reserved
for seniors).
(c) Clear-cutting.
(d) Indoor institutional.
(e) Outdoor institutional.
(f) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(g) Community living arrangement (16 or more residents).
(h) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(i) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(j) Boardinghouse.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
(d) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) Family day-care home.
(g) On-site parking lot.
(h) Private residential recreational facility.
(i) Drainage structure.
(j) Filling.
(k) Lawn care.
§ 550-28 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-28
1:1106
(l) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Intermediate day-care home.
(b) Company-provided on-site recreation.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses. For single-family dwellings,
see the SR-4 District. For two-family dwellings, see the TR-6 District.
For three- to four-unit multifamily dwellings, see the MR-8 District. For
five-or-more-unit multifamily dwellings, see the MR-10 District.
(1) Residential density and intensity requirements:
(a) Minimum zoning district area: one acre.
(b) Maximum gross density (MGD): 40.00 du/acre.
(c) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 50%.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(e) Maximum accessory building coverage: 10%.
(2) Residential bulk requirements: [Amended by Ord. No. 10-11]
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front or street side lot line to principal structure: 25 feet,
40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially
mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
§ 550-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-28
1:1107
[2] Front or street side lot line to attached garage: 25 feet, 40
feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped
right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[3] Side lot line to house or attached garage or other principal
structure: 20 feet or zero feet along common wall or other
attached part of the principal structure.
[4] Total of both sides, lot lines to house/attached garage or
other principal structure: 40 feet or zero feet along
common wall or other attached part of the principal
structure.
[5] Rear lot line to house or attached garage or other principal
structure: 25 feet or zero feet along common wall or other
attached part of the principal structure.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(e) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(f) Minimum paved surface setback: three feet from side or rear;
10 feet from street.
(g) Minimum dwelling unit or other principal structure separation:
20 feet or zero feet along common wall or other attached part
of the principal structure.
(h) Maximum height of dwelling unit: 25 feet, greater with
conditional use permit.
(i) Maximum height of accessory structure: 18 feet.
(j) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot (includes garage, drives and all designated parking
surfaces): 1.5 per dwelling unit.
(k) Minimum dwelling core dimensions: 24 feet by 40 feet.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.275.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 14,000 square feet.
§ 550-28 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-28
1:1108
§ 550-29. Neighborhood Office (NO) District.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements: [Amended by Ord. No. 10-11]
(a) Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet or zero feet
along a common wall or other attached part of the
principal structure.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 40 feet or zero feet
along a common wall or other attached part of the
principal structure.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet or zero feet
along a common wall or other attached part of the
principal structure.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 40 feet or zero feet
along a common wall or other attached part of the
principal structure.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 20 feet or zero feet along a
common wall or other attached part of the principal structure.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose.
§ 550-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-29
1:1109
(1) This district is intended to permit high-quality office and
institutional land uses at an intensity compatible with the older
portions of the City predominately developed with large homes
which are desirable to maintain, where traffic volumes and
adjacent land uses dictate the transition of these areas to certain
nonresidential uses. The desired neighborhood character of the
development is attained through landscape surface area ratio
(LSR) requirements and by restricting the maximum building size
(MBS) of all buildings within each instance of this district to 5,000
square feet. A range of dwelling unit types may be allowed.
Significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to
ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to ensure a minimum of
disruption to adjacent residential development, no development
within this district shall take direct access to a local residential
street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent
protection of an area which preserves the original residential
appearance yet permits office and institutional land uses, and
which ensures that the neighborhood character is maintained as
long as the NO District designation is retained, regardless of how
much development occurs within that area.
(2) Neighborhood Office requirements.
(a) Maximum zoning district: two acres.
(b) Minimum zoning district separation: 2,000 feet.
(c) All new Neighborhood Office (NO) Districts shall be
established through the standard rezoning process. The final
approval of the rezoning request shall not be granted until Plan
Commission approval of a site plan for the subject property.
(d) Maximum building size: 5,000 square feet (one-story); 10,000
square feet (two-story).
(e) No parking in required setbacks for principal buildings.
(f) Residential architectural and landscaping requirements
include foundation planting, pitched roof, fifteen-percent
window covering, natural materials (brick, wood, stone).
(g) Minimum landscape surface ratio: 40%.
(h) Operating hours: no earlier than 6:00 a.m. or later than 11:00
p.m.
(i) Shall provide a neighborhood-oriented amenity, per Plan
Commission direction (i.e., outdoor neighborhood gathering
area, public art, etc.).
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
§ 550-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-29
1:1110
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: lot of 8,000 square feet.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Selective cutting.
(d) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(e) Active outdoor public recreation.
(f) Public services and utilities.
(g) Office.
(h) Personal or professional services.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Twin house/duplex: 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Two-flat: lot of 9,000 square feet.
(c) Townhouse: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(d) Multiplex: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(e) Apartment: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit (three- to
sixteen-unit building).
(f) Institutional residential.
(g) Clear-cutting.
(h) Indoor institutional.
(i) Outdoor institutional.
(j) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(k) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(l) Community living arrangement (16 or more residents).
(m) Indoor sales or service.
(n) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(o) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(p) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(q) Boardinghouse.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
§ 550-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-29
1:1111
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
(d) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) On-site parking lot.
(g) Private residential recreational facility.
(h) Drainage structure.
(i) Filling.
(j) Lawn care.
(k) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Company-provided on-site recreation.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) Relocatable building.
(5) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses:
(1) For single-family dwellings, see the SR-4 District. For two-family
dwellings, see the TR-6 District. For three- to four-unit multifamily
dwellings, see the MR-8 District. For five-or-more-unit multifamily
dwellings and institutional residential developments, see the
MR-10 District.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
§ 550-29 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-29
1:1112
§ 550-30. Planned Office and Institutional (PO) District.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 40%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.25.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 7,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 75 feet; minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: eight feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: eight feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 16 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit high-quality
office and institutional land uses at an intensity compatible with the
§ 550-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-30
1:1113
overall community character of the City. A relatively low maximum floor
area ratio (FAR) and significant areas of landscaping are required in
this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to ensure
a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development
within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street
or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection
of an area for those who desire a high-quality office environment
which maintains the attractiveness of the site and retains enough
open land in its development to ensure that the community character
is maintained as long as the PO District designation is retained,
regardless of how much development occurs within that area.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Selective cutting.
(c) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(d) Active outdoor public recreation.
(e) Public services and utilities.
(f) Office.
(g) Personal or professional services.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Indoor institutional.
(c) Outdoor institutional.
(d) Institutional residential.
(e) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(f) Community living arrangement (16 or more residents).
(g) Indoor sales or service.
(h) In-vehicle sales or service.
(i) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(j) Commercial indoor lodging.
(k) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
§ 550-30 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-30
1:1114
(l) Airport/heliport.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
(d) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) On-site parking lot.
(g) Private residential recreational facility.
(h) Drainage structure.
(i) Filling.
(j) Lawn care.
(k) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(b) In-vehicle sales and service.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) Relocatable building.
(5) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to institutional residential uses. For institutional
residential developments, see the MR-10 District.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
§ 550-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-30
1:1115
§ 550-31. Neighborhood Business (NB) District.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): four.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.30.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 40,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet, 20,0000 square feet
with a conditional use permit.
(b) Minimum lot width: 75 feet; minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: eight feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: eight feet or zero
feet on zero lot line side.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: 10 feet.
(f) Minimum building separation: 20 feet or zero feet on zero lot
line side.
(g) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
§ 550-30 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-31
1:1116
A. Description and purpose.
(1) This district is intended to permit small-scale commercial
development that is compatible with the desired overall
neighborhood community character of the area in general and with
adjacent residential development in particular. The desired
neighborhood community character of the development is attained
through landscape surface area ratio (LSR) requirements and by
restricting the maximum building size (MBS) of all buildings within
each instance of this district to 5,000 square feet. Significant areas
of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect
is achieved. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to
residential development, no development within this district shall
take direct access to a local residential street or a residential
collector street.
Rationale: This district is used to provide both convenienceoriented
goods and services and for the permanent protection of
adjacent residential areas by permitting only a limited range of
commercial activities. Together, these requirements ensure that
the desired character is maintained as long as the NB District
designation is retained, regardless of how much development
occurs within the area.
(2) Neighborhood Business requirements.
(a) Maximum zoning district: two acres.
(b) Minimum zoning district separation: 2,000 feet.
(c) All new Neighborhood Business (NB) Districts shall be
established through the standard rezoning process. Final
approval of the rezoning request shall not be granted until Plan
Commission approval of a site plan for the subject property.
(d) Maximum building size: 5,000 square feet (one-story); 10,000
square feet (two-story).
(e) No parking in required setbacks for principal buildings.
(f) Residential architectural and landscaping requirements
include foundation planting, pitched roof, fifteen-percent
window covering, natural materials (brick, wood, stone).
(g) Minimum landscape surface ratio: 40%.
(h) Operating hours: no earlier than 6:00 a.m. or later than 11:00
p.m.
(i) Shall provide a neighborhood-oriented amenity, per Plan
Commission direction (i.e., outdoor neighborhood gathering
area, public art, etc.).
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-31
1:1117
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Single-family: lot of 8,000 square feet.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Selective cutting.
(d) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(e) Active outdoor public recreation.
(f) Indoor institutional.
(g) Public services and utilities.
(h) Office.
(i) Personal or professional services.
(j) Indoor sales or service.
(k) Indoor maintenance service.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Twin house/duplex: 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Two-flat: lot of 9,000 square feet.
(c) Townhouse: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(d) Multiplex: 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit (three- or fourunit
building).
(e) Apartment: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit (three- to
sixteen-unit building).
(f) Clear-cutting.
(g) Indoor institutional.
(h) Outdoor institutional.
(i) Institutional residential.
(j) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents).
(k) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents).
(l) Community living arrangement (16 or more residents).
(m) In-vehicle sales or service.
(n) Indoor commercial entertainment.
§ 550-31 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-31
1:1118
(o) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(p) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(q) Boardinghouse.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Home occupation.
(d) On-site parking lot.
(e) Private residential recreational facility.
(f) Drainage structure.
(g) Filling.
(h) Lawn care.
(i) Exterior communication devices.
(j) Tourist rooming house. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Commercial apartment.
(b) In-vehicle sales and service.
(c) Light industrial incidental to indoor sales.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) General temporary outdoor sales.
(2) Outdoor assembly.
(3) Contractor's project office.
(4) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(5) Relocatable building.
(6) On-site real estate sales office.
(7) Outdoor sales of farm products.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-31
1:1119
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses. For single-family dwellings,
see the SR-4 District. For two-family dwellings, see the TR-6 District.
For three- to four-unit multifamily dwellings, see the MR-8 District. For
five-or-more-unit multifamily dwellings and institutional residential
developments, see the MR-10 District.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 40%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.275.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 7,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): 5,000 square feet.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 60 feet; minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
§ 550-31 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-31
1:1120
§ 550-32. Planned Business (PB) District.
(f) Minimum building separation: 16 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit large- and
small-scale commercial development that is compatible with the
desired overall community character of the area in general. Significant
areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this
effect is achieved. A wide range of office, retail and lodging land uses
are permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of
disruption to residential development, no development within this
district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a
residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide the principal zoning
district for commercial development occurring after the adoption of
this chapter. The standards of this district are designed to provide
a clear distinction from the General Business and Central Business
Districts in terms of permitted intensity of development, treatment of
outdoor sales, and required green space areas. The desired suburban
community character of the development is attained through the
landscape surface area ratio (LSR) requirements. Together, these
requirements ensure that the desired community character is
maintained as long as the Planned Business District designation is
retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that
area.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Selective cutting.
(c) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(d) Active outdoor public recreation.
(e) Public services and utilities.
(f) Office.
(g) Personal or professional services.
(h) Indoor sales or service.
(i) Indoor maintenance service.
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-32
1:1121
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Indoor institutional.
(c) Outdoor institutional.
(d) Institutional residential.
(e) Outdoor display.
(f) In-vehicle sales or service.
(g) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(h) Commercial animal boarding.
(i) Commercial indoor lodging.
(j) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(k) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(l) Vehicle repair and maintenance.
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
(d) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) On-site parking lot.
(g) Private residential recreational facility.
(h) Drainage structure.
(i) Filling.
(j) Lawn care.
(k) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Commercial apartment.
(b) Company-provided on-site recreation.
§ 550-32 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-32
1:1122
(c) Outdoor display incidental.
(d) In-vehicle sales and service.
(e) Light industrial incidental to indoor sales.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) General temporary outdoor sales.
(2) Outdoor assembly.
(3) Contractor's project office.
(4) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(5) Relocatable building.
(6) On-site real estate sales office.
(7) Outdoor sales of farm products.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to institutional residential uses: for institutional
residential developments, see the MR-10 District.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): four.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.30.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 7,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 60 feet; minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
§ 550-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-32
1:1123
§ 550-33. General Business (GB) District.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet or zero feet
on zero lot line side.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 24 feet or zero feet on zero lot
line side.
(g) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both largeand
small-scale commercial development at intensities that provide
significant incentives for infill development and the continued economic
viability of existing development. To accomplish this effect, minimum
required green space ratios (GSRs) are substantially lower than those
required in the Planned Business District. A wide range of office, retail
and lodging land uses are permitted within this district. In order to
ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no
development within this district shall take direct access to a local
residential street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide an alternative, primarily
infill development, designation for commercial activity to the Planned
Business District. Performance standards for the General Business
District are designed to ensure the long-term economic health of strip
commercial development areas existing as of the effective date of this
chapter by limiting the attraction of the Planned Business District to
those uses which can afford the relatively higher development costs
and rents associated with development in that district. [Amended
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
§ 550-32 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-33
1:1124
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Selective cutting.
(c) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(d) Active outdoor public recreation.
(e) Public services and utilities.
(f) Office.
(g) Personal or professional services.
(h) Indoor sales or service.
(i) Indoor maintenance service.
(j) Off-site parking lot.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Indoor institutional.
(c) Outdoor institutional.
(d) Institutional residential.
(e) Outdoor display.
(f) In-vehicle sales or service.
(g) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(h) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(i) Commercial animal boarding.
(j) Commercial indoor lodging.
(k) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(l) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(m) Boardinghouse.
(n) Vehicle repair and maintenance.
(o) Personal storage facility.
(p) Sexually oriented land use. [Amended by Ord. No. 03-37]
§ 550-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-33
1:1125
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
(d) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) On-site parking lot.
(g) Private residential recreational facility.
(h) Drainage structure.
(i) Filling.
(j) Lawn care.
(k) Exterior communication devices.
(l) Tourist rooming house. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Commercial apartment.
(b) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(c) Outdoor display incidental.
(d) In-vehicle sales and service.
(e) Light industrial incidental to indoor sales.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) General temporary outdoor sales.
(2) Outdoor assembly.
(3) Contractor's project office.
(4) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(5) Relocatable building.
(6) On-site real estate sales office.
(7) Outdoor sales of farm products.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
§ 550-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-33
1:1126
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to institutional residential uses. For institutional
residential developments, see the MR-10 District.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): four.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 15%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.40.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 7,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 60 feet; minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 12 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 12 feet or zero feet
on zero lot line side.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 25 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
§ 550-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-33
1:1127
§ 550-34. Central Business (CB) District.
(f) Minimum building separation: 24 feet or zero feet on zero lot
line side.
(g) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both largeand
small-scale "downtown" commercial development at an intensity
that provides significant incentives for infill development,
redevelopment and the continued economic viability of existing
development. To accomplish this effect, minimum landscape surface
ratios (LSRs) permitted in this district are much lower than those
allowed in the Planned Business and General Business Districts. A wide
range of office, retail and lodging land uses are permitted within this
district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential
development, no development within this district shall take direct
access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. No
requirements for on-site landscaping or parking are required in this
district. This district is strictly limited to the central City locations.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide an alternative, primarily
infill development, designation for commercial activity to the Planned
Business (PB) and General Business District and is designed to assist
in maintaining the long-term viability of the central City.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Selective cutting.
(c) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(d) Active outdoor public recreation.
(e) Public services and utilities.
(f) Office.
(g) Personal or professional services.
(h) Indoor sales or service.
(i) Indoor maintenance service.
(j) Off-site parking lot.
§ 550-33 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-34
1:1128
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Indoor institutional.
(c) Outdoor institutional.
(d) Institutional residential.
(e) In-vehicle sales or service.
(f) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(g) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(h) Commercial indoor lodging.
(i) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(j) Group day-care center (nine or more children).218
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Commercial apartment.
(b) Farm residence.
(c) Private residential garage or shed.
(d) Company cafeteria.
(e) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(f) Home occupation.
(g) On-site parking lot.
(h) Private residential recreational facility.
(i) Drainage structure.
(j) Filling.
(k) Lawn care.
(l) Exterior communication devices.
(m) Tourist rooming house. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
218. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(2)(k), Boardinghouse, which immediately followed,
was repealed 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-4.
§ 550-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-34
1:1129
(a) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(b) In-vehicle sales and service.
(c) Light industrial incidental to indoor sales.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) General temporary outdoor sales.
(2) Outdoor assembly.
(3) Contractor's project office.
(4) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(5) Relocatable building.
(6) On-site real estate sales office.
(7) Outdoor sales of farm products.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to institutional residential uses. For institutional
residential developments, see the MR-10 District.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): four.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 0%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 3.00
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 2,000.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 10 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: zero feet.*
[2] Building to residential side lot line: zero feet.*
§ 550-34 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-34
1:1130
§ 550-35. Planned Industrial (PI) District.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 10 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: zero feet.*
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: zero feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: zero feet.*
(f) Minimum building separation: zero feet.*
(g) Maximum building height: 50 feet; minimum building height:
20 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
* Maximum permitted setback of zero feet, except where
permitted by the Plan Commission as an essential
component of site design.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both largeand
small-scale industrial and office development at an intensity that is
consistent with the overall desired suburban community character of
the community. Beyond a relatively high minimum green space ratio
(GSR), the primary distinguishing feature of this district is that it is
geared to indoor industrial activities not typically associated with high
levels of noise, soot, odors and other potential nuisances for adjoining
properties. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential
development, no development within this district shall take direct
access to a local residential street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for suburbanintensity
light industrial land uses, such as assembly operations,
storage and warehousing facilities, offices and light manufacturing,
which are protected from potential nuisances associated with certain
development permitted within the GI District. In addition, land uses
shall comply with the minimum performance standards presented in
Article XI.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
§ 550-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-35
1:1131
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Selective cutting.
(c) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(d) Active outdoor public recreation.
(e) Indoor institutional.
(f) Public services and utilities.
(g) Office.
(h) Personal or professional services.
(i) Indoor maintenance service.
(j) Indoor storage or wholesaling.
(k) Light industrial.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Outdoor institutional.
(c) Indoor institutional. [Added 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
(d) Indoor sales or service.
(e) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(f) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(g) Personal storage facility.
(h) Airport/heliport.
(i) Distribution center.
(j) Communication tower.
(k) Sexually oriented land use. [Amended by Ord. No. 03-37]
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C):
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
§ 550-35 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-35
1:1132
(d) Indoor sales incident to light industrial use.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) On-site parking lot.
(g) Private residential recreational facility.
(h) Drainage structure.
(i) Filling.
(j) Lawn care.
(k) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(b) In-vehicle sales and service.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) Relocatable building.
(5) On-site real estate sales office.
(6) Outdoor sales of farm products.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses: not applicable.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): five.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.60.
(d) Minimum zoning district area: 40,000 square feet.
§ 550-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-35
1:1133
§ 550-36. General Industrial (GI) District.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet (20,000 square feet
permitted as a conditional use).
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet (100 feet permitted as a
conditional use); minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 30 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 15 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 30 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both largeand
small-scale industrial and office development at an intensity that is
consistent with existing transition and urban intensity development.
Beyond a relatively high minimum green space ratio (GSR), the primary
distinguishing feature of this district is that it is geared to indoor
industrial activities not typically associated with high levels of noise,
soot, odors and other potential nuisances for adjoining properties. To
ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no
§ 550-35 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-36
1:1134
development within this district shall take direct access to a local
residential street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for urbanintensity
light industrial land uses, such as assembly operations,
storage and warehousing facilities, offices and light manufacturing,
which are protected from potential nuisances associated with certain
development permitted within the HI District. In addition, uses shall
comply with the minimum performance standards presented in Article
XI.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Selective cutting.
(c) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(d) Public services and utilities.
(e) Office.
(f) Indoor maintenance service.
(g) Indoor storage or wholesaling.
(h) Off-site parking lot.
(i) Distribution center.
(j) Light industrial.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Clear-cutting.
(b) Group day-care center (nine or more children).
(c) Vehicle repair and maintenance.
(d) Outdoor storage or wholesaling.
(e) Personal storage facility.
(f) Airport/heliport.
(g) Freight terminal.
(h) Communication tower.
(i) Sexually oriented land use. [Amended by Ord. No. 03-37]
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
§ 550-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-36
1:1135
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
(d) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(e) Indoor sales incidental to light industrial use.
(f) Home occupation.
(g) On-site parking lot.
(h) Private residential recreational facility.
(i) Drainage structure.
(j) Filling.
(k) Lawn care.
(l) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Company-provided on-site recreation.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
(4) Relocatable building.
(5) On-site real estate sales office.
(6) Outdoor sales of farm products.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses: not applicable.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
§ 550-36 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-36
1:1136
§ 550-37. Heavy Industrial (HI) District.
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): four.
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 15%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 1.00.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 9,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 75 feet; minimum street frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 50 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 20 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 40 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both largeand
small-scale industrial and office development at an intensity that
provides ample incentive for infill development and redevelopment of
industrial areas existing as of the effective date of this chapter. This
§ 550-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-37
1:1137
district is designed to permit a very wide variety of industrial uses
which may occur both indoors and outdoors, including certain land
uses which are permitted in no other zoning district because of their
potential to create nuisances for adjoining properties. In order to
ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no
development within this district shall take direct access to a local
residential street or a residential collector street.
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for both light
and heavy industrial uses in a zoning district in which the potential
for nuisance complaints from nearby properties is minimized. It must
be emphasized that this is not a district where virtually any land use
is permitted, as all uses shall comply with the minimum performance
standards presented in Article XI. In addition, certain land uses, such
as junkyards and salvage operations and freight terminals, are
permitted within this district only upon the granting of a conditional
use permit.
B. List of allowable principal land uses (per Article III).
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right (per § 550-45A):
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Selective cutting.
(c) Passive outdoor public recreation.
(d) Public services and utilities.
(e) Office.
(f) Indoor maintenance service.
(g) Indoor storage or wholesaling.
(h) Outdoor storage or wholesaling.
(i) Off-site parking lot.
(j) Distribution center.
(k) Light industrial.
(l) Heavy industrial.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional use (per § 550-45B):
(a) Agricultural services.
(b) Clear-cutting.
(c) Outdoor maintenance service.
(d) Sexually oriented land use.
§ 550-37 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-37
1:1138
(e) Vehicle repair and maintenance.
(f) Junkyard or salvage yard.
(g) Waste disposal facility.
(h) Composting operation.
(i) Airport/heliport.
(j) Freight terminal.
(k) Communication tower.219
C. List of allowable accessory uses (per § 550-45C).
(1) Accessory land uses permitted by right:
(a) Farm residence.
(b) Private residential garage or shed.
(c) Company cafeteria.
(d) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(e) Indoor sales incident to light industrial use.
(f) Home occupation.
(g) On-site parking lot.
(h) Private residential recreational facility.
(i) Drainage structure.
(j) Filling.
(k) Lawn care.
(l) Exterior communication devices.
(2) Accessory land uses permitted as conditional use:
(a) Company-provided on-site recreation.
(b) Migrant labor camp.
D. List of allowable temporary uses (per § 550-45D):
(1) Outdoor assembly.
(2) Contractor's project office.
(3) Contractor's on-site equipment storage.
219. Editor's Note: Original entry "Extraction," which immediately followed this entry was
deleted 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24.
§ 550-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-37
1:1139
(4) Relocatable building.
(5) On-site real estate sales office.
E. Regulations applicable to all uses:
(1) Landscaping regulations (see Article X).
(2) Performance standards (see Article XI).
(3) Signage regulations (see Article XII).
F. Regulations applicable to residential uses: not applicable.
G. Regulations applicable to nonresidential uses.
(1) Nonresidential intensity requirements:
(a) Maximum number of floors (F): two (or more with a conditional
use permit).
(b) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 15%.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 1.00.
(d) Minimum lot area (MLA): 9,000 square feet.
(e) Maximum building size (MBS): not applicable.
(2) Nonresidential bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; minimum street frontage: 50
feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Building to front or street side lot line: 25 feet, 40 feet for a
lot adjacent to a street with an officially mapped right-ofway
equal to or exceeding 100 feet.
[2] Building to residential side lot line: 50 feet.
[3] Building to residential rear lot line: 40 feet.
[4] Building to nonresidential side lot line: 20 feet.
[5] Building to nonresidential rear lot line: 30 feet.
[6] Side lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
[7] Rear lot line to accessory structure: three feet from
property line; 10 feet from alley right-of-way.
§ 550-37 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-37
1:1140
§ 550-38. Planned Development District.
§ 550-39. Natural resource protection overlay zoning districts.
(d) Required bufferyard: see § 550-99D along zoning district
boundary.
(e) Minimum paved surface setback: five feet from side or rear; 10
feet from street.
(f) Minimum building separation: 40 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
(h) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required on the
lot: see parking lot requirements per specific land use in
Article IV.
A. Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide more
incentives for redevelopment in areas of the community which are
experiencing a lack of reinvestment or which require flexible zoning
treatment because of factors specific to the site. This district is
designed to forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of the City
by controlling the site design and the land use, appearance, density or
intensity of development within the district in a manner that is
consistent with sound land use, urban design and economic
revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure
long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles.
Refer to § 550-152 for the procedures applicable to proposal review in
this standard zoning district.
B. Development standards. Development standards are flexible within this
zoning district. Refer to § 550-152B for the range of development
standards potentially available in this zoning district.
A. This chapter employs overlay zoning districts to identify and regulate
areas in which natural resource protection requirements apply. Each
type of natural resource regulated by this chapter is represented by an
overlay zoning district bearing its name.
B. Natural resource protection overlay districts include:
(1) Floodplain Overlay Districts.
(2) Shoreland-Wetland Overlay District.
(3) Drainageway Overlay District.
(4) Woodland Overlay District.
(5) Steep Slope Overlay District.
C. For specific natural resource protection overlay district regulations, see
Article IX.
§ 550-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-40
1:1141
§ 550-40. Map of natural resource protection overlay districts.
Natural resource protection overlay zoning districts established by this
chapter are shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Watertown
which, together with all the explanatory material thereon, is hereby made
part of this chapter. For specific natural resource protection overlay district
designation criteria, see Article IX of this chapter and also Chapter 532,
Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning.
§ 550-41. Downtown Historic Preservation Overlay Zoning District.
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of
the Comprehensive Plan by preserving and enhancing the historical quality
of the downtown and by attaining a consistent visually pleasing image for
the downtown area. As emphasized by said plan, this district is designed to
A. Where an apparent discrepancy exists between the location of the
outermost boundary of the flood-fringe district or the floodplain district
shown on the Official Zoning Map and actual field conditions, the
location shall be initially determined by the Zoning Administrator using
the criteria described in Subsections B and C below. Where the Zoning
Administrator finds that there is a significant difference between the
map and the actual field conditions, the map shall be amended using
the procedures established in § 550-141. Disputes between the Zoning
Administrator and the applicant over the location of the district
boundary line shall be settled using the procedures outlined in
§ 550-156H.
B. Where flood profiles exist, the location of the district boundary line
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator using both the scale
appearing on the map and the elevations shown on the water surface
profile of the regional flood. Where a discrepancy exists between the
map and actual field conditions, the regional flood elevations shall
govern. A map amendment is required where there is a significant
discrepancy between the map and actual field conditions. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to grant or deny a land use
permit on the basis of a district boundary derived from the elevations
shown on the water surface profile of the regional flood, whether or not
a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for initiating any map amendments required under this
section within a reasonable period of time.
C. Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the district boundary
line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator using the scale
appearing on the map, visual on-site inspection and any available
information provided by the Department of Natural Resources. Where
there is a significant difference between the map and actual field
conditions, the map shall be amended. Where a map amendment has
been approved by both the Common Council and the Department of
Natural Resources, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
grant or deny a land use permit.
§ 550-40 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-41
1:1142
forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of the City by controlling
the site design and appearance of development within the district in a
manner that is consistent with sound land use, urban design and economic
revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure
long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer
to § 550-149 for the procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay
district.
§ 550-42. Entry Corridor Design Overlay Zoning District.
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of
the Comprehensive Plan by preserving and enhancing the historical quality
of the STH 19 corridor west of the downtown, CTH E corridor southeast
of the downtown, STH 26 south of the downtown and the STH 26/16
corridor north and east of the downtown and by enhancing the economic
redevelopment potential of the STH 26 corridor north and south of the
downtown. As emphasized by the plan, this district is designed to forward
both aesthetic and historic preservation objectives of the City by controlling
the site design and appearance of development within the district in a
manner that is consistent with sound land use, urban design and economic
revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure
long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer
to § 550-150 for the procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay
district.
§ 550-43. Community Gateway Design Overlay Zoning District.
This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations
of the Comprehensive Plan by requiring that development located at and
around the most important entrances to the community has a character
which recognizes the City's adopted objectives of establishing an attractive
and high-quality image. These important community gateways are located
around the STH 26/16 interchange, the intersection of STH 16 and East
Gate Drive, STH 26 near Ebenezer Road, STH 19 near Gypsy Road and CTH
E/Concord Avenue near CTH D. As emphasized by the plan, this district is
designed to forward both aesthetic and economic development objectives
of the City by controlling the site design and appearance of development
within the district in a manner that is consistent with sound land use,
urban design and economic development principles. The application of
these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation
toward these principles. Refer to § 550-151 for the procedures applicable to
proposal review in this overlay district.
§ 550-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-43
1:1143

ARTICLE III
Land Use Regulations
§ 550-44. Purpose.
The purpose of Articles III through VI is to indicate which land uses may
locate in each zoning district and under what requirements and which land
uses may not locate therein. A further distinction is made for land uses that
may locate in a given district only upon obtaining a conditional or temporary
use permit to do so. Finally, certain land uses may locate in a given district
as a matter of right upon compliance with special regulations for such a
land use.
§ 550-45. Regulation of allowed land uses.
The land uses listed in Article II are specifically designated and refer to
the detailed listing of land uses contained in Article IV (Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations).
A. Land uses permitted by right. Land uses listed as permitted by right are
permitted per the general land use requirement of this chapter
(§ 550-47); per the general requirements of the specific zoning district
in which they are located; per any additional requirements imposed by
applicable overlay zoning districts as designated on the Official Zoning
Map; per the general requirements of this chapter, including § 550-145;
and per any and all other applicable City, county, state and federal
regulations.
B. Land uses permitted as a conditional use. Land uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use are permitted subject to all the requirements
applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection A above,
plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular land use
as contained in Article IV (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and
Regulations), including any additional requirements imposed as part of
the conditional use process. Each application for and instance of a
conditional use shall be considered a unique situation and shall not be
construed as precedence for similar requests. (See also § 550-142 for
conditional use procedures.)
C. Land uses permitted as an accessory use. Land uses permitted as an
accessory use are permitted subject to all the requirements applicable
to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection A above, plus any
additional requirements applicable to that particular land use as
contained in Article IV (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and
Regulations).
D. Land uses permitted as a temporary use. Land uses listed as permitted
as a temporary use are permitted subject to all the requirements
applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection A above,
plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular land use
§ 550-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-45
1:1145
§ 550-46. Tables of land uses.
Appendix B, which is nonregulatory, summarizes the treatment of all land
uses as regulated in each zoning district.220
§ 550-47. Regulations applicable to all land uses.
All uses of land initiated within the jurisdiction of this chapter on, or
following, the effective date of this chapter shall comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter. Specifically:
as contained in § 550-57. (See Article IV, Detailed Land Use
Descriptions and Regulations.)
E. Land uses not listed in a specific zoning district are not permitted in
such zoning district, except as legal nonconforming uses (per Article V).
F. Although a land use may be indicated as permitted by right or
permitted as a conditional use in a particular district, it does not follow
that such a land use is permitted or permissible on every parcel in such
district. No land use is permitted or permissible on a parcel unless it
can be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards and
regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the specific land use
and parcel in question, or unless an appropriate variance has been
granted pursuant to § 550-147.
A. Land use regulations and requirements. All uses of land shall comply
with all the regulations and requirements of this chapter pertaining to
the types of uses to which land may be put within particular zoning
districts. Such regulations and requirements address both general and
specific regulations which land uses shall adhere to and which are
directly related to the protection of the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City of Watertown and its environs.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24]
B. Density and intensity regulations and requirements. All development of
land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of this
chapter pertaining to the maximum permitted density (for residential
land uses) and intensity (for nonresidential land uses) of land uses.
Such regulations and requirements address issues such as floor area
ratios (FARs) and landscape surface ratios (LSRs) which are directly
related to and are a critical component of density and intensity and the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the City of Watertown and its environs.
C. Bulk regulations and requirements. All development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of this chapter
pertaining to the maximum permitted bulk of structures and the
220. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Land Use Regulations Table, is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-45 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-47
1:1146
location of structures on a lot. Such regulations and requirements
address issues such as height, setbacks from property lines and rightsof-
way, and minimum separation between structures which are directly
related to and a critical component of the effective bulk of a structure
and the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Watertown and its environs.
D. Natural resources and green space regulations and requirements. All
land use and/or development of land shall comply with all the
regulations and requirements of this chapter and Chapter 532,
Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning, pertaining to the protection
of sensitive natural resources and required green space areas. Such
regulations and requirements address issues such as absolute
protection, partial protection, and migration which are directly related
to and a critical component of the protection of natural resources and
the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents
of the City of Watertown and its environs.
E. Landscaping and bufferyards regulations and requirements. All
development of land shall comply with all the regulations and
requirements of this chapter pertaining to the provision of landscaping
and bufferyards. Such regulations and requirements address issues
such as minimum required landscaping of developed land and minimum
required provision of bufferyards between adjoining zoning districts
and/or development options which are directly related to and a critical
component of the effective bulk of a structure and the protection of the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of
Watertown and its environs.
F. Performance standards and requirements. All development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of this chapter
pertaining to the provision of appropriate access, parking, loading,
storage and lighting facilities. Such regulations and requirements
address issues such as maximum permitted access points, minimum
required parking spaces, the screening of storage areas, and maximum
permitted intensity of lighting, as well as defining acceptable levels of
potential nuisances such as noise, vibration, odors, heat, glare and
smoke, which are directly related to and a critical component of the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the City of Watertown and its environs.
G. Signage regulations and requirements. All land use and/or development
of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Article
XII pertaining to the type and amount of signage permitted on property.
Such regulations and restrictions address issues such as the maximum
area of permitted signage and the number and types of permitted
signage which are directly related to and a critical component of the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the City of Watertown and its environs.
§ 550-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-47
1:1147
H. Procedural regulations and requirements. All land use and/or
development of land shall comply with all the regulations and
requirements of Article XIII pertaining to the procedures necessary to
secure review and approval of land use and/or development. Such
regulations and restrictions address both procedural and technical
requirements and are directly related to and a critical component of the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the City of Watertown and its environs. At a minimum, all development
shall be subject to the requirements of § 550-145.
I. Number of buildings per lot. In the RH, CR-10, ER-1 and SR-4 Districts,
only one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot. In the
TR-6, MR-8, MR-10, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB, CB, PI, GI and HI Districts,
more than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot upon
the granting of a conditional use permit for a group development in
compliance with Article VI.
J. Number of land uses per building.
(1) No more than one nonresidential land use shall be permitted in any
building unless a conditional use permit for a group development is
granted in compliance with Article VI.
(2) With the exceptions of a commercial apartment or a home
occupation, no building containing a nonresidential land use shall
contain a residential land use. (See § 550-56A and J.)
K. Division or combining of a lot. No recorded lot shall be divided into two
or more lots, and no two or more recorded lots shall be combined into
one or more lots, unless such division or combination results in the
creation of lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable
regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located (as set forth
in this chapter). (See also Chapter 545, Subdivision of Land.)
§ 550-47 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-47
1:1148
ARTICLE IV
Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations
§ 550-48. Land use categories.
The land use categories employed by this chapter are defined in this article.
Land uses that are not listed in this chapter are not necessarily excluded
from locating within any given zoning district. Section 550-148 empowers
the Zoning Administrator to make interpretations on matters regarding
specific land use proposals which are not addressed by this chapter.
§ 550-49. Residential land uses.
A. Conventional residential development. Description: This land use
includes, but is not limited to, all residential developments which do not
provide permanently protected green space areas. Property which is
under common ownership of a property owners' association is
permitted but is not a required component of this type of development.
Up to 10% of a conventional residential development's gross site area
(GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be protected (or
other permanently protected green space areas) without a reduction in
maximum gross density (MGD). (See Subsection F below.) Conventional
residential development can be made up of the following dwelling unit
types:
Key to Letters:
(Note: Not all letters appear on all graphics. See bulk requirements in
Article II.)
B Minimum Lot Width
E Front or Street Side Lot Line to House
F Front or Street Side Lot Line to Garage
G Side Lot Line to House or Garage
I Rear Lot Line to House or Garage
J Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure
K Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure
M Minimum Paved Surface Setback
N Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation
Q Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the
Lot
(1) Single-family detached. Description: A dwelling designed for and
occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, wall or
floor in common with any other dwelling unit. This dwelling unit
type consists of a fully detached single-family residence that is
located on an individual lot or within a group development. The
dwelling unit must be a site-built structure built in compliance with
the State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) or may be a
§ 550-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:1149
manufactured dwelling (modular home) as permitted by the UDC
or a manufactured home as permitted by the HUD code. For any
of these dwelling units, the use of a permanent continuous UDC
foundation is required. This dwelling unit type may not be split
into two or more residences. Refer to the illustration below and to
Article II for setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
Single-family Detached Dwelling Unit
(2) Duplex. Description: These dwelling unit types consist of a singlefamily
dwelling that is attached on one side to another single-family
residence. A minimum building code required fire-rated wall
assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level to
flush against the underside of the roof, and individual sanitary
sewer and public water laterals are required between each
dwelling unit. The two residences shall be located on the same lot,
and in fact, the twin house is distinguished from the duplex house
merely by having each unit located on an individual lot. These
dwelling unit types may not be split into additional residences.
Refer to the illustration below and to Article II for setback
requirements labeled in capital letters:
§ 550-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-49
1:1150
Duplex
(3) Twin house. Description: These dwelling unit types consist of a
single-family dwelling that is attached on one side to another
single-family residence. A minimum building code required firerated
wall assembly division, separating living areas from the
lowest level to flush against the underside of the roof, and
individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals are required
between each dwelling unit. The two residences shall be located on
individual lots, and in fact, the twin house is distinguished from the
duplex house merely by having each unit located on an individual
lot. These dwelling unit types may not be split into additional
residences. Refer to the illustration below and to Article II for
setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:1151
Twin House
(4) Two-flat house. Description: This dwelling unit type consists of a
two-family residence, which is in complete compliance with the
State of Wisconsin One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (§§ 101.60
to 101.66, Wis. Stats.), which has individual dwelling units on
multiple levels (rather than side by side as for a duplex or twin
house). This dwelling unit type also includes any single-family
residence that has been converted into a two-family residence. The
two residences are both located on the same lot or within the same
group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into
additional residences. Where permitted, this use is a conditional
use and must be approved through the procedures of § 550-142.
Refer to the illustration below and to Article II for setback
requirements labeled in capital letters:
§ 550-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-49
1:1152
Two-Flat House
(5) Townhouse. Description: This dwelling unit type consists of
attached, two-story, single-family residences, each having a
private, individual access. This dwelling unit type is located on its
own lot or within a group development and may not be split into
additional residences. A minimum building code required fire-rated
wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest
level through the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and public
water laterals are required between each dwelling unit. No more
than four and no fewer than three townhouse dwelling units may be
attached per group. All townhouse units within a development shall
be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the
development. Refer to the illustration below and to Article II for
setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:1153
Townhouse
(6) Multiplex. Description: This dwelling unit type consists of an
attached, multifamily residence that has a private, individual
exterior entrance. A minimum building code required fire-rated
wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest
level through the roof, is required between each dwelling unit. No
more than four and no fewer than three multiplex dwelling units
may be attached per group. All multiplex units within a
development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the
boundary of the development. Refer to the illustration below and to
Article II for setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
§ 550-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-49
1:1154
Multiplex
(7) Apartment. Description: This dwelling unit type consists of an
attached, multifamily residence that takes access from a shared
entrance or hallway. A minimum building code required fire-rated
wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest
level to the underside of the roof, is required between each
dwelling unit. No more than 24 dwelling units, and no fewer than
three, may be located in a building. As part of the conditional use
requirements for group developments, any development comprised
of one or more buildings which contain four or more dwelling units
is considered a distinct land use type from apartments with three
or four dwelling units in the building. Refer to the illustration below
and to Article II for setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:1155
Apartment
(8) Mobile home. Description: This dwelling unit type consists of a
transportable, factory-built, fully detached single-family residence,
which has not received a federal manufactured housing certificate,
and which is located on an individual lot or within a group
development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into two or
more residences. Within 30 days of occupancy, the owner shall
remove the axle and install skirting per the requirements of the
Plan Commission. Refer to the illustration below and to Article II
for setback requirements labeled in capital letters:
§ 550-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-49
1:1156
Mobile Home (Land Use)
B. Institutional residential development. See § 550-51F.
C. Mobile home subdivision residential development. Description: This
land use is a form of residential development which is exclusively
reserved for individually sold lots containing mobile home units. Each
of the lots and mobile home units must meet the requirements for
mobile homes listed in Subsection A(8) of this section. Under this
development option, approximately 10% of a development's gross site
area (GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be protected
(or other permanently protected green space areas) without a reduction
in maximum gross density (MGD).
(1) Regulations.
(a) The minimum size of the mobile home development shall be
five acres.
(b) The minimum lot size shall comply with the minimum
dimensional requirements for single-family detached (sitebuilt)
lots within the zoning district.
(c) The mobile home development shall be located so as to blend
with adjacent residentially zoned areas.
(d) No direct access from the development shall be made available
to local residential streets developed with conventional onefamily
or two-family housing.
(e) A thirty-foot-wide landscaped buffer which provides
continuous year-round screening to a minimum height of eight
feet shall be required along all property lines abutting
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:1157
residentially zoned property and may be required around the
entire perimeter of the subject property.
(f) A community room shall be provided within the development,
which must provide an emergency public shelter with capacity
designed to serve the residents of the development at an
assumed population of 2.5 residents per dwelling unit.
(g) Each dwelling unit shall provide two off-street parking spaces.
(h) Each dwelling unit shall have a garage, either attached or
detached, if 60% of other dwellings within 500 feet have a
garage.
(i) Each dwelling unit shall be placed on a foundation and secured
with a tie-down technique approved by the Building Inspector.
Residential masonry or residential siding materials shall be
required for skirting around the entire perimeter of each unit.
(j) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of 22 feet,
exclusive of attached garage, carport or open deck, if 60% of
the dwellings within 500 feet have a width of 22 feet.
(k) Minimum dwelling core dimensions for the zoning district shall
not apply within this type of development; however, each
dwelling unit shall have siding and roofing materials
comparable with 60% of the dwellings within 500 feet of the
dwelling in question.
D. Mobile home park residential development. Description: This land use
is a form of conventional residential development which is exclusively
reserved for individually sold or rented air right pads containing mobile
home units. Each of the pads and mobile home units must meet the
requirements for mobile homes listed in Subsection A(8) of this section.
Under this development option, approximately 10% of a development's
gross site area (GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be
protected (or other permanently protected green space areas) without
a reduction in maximum gross density (MGD).
(1) Regulations.
(a) The minimum size of the mobile home park development shall
be five acres.
(b) The minimum air pad size shall comply with the minimum
dimensional requirements for single-family detached (sitebuilt)
lots within the zoning district.
(c) The mobile home park development shall be located so as to
blend with adjacent residentially zoned areas.
§ 550-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-49
1:1158
(d) No direct access from the development shall be made available
to local residential streets developed with conventional onefamily
or two-family housing.
(e) A thirty-foot-wide landscaped buffer which provides
continuous year-round screening to a minimum height of eight
feet shall be required along all property lines abutting
residentially zoned property and may be required around the
entire perimeter of the subject property.
(f) A community room shall be provided within the development,
which must provide an emergency public shelter with capacity
designed to serve the residents of the development at an
assumed population of 2.5 residents per dwelling unit.
(g) Each dwelling unit shall provide two off-street parking spaces.
(h) Each dwelling unit shall have a garage, either attached or
detached, if 60% of other dwellings within 500 feet have a
garage.
(i) Each dwelling unit shall be placed on a foundation and secured
with a tie-down technique approved by the Building Inspector.
Residential masonry or residential siding materials shall be
required for skirting around the entire perimeter of each unit.
(j) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of 22 feet,
exclusive of attached garage, carport or open deck, if 60% of
the dwellings within 500 feet have a width of 22 feet.
(k) Minimum dwelling core dimensions for the zoning district shall
not apply within this type of development; however, each
dwelling unit shall have siding and roofing materials
comparable with 60% of the dwellings within 500 feet of the
dwelling in question.
E. Regulation of mobile home park or subdivision legally established
before 2002.
(1) All such mobile home parks or subdivisions are considered a legal
conforming land use.
(2) All such dwelling units within such parks are exempt from the
requirements of Subsections C and D.
(3) New or replacement dwelling units within such parks are also
exempt from the same requirements.
(4) Legally established parks shall be made exempt from the lot size
and public improvement requirements of the TF-6 District upon the
granting of a conditional use permit per § 550-142 that approves a
site plan per § 550-145 and conditions of operation for said mobile
home park.
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:1159
§ 550-50. Agricultural land uses.
F. Note regarding percentage of green space and maximum density yield.
This estimate is provided as a general rule of thumb for the convenience
of the users of this chapter. Such a yield is not to be considered as
ensured by the provisions of this chapter.
A. Cultivation. Description: Cultivation land uses include all operations
primarily oriented to the on-site, outdoor raising of plants. This land use
includes trees which are raised as a crop to be replaced with more trees
after harvesting, such as in nursery or Christmas tree operations. The
raising of plants for consumption by farm animals is considered
cultivation if said plants are consumed by animals which are located off
site.
(1) Regulations.
(a) On buildable lots, cultivation areas shall not exceed 20% of the
lot's area.
(b) Cultivation areas shall not be located within the required front
yard or street yard of any buildable or developed lot.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per employee on the largest work
shift. [Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from
the surfacing requirements of § 550-107F(1).]
B. Husbandry. Description: Husbandry land uses include all operations
primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an
intensity of less than one animal unit (as defined in § 550-15) per acre.
Apiaries are considered husbandry land uses.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of
300 feet from any residentially zoned property and 100 feet
from all other lot lines.
(b) All outdoor animal containments (pastures, pens and similar
areas) shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per employee on the largest work
shift. [Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from
the surfacing requirements of § 550-107F(1).]
C. Intensive agriculture. Description: Intensive agricultural land uses
include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or
use of animals at an intensity equal to or exceeding one animal unit (as
defined in § 550-15) per acre and/or agricultural activities requiring
large investments in structures. Examples of such land uses include
feed lots, hog farms, poultry operations, fish farms, commercial
§ 550-49 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-50
1:1160
greenhouse operations and certain other operations meeting this
criterion.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an existing or platted
residential subdivision.
(b) Shall be completely surrounded by a bufferyard with a
minimum intensity of 1.00. (See § 550-99.)
(c) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor
animal containments (pastures, pens and similar areas) shall
be located a minimum of 300 feet from all residentially zoned
property and 100 feet from all other lot lines.
(d) Shall be located in an area that is planned to remain
commercially viable for agricultural land uses.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per employee on the largest work
shift. [Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from
the surfacing requirements of § 550-107F(1).]
D. Agricultural service. Description: Agricultural service land uses include
all operations pertaining to the sale, handling, transport, packaging,
storage or disposal of agricultural equipment, products, by-products or
materials primarily used by agricultural operations. Examples of such
land uses include agricultural implement sales, storage or repair
operations; feed and seed stores; agricultural chemical dealers and/or
storage facilities; animal feed storage facilities; commercial dairies;
food processing facilities; canning and other packaging facilities; and
agricultural waste disposal facilities (except commercial composting
uses, see § 550-53F).
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an existing or platted
residential subdivision.
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor
animal containments (pastures, pens and similar areas) shall
be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(c) If within the RH District, shall be located in an area that is
planned to remain commercially viable for agricultural land
uses.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per employee on the largest work
shift. [Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from
the surfacing requirements of § 550-107F(1).]
E. On-site agricultural retail. Description: On-site agricultural retail land
uses include land uses solely associated with the sale of agricultural
§ 550-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-50
1:1161
products grown exclusively on the site. The sale of products grown
or otherwise produced off site shall not be permitted within on-site
agricultural retail operations, and such activity constitutes retail sales
as a commercial land use. Packaging and equipment used to store,
display, package or carry products for the convenience of the operation
or its customers (such as egg cartons, baskets, containers and bags)
shall be produced off site.
(1) Regulations.
(a) No structure or group of structures shall exceed 500 square
feet in floor area.
(b) No structure shall exceed 12 feet in height.
(c) All structures shall meet all required setbacks for
nonresidential land uses.
(d) Signage shall be limited to one on-site sign that shall not
exceed 30 square feet in area.
(e) Such land use shall be served by no more than one driveway.
Said driveway shall require a valid driveway permit.
(f) A minimum of one parking space shall be required for every
200 square feet of product display area.
(g) The sale of products grown or otherwise produced on
nonadjacent property under the same ownership, or on
property under different ownership, shall be prohibited.
(h) Said structure and fencing shall be located a minimum of 300
feet from any residentially zoned property.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per employee on the largest work
shift and four spaces for customers. [Note: Agricultural land uses
are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of
§ 550-107F(1).]
F. Selective cutting. Description: Selective cutting land uses include any
operation associated with the one-time, continuing or cumulative
clearing, cutting, harvesting or other destruction of trees (including by
fire) where the extent of such activity is limited to an area (or combined
areas) of less than or equal to 30% of the woodlands on the property (or
up to 100% for developments approved prior to the effective date of this
chapter). Selective cutting activity shall be limited to areas located
within development pads which are designated on recorded plats or
certified survey maps. The destruction of trees in an area in excess of
this amount of the woodlands on the property shall be considered clearcutting
(see Subsection G below).
(1) Regulations: Not applicable.
§ 550-50 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-50
1:1162
§ 550-51. Institutional land uses.
G. Clear-cutting. Description: Clear-cutting land uses include the onetime,
continuing or cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting or other
destruction (including by fire) of trees in an area (or combined areas) of
more than 30% of the woodlands on a property (or up to 100% for
developments approved prior to the effective date of this chapter).
Clear-cutting is permitted only as a conditional use within the
jurisdiction of this chapter. Areas which have been clear-cut as a result
of intentional action following the effective date of this chapter without
the granting of a conditional use permit are in violation of this chapter,
and the property owner shall be fined for such violation (in accordance
with the provisions of § 550-158) and shall be required to implement the
mitigation standards required for the destruction of woodlands solely at
his/her expense, including costs associated with site inspection to
confirm the satisfaction of mitigation requirements. Areas which have
been clear-cut unintentionally as a result of fire shall not subject the
owner of the property to fines associated with the violation of this
chapter but shall require the satisfaction of mitigation requirements at
the owner's expense, including costs associated with site inspection to
confirm the satisfaction of mitigation requirements.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Applicant shall demonstrate that clear-cutting will improve the
level of environmental protection on the subject property.
(b) Areas of the subject property which are clear-cut beyond the
limitations established above shall be replanted per the
requirements of § 550-92. (Referenced section requires the
replanting of trees in other portions of the subject property,
thereby freeing the currently wooded area for development
while ensuring that the amount of required wooded area on the
subject property remains constant.)
(c) Clear-cutting shall not be permitted within a required
bufferyard or landscaped area (see § 550-99) or within an area
designated as permanently protected green space (see Article
X).
A. Passive outdoor public recreational. Description: Passive outdoor public
recreational land uses include all recreational land uses located on
public property which involve passive recreational activities. Such land
uses include arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails,
bike trails, cross-country ski trails, horse trails, open grassed areas not
associated with any particular active recreational land use (see
Subsection B below), picnic areas, picnic shelters, gardens, fishing
areas, and similar land uses.
(1) Parking requirements. One space per four expected patrons at
maximum capacity for any use requiring over five spaces.
§ 550-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-51
1:1163
B. Active outdoor public recreational. Description: Active outdoor public
recreational land uses include all recreational land uses located on
public property which involve active recreational activities. Such land
uses include play courts (such as tennis courts and basketball courts),
play fields (such as ball diamonds, football fields, and soccer fields), totlots,
outdoor swimming pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses,
public golf courses, and similar land uses.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially
zoned property shall install and continually maintain a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see § 550-99). Said
bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
(b) All structures and active recreational areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(c) Facilities that serve a community-wide function shall be
located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial
street.
(d) Facilities that serve a regional or community-wide function
shall provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority
of the users will be children.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per four expected patrons at
maximum capacity for any use requiring over five spaces.
C. Indoor institutional. Description: Indoor institutional land uses include
all indoor public and not-for-profit recreational facilities (such as gyms,
swimming pools, libraries, museums and community centers), schools,
colleges, churches, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit fraternal organizations,
convention centers, hospitals, jails, prisons and similar land uses.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or
arterial street.
(b) Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority
of the users will be children (as in the case of a school, church,
library or similar land use).
(c) All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(2) Parking requirements. Generally, one space per three expected
patrons at maximum capacity. However, see additional specific
requirements below:
(a) Church: one space per five seats at the maximum capacity.
§ 550-51 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-51
1:1164
(b) Community or recreation center: one space per 250 square
feet of gross floor area, or one space per four patrons to the
maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(c) Funeral home: one space per three patron seats at the
maximum capacity, plus one space per employee on the largest
work shift.
(d) Hospital: two spaces per three patient beds, plus one space per
staff doctor and each other employee on the largest work shift.
(e) Library or museum: one space per 250 square feet of gross
floor area or one space per four seats to the maximum capacity,
whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the
largest work shift.
(f) Elementary and junior high: one space per teacher and per
staff member, plus one space per two classrooms.
(g) Senior high: one space per teacher and staff member, plus one
space per five non-bused students.
(h) College or trade school: one space per staff member on the
largest work shift, plus one space per two students of the
largest class attendance period.
D. Outdoor institutional. Description: Outdoor institutional land uses
include public and private cemeteries, privately held permanently
protected green space areas, country clubs, nonpublic golf courses, and
similar land uses.
(1) Regulations:
(a) Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or
arterial street.
(b) Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if a significant
proportion of the users will be children.
(c) All structures and actively used outdoor recreational areas
shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially
zoned property.
(d) Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially
zoned property shall install and continually maintain a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see § 550-99). Said
bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
(e) Shall comply with § 550-142, standards and procedures
applicable to all conditional uses.
§ 550-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-51
1:1165
(2) Parking requirements. Generally, one space per three expected
patrons at maximum capacity. However, see additional specific
requirements below:
(a) Cemetery: one space per employee, plus one space per three
patrons to the maximum capacity of all indoor assembly areas.
(b) Golf course: 36 spaces per nine holes, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift, plus 50% of spaces
otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g., bars,
restaurants).
(c) Swimming pool: one space per 75 square feet of gross water
area.
(d) Tennis court: three spaces per court.
E. Public service and utilities. Description: Public service and utilities land
uses include all City, county, state and federal facilities (except those
otherwise treated in this section), emergency service facilities such as
fire departments and rescue operations, wastewater treatment plants,
public and/or private utility substations, water towers, utility and
public-service-related distribution facilities, and similar land uses.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet
from any residentially zoned property.
(b) All outdoor storage areas adjoining a residentially zoned
property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see § 550-99). Said bufferyard
shall be located at the property line adjacent to said
residentially zoned property.
(c) All structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(d) The exterior of all buildings shall be compatible with the
exteriors of surrounding buildings.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus one space per company vehicle normally stored or
parked on the premises, plus one space per 500 square feet of
gross square feet of office area.
F. Institutional residential. Description: This land use is a form of
residential development designed to accommodate institutional
residential land uses, such as retirement homes, nursing homes,
convents, dormitories, group homes, monasteries, convalescent homes,
limited care facilities, rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not
considered to be community living arrangements under the provisions
of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. No individual lots are required, although the
§ 550-51 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-51
1:1166
development shall contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site
area for each occupant of the development. A minimum of 30% of
the development's gross site area (GSA) shall be held as permanently
protected green space (see § 550-49F above). The density of
institutional residential land uses shall be regulated on a case-by-case
basis as determined by the Plan Commission through the site plan
review and conditional use process. Factors such as on-site conditions,
uses and development intensity and such as off-site conditions, uses and
development intensity shall be considered.
(1) Regulations:
(a) The proposed site shall be located so as to avoid disruption of
an established or developing office area. Within the
Neighborhood Office (NO) and Planned Office and Institutional
(PO) District, institutional residential developments shall be
designed so as to maintain the character of the adjacent
properties.
(b) Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or
arterial street.
(c) No access shall be permitted to a local residential street.
(d) Applicant shall provide off-street passenger loading area at a
minimum of one location within the development.
(e) All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property which does not contain an
institutional residential land use.
(2) Parking requirements.
(a) Monastery or convent: one space per six residents, plus one
space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space
per five chapel seats if the public may attend.
(b) Nursing home: one space per six patient beds, plus one space
per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per staff
member and per visiting doctor.
(c) Dormitory: one space per three residents or dorm apartment
units (whichever requires the larger amount of parking), not
including residents subject to on-campus ownership
prohibitions imposed by the institution.
G. Community living arrangement (one to eight residents). Description:
Community living arrangement land uses include all facilities provided
for in § 46.03(22), Wis. Stats., including child welfare agencies, group
homes for children, and community-based residential facilities.
Community living arrangements do not include day-care centers (see
separate listing); nursing homes (an institutional residential land use);
general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons or jails (all indoor
§ 550-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-51
1:1167
institutional land uses). Community living arrangement facilities are
regulated depending upon their capacity as provided for in § 62.23, Wis.
Stats.
(1) Regulations:
(a) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity,
unless specifically exempted by action of the Plan Commission.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the City
shall not exceed 1% of the City's population (unless specifically
authorized by the Common Council following a public hearing).
(c) Foster homes housing four or fewer children and licensed
under § 48.62, Wis. Stats., shall not be subject to Subsection
G(1)(a) above and shall not be subject to, or count toward, the
total arrived at in Subsection G(1)(b) above.
(2) Parking requirements: three spaces.
H. Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents). Description: See
Subsection G above.
(1) Regulations:
(a) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity,
unless specifically exempted by action of the Plan Commission.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the City
shall not exceed 1% of the City's population (unless specifically
authorized by the Common Council following a public hearing).
(2) Parking requirements. Four spaces.
I. Community living arrangement (16 or more residents). Description: See
Subsection G above.
(1) Regulations.
(a) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity,
unless specifically exempted by action of the Plan Commission.
(b) The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all
capacities) in the City shall not exceed 1% of the City's
population (unless specifically authorized by the Common
Council following a public hearing).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per every three residents.
§ 550-51 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-52
1:1168
§ 550-52. Commercial land uses.
A. Office. Description: Office land uses include all exclusively indoor land
uses whose primary function is the handling of information or
administrative services. Such land uses do not typically provide
services directly to customers on a walk-in or on-appointment basis.
(1) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
B. Personal or professional service. Description: Personal service and
professional service land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses
whose primary function is the provision of services directly to an
individual on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples of such uses
include professional services, insurance or financial services, realty
offices, medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barbershops,
beauty shops, and related land uses.
(1) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
C. Indoor sales or service. Description: Indoor sales and service land uses
include all land uses which conduct or display sales or rental
merchandise or equipment or nonpersonal or nonprofessional services
entirely within an enclosed building. This includes self-service facilities
such as coin-operated laundromats. Depending on the zoning district,
such land uses may or may not display products outside of an enclosed
building. Such activities are listed as "outdoor display incidental to
indoor sales" under accessory uses (§ 550-56F). A land use which
contains both indoor sales and outdoor sales exceeding 15% of the total
sales area of the building(s) on the property shall be considered as an
outdoor sales land use (see Subsection D below). Artisan studios are
regulated in Subsection R.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Within the Planned Office and Institutional District, permitted
uses shall be limited to indoor sales and personal services
which primarily support office tenants, such as office supply
stores, copy centers and travel agencies.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
D. Outdoor display. Description: Outdoor display land uses include all land
uses which conduct sales or display sales or rental merchandise or
equipment outside of an enclosed building. Example of such land uses
include vehicle sales, vehicle rental, manufactured and mobile housing
sales and monument sales. The area of outdoor sales shall be calculated
as the area which would be enclosed by a fence installed and
continually maintained in the most efficient manner which completely
encloses all materials displayed outdoors. Such land uses do not include
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:1169
the storage or display of inoperative vehicles or equipment or other
materials typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard. (See
§ 550-53 below also.) (Land uses which conduct or display only a limited
amount of product outside of an enclosed building are listed separately
in § 550-56F as "outdoor display incidental to indoor sales.")
(1) Regulations.
(a) The display of items shall not be permitted in permanently
protected green space areas, required landscaped areas, or
required bufferyards.
(b) The display of items shall not be permitted within required
setback areas for the principal structure.
(c) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use
or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of § 550-107. If the
number of provided parking stalls on the property is already
less than the requirement, such display area shall not further
reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
(d) Display areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall
be clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a
greenway, curb, fence or line of planters, or by a clearly
marked paved area.
(e) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site
or off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and
traffic/pedestrian conflicts.
(f) Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar
year; however, if goods are removed from the display area, all
support fixtures used to display the goods shall be removed
within 10 calendar days of the goods' removal.
(g) Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically
stored or displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be
displayed for this land use.
(h) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting residentially
zoned property, except per Subsection D(1)(e) above (see
§ 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
E. Indoor maintenance service. Description. Indoor maintenance services
include all land uses which perform maintenance services (including
repair) and contain all operations (except loading) entirely within an
§ 550-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-52
1:1170
enclosed building. Because of outdoor vehicle storage requirements,
vehicle repair and maintenance is considered a vehicle repair and
maintenance land use (see Subsection Q).
(1) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
F. Outdoor maintenance service. Description: Outdoor maintenance
services include all land uses which perform maintenance services,
including repair, and have all or any portion of their operations located
outside of an enclosed building.
(1) Regulations.
(a) All outdoor activity areas shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum six-foot-high fence. Such enclosure shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property and
shall be screened from such property by a bufferyard with a
minimum opacity of 0.60 (see § 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
G. In-vehicle sales or service. Description: In-vehicle sales and service
land uses include all land uses which perform sales and/or services to
persons in vehicles or to vehicles which may or may not be occupied at
the time of such activity (except vehicle repair and maintenance
services, see Subsection Q). Such land uses often have traffic volumes
which exhibit their highest levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on
adjacent roads. Examples of such land uses include drive-in, drive-up
and drive-through facilities, vehicular fuel stations, and all forms of car
washes. If performed in conjunction with a principal land use (for
example, a convenience store, restaurant or bank), in-vehicle sales and
service land uses shall be considered an accessory use (see § 550-56G).
(1) Regulations.
(a) Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for
each walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to the
drive-through lane(s).
(b) The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to not impede
or impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement or
exacerbate the potential for pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.
(c) In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to
operate which endangers the public safety, even if such land
use has been permitted under the provisions of this section.
(d) The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall
be a minimum of 10 feet from all street right-of-way lines, a
minimum of 20 feet from all residentially zoned property lines,
and shall be a minimum of five feet from all other property
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:1171
lines. The total height of any overhead canopy or similar
structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured to highest part
of structure.
(e) All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface paved
with concrete or bituminous material which is designed to
meet the requirements of a minimum four-ton axle load.
(f) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (§ 550-99).
(g) Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from
exterior fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards,
canopy supports and landscaped islands. Said curbs shall be a
minimum of six inches high and be of a nonmountable design.
No curb protecting an exterior fixture shall be located closer
than 25 feet to all property lines.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per 50 square feet of gross floor
area. Each drive-up lane shall have a minimum stacking length of
100 feet behind the pass-through window and 40 feet beyond the
pass-through window.
H. Indoor commercial entertainment. Description: Indoor commercial
entertainment land uses include all land uses which provide
entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building. Such
activities often have operating hours which extend significantly later
than most other commercial land uses. Examples of such land uses
include restaurants, taverns, theaters, health or fitness centers, all
forms of training studios (dance, art, martial arts, etc.), small-scale
alcoholic beverage production, bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks,
and pool halls. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-6]
(1) Regulations:
(a) If located on the same side of the building as abutting
residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind
shall be permitted within 150 feet, or as far as possible, of a
residentially zoned property.
(b) Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.60
along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per every three patron seats or
lockers (whichever is greater) or one space per three persons at the
maximum capacity of the establishment (whichever is greater).
I. Outdoor commercial entertainment. Description: Outdoor commercial
entertainment land uses include all land uses which provide
entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed
§ 550-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-52
1:1172
building. Such activities often have the potential to be associated with
nuisances related to noise, lighting, dust, trash and late operating
hours. Examples of such land uses include outdoor commercial
swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, small-scale
alcoholic beverage production, amusement parks, drive-in theaters, gocart
tracks, and racetracks. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-6]
(1) Regulations:
(a) Activity areas shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a
residentially zoned property.
[1] Within the Central Business (CB) Zoning District, activity
areas shall not be located closer than 50 feet to a
residentially zoned property. [Added 6-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-5]
(b) Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.80
along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(c) Activity areas (including drive-in movie screens) shall not be
visible from any residentially zoned property.
[1] Central Business (CB) Zoning District is exempt. [Added
6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-5]
(2) Parking requirements. One space for every three persons at the
maximum capacity of the establishment.
J. Commercial animal boarding. Description: Commercial animal
boarding facility land uses include land uses which provide short-term
and/or long-term boarding for animals. Examples of these land uses
include commercial kennels and commercial stables. Exercise yards,
fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are
considered accessory to such land uses and do not require separate
consideration.
(1) Regulations:
(a) Each animal shall be provided with an indoor containment
area.
(b) The minimum permitted size of horse or similar animal stall
shall be 100 square feet.
(c) Special events such as shows, exhibitions and contests shall
only be permitted when a temporary use permit has been
secured. (See § 550-143.)
(2) Parking requirements. One space per every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:1173
K. Commercial indoor lodging. Description: Commercial indoor lodging
facilities include land uses which provide overnight housing in
individual rooms or suites of rooms, each room or suite having a private
bathroom. Such land uses may provide in-room or in-suite kitchens and
may also provide indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of
their customers. Restaurants, arcades, fitness centers and other on-site
facilities available to nonlodgers are not considered accessory uses, and
therefore require review as a separate land use.
(1) Regulations:
(a) If located on the same side of a building as abutting
residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind
shall be permitted within 100 feet of a residentially zoned
property.
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(c) Within the PO District, each and every room must take primary
access via an individual interior door and may not be accessed
via an external balcony, porch or deck, except for emergency
purposes.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per bedroom, plus one space for
each employee on the largest work shift.
L. Bed-and-breakfast establishment. Description: Bed-and-breakfast
establishments are exclusively indoor lodging facilities which provide
meals only to paying lodgers. Such land uses may provide indoor
recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers.
(1) Regulations:
(a) All such facilities shall be required to obtain a permit to serve
liquor, if applicable. They shall be inspected annually at a fee
as established by a separate ordinance, to verify that the land
use continues to meet all applicable regulations.
(b) One sign, with a maximum area of 24 square feet, inclusive of
all sign sides, shall be permitted on the property.
(c) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(d) No premises shall be utilized for a bed-and-breakfast operation
unless there are at least two exits to the outdoors from such
premises. Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a minimum
size of 100 square feet for two occupants with an additional 30
square feet for each additional occupant to a maximum of four
occupants per room. Each sleeping room used for the bed-and-
§ 550-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-52
1:1174
breakfast operation shall have a separate operational smoke
detector alarm, as required in the Building Code. One lavatory
and bathing facility shall be required for every 10 occupants,
in addition to the owner/operator's personal facilities.
(e) The dwelling unit in which the bed-and-breakfast takes place
shall be the principal residence of the operator/owner and said
operator/owner shall live on the premises when the bed-andbreakfast
operation is active.
(f) Only the meal of breakfast shall be served to overnight guests.
(g) Each operator shall keep a list of names of all persons staying
at the bed-and-breakfast operation. This list shall be kept on
file for a period of one year. Such list shall be available for
inspection by City officials at any time.
(h) The maximum stay for any occupants of a bed-and-breakfast
operation shall be 14 days.
(i) It shall be unlawful for any persons to operate a bed-andbreakfast
operation as defined and as permitted in the
Municipal Code of the City of Watertown without first having
obtained a conditional use permit.
(j) Applicants applying for a conditional use permit to operate a
bed-and-breakfast shall submit a floor plan of the single-family
dwelling unit illustrating that the proposed operation will
comply with the City Zoning Ordinance, other applicable City
codes and ordinances, and within the terms of this chapter.
(k) In the Plan Commission's determination of the number of bedand-
breakfast operations required to provide for such public
convenience and necessity, the Plan Commission shall consider
the effect upon residential neighborhoods, conditions of
existing bed-and-breakfasts, and the necessity of additional
bed-and-breakfasts operations for public service.
(l) Public nuisance violations. Bed-and-breakfast operations shall
not be permitted whenever the operation endangers, or
offends, or interferes with the safety or rights of others so as to
constitute a nuisance.
(m) Suspension, revocation and renewal. Any conditional use
permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Plan Commission (see § 550-142H) for good
cause shown after investigation and opportunity to the holder
of such permit to be heard in opposition thereto; in such
investigation, the compliance or noncompliance with the state
law and local ordinances, the conduct of the permittee in
regard to the public, and other considerations shall be weighed
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:1175
in determination of such issue. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
(2) Parking requirements. One space per each bedroom.
M. Group day-care center (nine or more children). Description: Group daycare
centers are land uses in which qualified persons provide child-care
services for nine or more children. Examples of such land uses include
day-care centers and nursery schools. Such land uses shall not be
located within a residential building. Such land uses may be operated
on a for-profit or a not-for-profit basis. Such land uses may be operated
in conjunction with another principal land use on the same environs,
such as a church, school, business or civic organization. In such
instances, group day-care centers are not considered as accessory uses,
and therefore require review as a separate land use.
(1) Regulations:
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.50 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(b) Property owner's permission is required as part of the
conditional use permit application.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per five students, plus one space
for each employee on the largest work shift.
N. Campground. Description: Campgrounds include any facilities designed
for overnight accommodation of persons in tents, travel trailers, or
other mobile or portable shelters or vehicles.
(1) Regulations:
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.70 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements: 1 1/2 spaces per campsite.
O. Boardinghouse. Description: Boardinghomes include any residential
use renting rooms which do not contain private bathroom facilities
(with the exception of approved bed-and-breakfast facilities).
(1) Regulations.
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(b) Shall provide a minimum of one on-site parking space for each
room for rent.
§ 550-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-52
1:1176
(c) Shall be located in an area of transition from residential land
uses to nonresidential land uses.
(d) Shall comply with § 550-142 applicable to all conditional uses.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per room for rent, plus one space
per each employee on the largest work shift.
P. Sexually oriented business. Description: Sexually oriented business
includes, but shall not be restricted to, adult arcades, adult bookstores,
adult video stores, adult booths, adult theaters and adult cabarets, as
defined in this subsection, to which public patrons or members are
invited or admitted for the purpose of viewing, purchasing or renting
sexually oriented material, including any business or establishment
which has a significant part of its business or its stock-in-trade devoted
to a primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined in this subsection. [Amended by Ord. No.
03-37; Ord. No. 04-1]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — A place to which public patrons or members, in
return for monetary payment, are permitted access, either in adult
booths or common areas, to view through electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices which are maintained
to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment
which advertises, sells or rents sexually oriented material when
such activity constitutes a significant part of the business
conducted on the premises. The provisions of this subsection are
not intended to apply if the presumption applied in this subsection
is rebutted by evidence that establishes that at the establishment:
ADULT BOOTH — A separate enclosure, cubicle, room,
compartment or stall, separate from the common areas, managerial
offices or restrooms of the sexually oriented business, offered to
public patrons or members for a fee or for hire as part of the
business operated on the premises, which business offers as part
All sexually oriented material is accessible only by employees;
or
(a)
A significant part of the business consists of material which
is published or produced by a medical products manufacturer,
a medical or health association, an insurance company or a
consumer education organization.
(b)
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:1177
of its business the viewing of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas within the enclosure, which shall include such
enclosures wherein the viewing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not
charged for mere access to the enclosure. The term "managerial
offices" means enclosures which are private offices used by the
owners, managers or employees on the premises for attending to
the tasks of their employment and which are not held out for hire
or for a fee to public patrons or members of the establishment
and which are not available to any persons other than owners,
managers or employees.
ADULT CABARET — Any bar, dance hall, restaurant or other place
of business which features dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers,
or waiters or waitresses that engage in specified sexual activities
or display specified anatomical areas, or any such business
establishment, the advertising for, or a sign or signs identifying
which, use the words "adult," "topless," "nude," "bottomless," or
other words of similar import.
ADULT THEATER — An enclosed building, an enclosed space
within a building, or an open-air area used for presenting a motionpicture
film, show or other presentation, either by individuals or
groups, having as its dominant theme or distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on exposure to view material
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas. An establishment which has an adult
booth or an adult arcade is considered to be an adult theater.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIAL — Any one or more of the
following, regardless of whether it is new or used:
SIGNIFICANT PART OF THE BUSINESS — Dedication or use of the
premises on which the sexually oriented business is located in any
one of the following manners:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
paintings, drawings or other publications or graphic media, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
disks, slides or other visual representations, or sound
recordings or other audio matter, which have as their primary
or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or
relating to a specified sexual activity or specified anatomical
area; or
(a)
Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
The gross income from the sale and/or rental of sexually
oriented material comprises more than 25% of the gross
(a)
§ 550-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-52
1:1178
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual:
income from the sale and rental of the goods or services at the
business entity location;
The individual items of sexually oriented material offered for
sale and/or rental at the business entity location comprise
more than 25% of the total individual items publicly displayed
as stock-in-trade in any of the following categories: books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video disks, slides or
other visual representations; or sound recordings or other
audio materials; or
(b)
The dedication or use of more than 25% of the available floor,
wall and display space within the public or common areas at
the business entity location, including adult booths, space for
live presentations, and space devoted to the viewing, display
or advertisement of materials in the categories outlined in (b)
above.
(c)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
vulva, anus and cleavage of the buttocks.
(a)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(b)
Less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple
of the female breast.
(c)
Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
(a)
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus, or
excretory functions.
(b)
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
anus, buttock(s) or female breast(s).
(c)
(2) Regulations as to location. Sexually oriented businesses, as defined
in this subsection, are to be restricted as to location in the following
manner in addition to any other requirements of this chapter:
(a) Any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
subsection shall not be located within a four-hundred-fifty-foot
radius of another such sexually oriented business.
(b) Any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
subsection shall not be located within a four-hundred-fifty-foot
radius of any area zoned for residential use, zoned Planned
Office and Institutional (PO), or a planned use development
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:1179
containing a minimum of 25% residential uses on any separate
parcel or contiguous parcels.
(c) Any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this section
shall not be located within a four-hundred-fifty-foot radius of
any church, other place of religious worship, park, playground,
athletic field, public or parochial school or school dormitory or
classroom.
(d) The distances provided in this subsection shall be measured by
following a straight line, without regard to intervening
buildings, bodies of water or other physical obstacles, from the
nearest point on the property line of the parcel or the land use
district boundary line from which the proposed sexually
oriented business land use is to be separated to the nearest
point on the property line of the parcel on which the proposed
sexually oriented business land use is to be situated.
(3) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross
interior floor area of all buildings on the premises or one space per
four patron seats at the maximum capacity of any building on the
premises, whichever number of parking spaces is greater.
(4) Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the
following land uses:
(a) Theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, exhibition
halls, restaurants and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet,
music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are
offered to the general public, with or without paid admission,
or movie theaters and video arcades where video or motion
picture presentations of dance, ballet, music and dramatic
performances of serious artistic merit are offered to the
general public, with or without paid admission.
(b) Organizations, associations or businesses that dispense
medical, health care or consumer education information or
display, show or sell items published or produced by a medical
products manufacturer, a medical or health association, an
insurance company, or a consumer education organization.
Q. Vehicle repair and maintenance service. Description: Vehicle repair and
maintenance services include all land uses which perform maintenance
services (including repair) to motorized vehicles and contain all
operations (except vehicle storage) entirely within an enclosed
building.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Storage of abandoned vehicles is prohibited.
§ 550-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-52
1:1180
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (§ 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area. Adequate on-site parking is required for all customer and
employee vehicles.
R. Artisan studio or artisan production shop. Description: A building or
portion thereof used for the preparation, display and sale of individually
crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft,
hand-woven articles and related items, as either a principal use or
accessory use. A studio is used by no more than three artists or
artisans. An artisan production shop is an artisan studio used by more
than three artists or artisans.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Artisan production shop is not allowed in the Neighborhood
Office (NO) District.
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (§ 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area. Adequate on-site parking is required for all customer and
employee vehicles.
S. Convenient cash businesses. Description: Convenient cash businesses
include, but are not restricted to, businesses licensed pursuant to
§ 138.09 or 218.05, Wis. Stats., and pawnshops.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
CONVENIENT CASH BUSINESSES — Businesses licensed
pursuant to § 138.09 or 218.05, Wis. Stats., which provide
nontraditional, short-term consumer loans in which the consumer
receives cash in exchange for giving the lender a post-dated check,
title to a motor vehicle, or electronic access to the consumer's bank
account for the amount of the loan for a period of time before
negotiating the check or for payment to the lender an agreedupon
finance fee or refinancing or consolidating such transaction.
Such businesses are also known as payday loan businesses, cash
advance businesses, and check-cashing businesses.
PAWNSHOP — A convenient cash business that loans money on
deposit of personal property on condition of selling the same back
to the depositor or loans or advances money on personal property
and holds said property as collateral to be sold to the public in the
event of default.
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:1181
§ 550-53. Storage or disposal land uses.
(2) Regulations as to location. A convenient cash business or pawnshop
shall be located only in compliance with the following criteria:221
(a) A convenient cash business or pawnshop is allowed as a
conditional use in the following zoning districts: General
Business, Planned Business, and Central Business. [Amended
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24]
(b) No convenient cash business or pawnshop shall be located
within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property.
(c) No convenient cash business or pawnshop shall be located
within 3,500 feet of another convenient cash business or
pawnshop.
(3) Standards of measurement. The distances identified in this
subsection shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest point of the
structure proposed for occupancy by the convenient cash business
or pawnshop to the nearest point of the parcel of property or zoning
district boundary from which the proposed land use is to be
separated.
(4) Hours of operation. No convenient cash business or pawnshop may
be open for operation except between the following hours:
(a) Monday through Friday: 8:00 a.m. (0800 hours) to 7:00 p.m.
(1900 hours).
(b) Saturday: 8:00 a.m. (0800 hours) to three p.m. (1500 hours).
[Amended 11-20-2007]
(5) Parking requirements. One parking space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area of the business.
A. Indoor storage or wholesaling. Description: Indoor storage and
wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding
and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single
group of businesses. With the exception of loading and parking
facilities, such land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed
building. Examples of this land use include conventional warehouse
facilities, long-term indoor storage facilities, and joint warehouse and
storage facilities. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be
considered accessory uses per § 550-56H below.
(1) Parking requirements. One space per 2,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
221. Editor's Note: A map of potential cash advance locations is on file in the City Clerk/
Treasurer's office.
§ 550-52 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-53
1:1182
B. Outdoor storage or wholesaling. Description: Outdoor storage and
wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding
and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single
group of businesses. Such a land use in which any activity beyond
loading and parking is located outdoors is considered an outdoor
storage and wholesaling land use. Examples of this land use include
contractors' storage yards, equipment yards, lumberyards, coal yards,
landscaping materials yard, construction materials yards, and shipping
materials yards. Such land uses do not include the storage of
inoperative vehicles or equipment or other materials typically
associated with a junkyard or salvage yard (see Subsection D below).
(1) Regulations:
(a) All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls and
fencing. Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight
feet in height and shall be designed to completely screen all
stored materials from view from nonindustrialized areas at an
elevation of five feet above the grade of all adjacent properties
and rights-of-way. Said walls or fencing shall be screened from
residentially zoned property by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.80.
(b) The storage of items shall not be permitted in permanently
protected green space areas (see § 550-97).
(c) The storage of items shall not be permitted in required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
(d) In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use
or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of § 550-107. If the
number of provided parking stalls on the property is already
less than the requirement, such storage area shall not further
reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
(e) Storage areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall
be clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a
greenway, curb, fence or line of planters, or by a clearly
marked paved area.
(f) Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with
either on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential
traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts.
(g) Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically
stored in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be stored under
the provisions of this land use.
§ 550-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-53
1:1183
(h) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(i) All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a
residentially zoned property than the required minimum
setback for buildings on the subject property.
(2) Parking requirements. One space for every 10,000 square feet of
gross storage area, plus one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
C. Personal storage facility. Description: Personal storage facilities are
land uses oriented to the indoor storage of items entirely within
partitioned buildings having an individual access to each partitioned
area. Such storage areas may be available on either a condominium or
rental basis. Also known as "mini warehouses."
(1) Regulations.
(a) Facility shall be designed so as to minimize adverse visual
impacts on nearby developments. The color, exterior materials,
and orientation of proposed buildings and structures shall
complement surrounding development.
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.80 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(c) Shall comply with § 550-142, standards and procedures
applicable to all conditional uses.
(d) No electrical power shall be run to the storage facilities, except
for exterior lighting.
(2) Parking requirements. One space for each employee on the largest
work shift.
D. Junkyard or salvage yard. Description: Junkyard or salvage yard
facilities are any land or structure used for a salvaging operation,
including but not limited to the aboveground outdoor storage and/or
sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded
materials intended for sale or recycling, and/or the collection,
dismantlement, storage or salvage of two or more unlicensed and/or
inoperative vehicles. Recycling facilities involving on-site outdoor
storage of salvage materials are included in this land use.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
§ 550-53 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-53
1:1184
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all
lot lines.
(c) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
(d) Shall not involve the storage, handling or collection of
hazardous materials, including any of the materials listed in
§ 550-122.
(2) Parking requirements. One space for every 20,000 square feet of
gross storage area, plus one space for each employee on the largest
work shift.
E. Waste disposal facility. Description: Waste disposal facilities are any
areas used for the disposal of solid wastes, including those defined by
§ 281.01(15), Wis. Stats., but not including composting operations (see
Subsection F below).
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall comply with all county, state and federal regulations.
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all borders of the property (see § 550-99).
(c) All buildings, structures and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
(d) Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or
disposal of hazardous materials (as defined by § 550-122) in
any manner.
(e) Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration
plans, which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and
revegetation plans, and a detailed written statement indicating
the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount
equivalent to 110% of the costs determined to be associated
with said restoration (as determined by a third party selected
by the City), shall be filed with the City by the petitioner
(subject to approval by the City Attorney and the Zoning
Administrator) and shall be held by the City for the purpose of
ensuring that the site is restored to its previous condition. (The
requirement for said surety is waived for waste disposal
facilities owned by public agencies.) [Amended 10-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
(2) Parking requirements. One space for each employee on the largest
work shift.
§ 550-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-53
1:1185
§ 550-54. Transportation land uses.
F. Composting operation. Description: Composting operations are any
land uses devoted to the collection, storage, processing and/or disposal
of vegetation.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall comply with all county, state and federal regulations.
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all borders of the property occupied by
nonagricultural land uses (see § 550-99).
(c) All buildings, structures and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(d) No food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials shall be
processed, stored or disposed of on site.
(e) Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or
disposal of hazardous wastes as defined by state statutes in any
manner.
(2) Parking requirements. One space for each employee on the largest
work shift.
A. Off-site parking lot. Description: Off-site parking lots are any areas used
for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered,
licensed and operative. See also § 550-107 for additional parking
regulations.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a
collector or arterial street.
(b) Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to
discourage cut-through traffic.
B. Airport/heliport. Description: Airports and heliports are transportation
facilities providing takeoff, landing, servicing, storage and other
services to any type of air transportation. The operation of any type of
air vehicle (including ultralight aircraft, hang gliders, parasails and
related equipment, but excepting model aircraft) within the jurisdiction
of this chapter shall occur only in conjunction with an approved airport
or heliport.
(1) Regulations.
(a) All buildings, structures, outdoor airplane or helicopter
storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
§ 550-53 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-54
1:1186
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all borders of the property not otherwise completely
screened from activity areas by buildings or structures (see
§ 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per each employee on the largest
work shift, plus one space per every five passengers, based on
average daily ridership.
C. Freight terminal. Description: Freight terminals are defined as land and
buildings representing either end of one or more truck carrier lines
which may have some or all of the following facilities: yards, docks,
management offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage
areas, freight stations, and truck maintenance and repair facilities,
principally serving several or many businesses and always requiring
transshipment.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all
lot lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(c) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per each employee on the largest
work shift.
D. Distribution center. Description: Distribution centers are facilities
oriented to the short-term indoor storage and possible repackaging and
reshipment of materials, involving the activities and products of a
single user. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered
accessory uses per § 550-56H below.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially zoned
property (see § 550-99).
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all
lot lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(c) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas.
§ 550-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-54
1:1187
§ 550-55. Industrial land uses.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per each employee on the largest
work shift.
A. Light industrial land use. Description: Light industrial land uses are
industrial facilities at which all operations (with the exception of
loading operations) are conducted entirely within an enclosed building;
are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat,
vibration and radiation which are detectable at the property line; do not
pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion); and
comply with all of the performance standards listed for potential
nuisances in Article XI. Light industrial land uses may conduct retail
sales activity as an accessory use, provided that the requirements of
§ 550-56H below are complied with.
(1) Regulations.
(a) All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted
entirely within the confines of a building.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per each employee on the largest
work shift.
B. Heavy industrial land use. Description: Heavy industrial land uses are
industrial facilities which do not comply with one or more of the
following criteria: are conducted entirely within an enclosed building;
are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat,
vibration and radiation which are detectable at the property line; and
do not pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion).
More specifically, heavy industrial land uses are industrial land uses
which may be wholly or partially located outside of an enclosed
building; may have the potential to create certain nuisances which are
detectable at the property line; and may involve materials which pose a
significant safety hazard. However, in no instance shall a heavy
industrial land use exceed the performance standards listed in Article
XI. Examples of heavy industrial land uses include meat product
producers; large-scale alcoholic beverage production; paper, pulp or
paperboard producers; chemical and allied product producers (except
drug producers) including poison or fertilizer producers; petroleum and
coal product producers; asphalt, concrete or cement producers;
tanneries; stone, clay or glass product producers; primary metal
producers; heavy machinery producers; electrical distribution
equipment producers; electrical industrial apparatus producers;
transportation vehicle producers; commercial sanitary sewage
treatment plants; railroad switching yards; and recycling facilities not
involving the on-site storage of salvage materials. [Amended 4-3-2017
by Ord. No. 17-6]
(1) Regulations.
§ 550-54 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-55
1:1188
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all borders of the property abutting properties
which are not zoned heavy industrial (see § 550-99).
(b) All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100
feet from residentially zoned property. No materials shall be
stacked or otherwise stored so as to be visible over bufferyard
screening elements.
(2) Parking requirements. One space per each employee on the largest
work shift.
C. Communication tower. Description: Communication towers include all
freestanding broadcasting, receiving or relay structures, and similar
principal land uses, and any office, studio or other land uses directly
related to the function of the tower.
(1) Requirements.
(a) Tower shall be located so that there is sufficient radius of clear
land around the tower so that its collapse shall be completely
contained on the property.
(b) The installation and continued maintenance of a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.80 along property borders
abutting residentially zoned property (see § 550-99).
(2) Parking requirements. One space per employee on the largest work
shift.
D. Extraction use. Description: Extraction uses include any land uses
involving the removal of soil, clay, sand, gravel, rock, minerals, peat or
other material in excess of that required for approved on-site
development or agricultural activities.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall receive approval from the county prior to action by the
City of Watertown and shall comply with all county, state and
federal regulations.
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all borders of the property (see § 550-99).
(c) All buildings, structures and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
(d) Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration
plans, which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and
revegetation plans, and a detailed written statement indicating
the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount
equivalent to 110% of the costs determined to be associated
with said restoration (as determined by a third party selected
§ 550-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-55
1:1189
§ 550-56. Accessory land uses.
Accessory uses are land uses which are incidental to the principal activity
conducted on the subject property. Only those accessory uses listed below
shall be permitted within the jurisdiction of this chapter. With the exception
of a commercial apartment (see Subsection A below) or a farm residence
(see Subsection B below), in no instance shall an accessory use, cellar,
basement, tent or recreational trailer be used as a residence. With the
exception of farm buildings, accessory buildings located within a residential
district shall be constructed or finished in a complementary architectural
style and with complementary materials to the principal residential
buildings in the neighborhood. Accessory uses shall not be located between
a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any
required front yard or street side yard, except when there is a shoreyard. In
instances where there is a shoreyard, shoreyards shall be treated as front
yards and street yards as rear yards, whereby accessory structures may be
located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot.
by the City), shall be filed with the City by the petitioner
(subject to approval by the City Attorney and the Zoning
Administrator) and shall be held by the City for the purpose of
ensuring that the site is restored to its previous condition. (The
requirement for said surety is waived for publicly owned waste
disposal facilities.) [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
(2) Parking requirements. One space per each employee on the largest
work shift.
A. Commercial apartment. Description: Commercial apartments are
dwelling units which are generally located above the ground floor of a
building used for a commercial land use (as designated in § 550-52
above), most typically an office or retail establishment. The primary
advantage of commercial apartments is that they are able to share
required parking spaces with nonresidential uses.
(1) Regulations.
(a) All commercial apartments shall be located above the first
floor.
(b) The gross floor area devoted to commercial apartments shall
be counted toward the floor area of a nonresidential
development.
(c) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided
for each bedroom within a commercial apartment. Parking
spaces provided by nonresidential land uses on the site may be
counted for this requirement with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
§ 550-55 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-56
1:1190
B. Farm residence. Description: A farm residence is a single-family
detached dwelling unit located on the same property as any of the
principal agricultural land uses listed in § 550-50 above.
C. Detached residential garage, carport, utility shed, play structure, or
lawn ornament. Description: A private residential garage, carport or
utility shed is a structure which primarily accommodates the sheltered
parking of a passenger vehicle and/or the storage of residential
maintenance equipment of the subject property. Walks, drives, paved
terraces and purely decorative garden accessories such as ponds,
fountains, statuary, sundials, flagpoles, etc., shall be permitted in
setback areas but not closer than three feet to an abutting property line
other than a street line. For the purposes of this section, children's play
structures, including playhouses or elevated play structures and
climbing gyms, shall be considered accessory structures and shall
comply with the requirements of this section whether such play
structures are placed on a foundation or not. Swing sets, slides and
sandboxes are not considered children's play structures for purposes of
this section. A building permit is not required for construction of a play
structure. Play structures shall not be used for storage or be
constructed out of materials that would constitute a nuisance. It may be
located on the same lot as a residential unit or units or on a separate lot
in conjunction with a residential land use. See § 550-85 for
requirements applicable to legal nonconforming garages. Garages,
carports and utility sheds in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, or which exceed 30% coverage of the rear yard area, or which
exceed the lot coverage of the principal structure, are not permitted in
residential districts except as conditional uses in the RH and ER-1
Districts. (Also, see the first paragraph of this section.)
(1) Regulations.
(a) One attached or detached garage and two accessory structures
shall be permitted by right.
(b) A conditional use permit is required for:
[1] A combination of accessory structures exceeding a total of
1,000 square feet; or
[2] More than two accessory structures.
D. Company cafeteria. Description: A company cafeteria is a food service
operation which provides food only to company employees and their
guests, which meets state food service requirements and is located on
the same property as a principal land use engaged in an operation other
than food service.
E. Company-provided on-site recreation. Description: A company-provided
on-site recreational facility is any active or passive recreational facility
located on the same site as a principal land use and reserved solely for
the use of company employees and their guests.
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-56
1:1191
(1) Regulations.
(a) All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located
a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(b) Outdoor recreation facilities using night lighting and adjoining
a residentially zoned property shall install and continually
maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see
§ 550-99). Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line
adjacent to said residentially zoned property.
(c) Facilities using night lighting shall require a conditional use
permit.
F. Outdoor display incidental to indoor sales and service (more than 12
days). Description: see § 550-52D.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall comply with all conditions of § 550-52D.
(b) Display area shall not exceed 25% of gross floor area of
principal building on the site.
G. In-vehicle sales and services incidental to on-site principal land use.
Description: see § 550-52G.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall comply with all conditions of § 550-52G.
H. Indoor sales incidental to storage or light industrial land use.
Description: These land uses include any retail sales activity conducted
exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as
warehousing, wholesaling or any light industrial land use on the same
site.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Adequate parking, per the requirements of § 550-107, shall be
provided for customers. Said parking shall be in addition to
that required for customary light industrial activities.
(b) The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25% of
the total area of the buildings on the property.
(c) Shall provide restroom facilities directly accessible from retail
sales area.
(d) Retail sales area shall by physically separated by a wall from
other activity areas.
I. Light industrial activities incidental to indoor sales or service land use.
Description: These land uses include any light industrial activity
§ 550-56 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-56
1:1192
conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use
such as indoor sales or service on the same site.
(1) Regulations.
(a) The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not
exceed 15% of the total area of the buildings on the property or
5,000 square feet, whichever is less. Areas devoted to artisan
studio uses, such as custom ceramics, glass, wood, paper,
fabric and similar crafts, may exceed 5,000 square feet with
the granting of a conditional use permit for such use.
(b) Production area shall be physically separated by a wall from
other activity areas and shall be soundproofed to the level
required by § 550-112 for all adjacent properties.
J. Home occupation. Description: It is the intent of this subsection to
provide a means to accommodate a small home-based family or
professional business without the necessity of a rezoning from a
residential to a commercial district. Approval of an expansion of a home
occupation at a future time beyond the limitations of this subsection is
not to be anticipated; relocation of the business to an area that is
appropriately zoned may be necessary. Home occupations are economic
activities performed within any single-family detached residence which
comply with the following requirements. Examples include personal
and professional services and handicrafts which comply with all of the
following requirements:
(1) Regulations.
(a) The home occupation shall be conducted only within the
enclosed area of the dwelling unit and not within a garage.
(b) There shall be no exterior alterations which change the
character thereof as a dwelling and/or exterior evidence of the
home occupation other than those signs permitted in the
district.
(c) No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or
equipment related to the operation of the home occupation
shall be visible outside any structures located on the premises.
(d) No home occupation use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise,
dust, vibration, fire hazard, small electrical interference or any
other nuisance not normally associated with the average
residential use in the district.
(e) Only one sign may be used to indicate the type of occupation or
business. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not
exceed two square feet.
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-56
1:1193
(f) The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for
more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the
premises.
(g) A permitted home occupation is restricted to a service-oriented
business prohibiting the mass production of items or products
or the sale of items or products on the premises. Examples of
service-oriented businesses are, but are not limited to,
computer programming, accounting, insurance agency and
computer-based consulting and clerical services.
(h) A permitted home occupation shall not occupy more than 30%
of the floor area of the dwelling.
(i) Persons employed by a permitted home occupation shall be
limited to the resident family members only.
(j) Under no circumstances shall a vehicle repair or bodywork or
auto-detailing business qualify as a home occupation.
(k) The Plan Commission may approve home occupations in
residential districts which do not meet standards in Subsection
J(1)(a) through (j) above as conditional uses subject to the
following:
[1] The types and number of equipment or machinery used on
the conditional use site may be restricted by the Plan
Commission.
[2] Sale or transfer of the property or expansion of the home
occupation shall cause the conditional use permit to be
null and void.
K. Family day-care home (four to eight children). Description: Family daycare
homes are occupied residences in which a qualified person or
persons provide child care for four to eight children. The care of fewer
than four children is not subject to the regulations of this chapter.
L. Intermediate day-care home (nine to 15 children). Description:
Intermediate day-care homes are occupied residences in which a
qualified person or persons provide child care for nine to 15 children.
M. Migrant labor camp. Migrant labor camps include any facility subject to
the regulation of § 103.90, Wis. Stats.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.60 along all property lines adjacent to all properties in
residential, office or commercial zoning districts (see
§ 550-99).
§ 550-56 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-56
1:1194
(b) Migrant labor camp shall be an accessory use to an active
principal use under the same ownership which is located
within the City.
N. On-site parking lot. Description: On-site parking lots are any areas
located on the same site as the principal land use which are used for the
temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed and
operative. Refer also to § 550-107.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a
collector or arterial street.
(b) Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to
discourage cut-through traffic.
O. Private residential recreational facility. Description: This land use
includes all active outdoor recreational facilities located on a private
residential lot which are not otherwise listed in Appendix B. Materials
and lighting shall limit light levels at said property line to be equal to or
less than 0.5 footcandle (see § 550-110). All private residential
recreation facilities and their attendant structures shall comply with
the bulk requirements for accessory structures (see Article VIII).
Common examples of these accessory uses include swing sets, tree
houses, basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, and
recreation-type equipment.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Swimming pools shall be regulated by the performance
standards provided in § 550-127.
(b) Tree houses and similar platforms shall not exceed a platform
height of eight feet and shall be set back twice their elevation
from any property line.
P. Private residential kennel. Refer to Chapter 228, Article III, Keeping of
Domestic Animals.
Q. Private residential stable. Description. A private residential stable is a
structure facilitating the keeping of horses (or similar animals) on the
same site as a residential dwelling.
(1) Regulations.
(a) A minimum lot area of 218,000 square feet (five acres) is
required for a private residential stable.
(b) A maximum of one horse per five acres of fully enclosed (by
fencing and/or structures) area is permitted.
(c) Outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum
of 25 feet from any residentially zoned property.
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-56
1:1195
(d) The minimum permitted size of horse or similar animal stall
shall be 100 square feet.
R. Drainage structure. Description: These include all improvements,
including but not limited to swales, ditches, culverts, drains, tiles,
gutters, levees, basins, detention or retention facilities, impoundments
and dams, intended to affect the direction, rate and/or volume of
stormwater runoff, snowmelt and/or channelized flows across, within
and/or away from a site.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall comply with § 550-58 for the placement of drainage
structures in permanently protected green space areas.
(b) Shall comply with § 550-58 regarding protection measures for
drainageways.
(c) Any drainage improvement shall not increase the rate or
volume of discharge from the subject property onto any
adjacent properties, except where regional stormwater
management facilities such as storm sewers and retention or
detention facilities are in place to serve the subject property.
S. Filling. Description: Filling includes any activity in an area over 4,000
square feet, or greater than 500 cubic yards of fill, involving the
modification of the earth's surface above that in its undisturbed state.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall comply with § 550-58I regarding filling activities in
permanently protected green space areas.
(b) Shall comply with Article IX regarding protection measures for
natural resources.
(c) Shall not impede on-site drainage.
(d) Shall comply with provisions of Chapter 545, Subdivision of
Land.
T. Lawn care. Description: Lawn care includes any activity involving the
preparation of the ground for installation and maintenance of
vegetative ground cover (including gardens) which complies with the
City of Watertown's Code. Lawn care is not permitted in certain
permanently protected green space areas; see § 550-58E.
U. Individual septic disposal system. Description: This land use includes
any state-enabled, county-approved septic disposal system.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Minimum lot size of 0.5 acre.
§ 550-56 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-56
1:1196
(b) Shall comply with Article IX regarding protection measures for
natural resources.
V. Exterior communication devices. Description: This land use includes
any antennas used for communication reception use, including any
towers and antennas used for communication reception by an amateur
radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(e.g., satellite dishes, ham radio towers, television antennas). [Added
by Ord. No. 10-10]
(1) Regulations pertaining to all antennas.
(a) Except for television antennas and satellite dishes 18 inches or
smaller, exterior communication devices shall not be visible
from a public street.
(b) Devices must be sited an equal or greater number of feet from
any property lines as their maximum height and may not be
located in a required street yard.
(c) The applicant must demonstrate that all reasonable
mechanisms have been used to mitigate safety hazards and the
visual inputs of the device.
(2) Regulations pertaining to ham/short-wave antennas and towers.
(a) The regulations under this Subsection V(2) only apply to
towers and antennas used for communication reception by an
amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
(b) Installations may not be located in a front or street side yard.
(c) Installations of 45 feet or less must meet the setback
requirements for an accessory structure.
(d) Installations with heights between 45 feet and 75 feet must
meet the setback requirements for a principal structure and
will require a prior written notice to the abutting property
owners.
(e) Installations of 75 feet or higher must have a setback of at least
1/3 of the total height of the structure.
(f) Installations of 75 feet or higher or those that do not meet all of
the requirements for installations less than 75 feet will require
a conditional use permit.
(g) With the exception of the regulations listed above, all
installations of ham/short-wave antennas and towers must
comply with the performance standards found in § 550-124E of
this chapter, except for the provisions of § 550-124E(3) and (4).
(h) All installations will require the proper building permits.
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-56
1:1197
W. Caretaker's residence. Description: This land use includes any
residential unit which provides permanent housing for a caretaker of
the subject property in either an attached or detached configuration.
(1) Regulations.
(a) Shall provide housing only for on-site caretaker and family.
X. Keeping and raising of chickens. Description. The keeping and raising
of chickens in the City of Watertown. [Added 10-20-2015 by Ord. No.
15-33]
(1) Regulations.
(a) Chickens shall be permitted on lots where the principal
structure is a detached single-family residence. If the
residence is not owner-occupied, the tenant shall supply the
owner's written consent to the keeping of chickens on the
property to the City.
[1] Chickens shall be permitted on lots where the principal
structure is an owner-occupied two-family duplex.
[2] Chickens shall not be permitted on a lot where the duplex
is not owner-occupied, triplexes or any other higherdensity
residential dwelling units.
(b) A maximum of four chickens may be kept per residential lot.
(c) Keeping of one or more roosters is prohibited.
(d) The sale of chickens, chicken meat, eggs or other chicken byproducts
is prohibited.
(e) Chicken coop and run required.
[1] Chickens shall be provided with a chicken coop (i.e., a
covered roosting area) and an adjacent chicken run (i.e.,
enclosed area in which chickens are allowed to walk and
run about).
[2] Chickens shall be kept in the coop or chicken run at all
times.
[3] The coop shall be a stand-alone structure located in the
rear yard at least 25 feet from all property lines and at
least 10 feet from the principal structure as depicted in the
illustration to follow.
[4] The coop shall not exceed 32 square feet in area nor 10
feet in height.
[5] The chicken run shall be located adjacent to the coop and
shall be at least 25 feet from all property lines and at least
§ 550-56 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-56
1:1198
10 feet from the principal structure as depicted in the
illustration to follow.
[6] The chicken run shall not exceed 64 square feet in area
and the fence surrounding it shall between 48 and 96
inches in height.
[7] Chickens shall not be permitted in any other structure on
the lot, including garages, basements and attics.
(f) License.
[1] No owner or occupant shall keep chickens without the
prior issuance of a "raising of chicken" permit and a
residential building permit for the chicken coop and run by
the City of Watertown Building, Safety and Zoning
Department.
[2] Prior to issuance of a license by the City, the applicant
shall provide the City with proof of notification to all
abutting property owners of the presence of chickens.
[a] In the instance of an owner-occupied two-family
duplex, the tenant must provide the City with the
owner's written consent to the presence of chickens
along with proof of notification to all abutting property
owners.
[3] Prior to issuance of a license by the City, the applicant
shall provide proof of livestock premises registration with
the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection.
[4] The City may revoke the license if two or more
substantiated violations of the City of Watertown Code are
received by the City within a twelve-month period.
(g) Chickens are defined as females of the subspecies Gallus gallus
domesticus.
Y. Short-term rentals. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-56
1:1199
(1) "Short-term rental" means residential dwelling that is offered for
rent for a fee to tourists or transients for fewer than 29 consecutive
days. Short-term rentals do not include bed-and-breakfast
establishments.
(2) Purpose. The following short-term rental land use establishes
zoning and licensing regulations created to ensure applicable state
and City laws are followed, to protect persons engaged in this
practice as landlord or tenant; to protect against adverse impacts
of noise, odor, disturbance, adverse visual impacts, or other
nuisances that this practice could have upon neighboring
properties; to preserve property values for the benefit of the City;
and also to control impacts of such operations on municipal
services.
(3) Regulations.
(a) Any person who maintains, manages, or operates a short-term
rental must:
[1] Obtain from the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection or its agent, the City of
Watertown Health Department, under § 319-21, a license
as a tourist rooming house.
[a] Under a tourist rooming house license, an operator
may rent as many as four units, including, but not
limited to, rooms, cottages or cabins. A hotel license is
needed if five or more units are being rented.
(b) Short-term rentals must comply with General Code Chapter
76, Article II, Finance and Taxation, Room Tax, except:
[1] Short-term rentals that are rented through a lodging
marketplace must comply with § 66.0615(5), Wis. Stats.
(c) All refuse containers shall be screened from view.
(d) Sleeping quarters related to a short-term rental establishment
use shall only be located within the principal structure on the
parcel. Accessory buildings, accessory dwelling units,
recreational vehicles or recreational trailers cannot be used for
sleeping quarters.
[1] Recreational vehicles or recreational trailers must be
parked off street and parked on the parcel's paved
driveway.
(e) Occupancy limits shall not exceed the number of occupants
allowed under Ch. ATCP 72, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 550-56 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-56
1:1200
(f) Food or liquor shall not be prepared and/or provided by any
person who maintains, manages or operates a short-term
rental.
(g) The person who maintains, manages or operates a short-term
rental may not reside at the short-term rental during
occupancy by a tourist or transient.
Z. Tourist rooming house. [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
(1) "Tourist rooming house" means any lodging place or tourist cabin
or cottage where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to
tourists or transients. Tourist rooming houses do not include
boardinghouses, hotels (commercial indoor lodging) or bed-andbreakfast
establishments.
(2) Regulations.
(a) Any person who maintains, manages, or operates a tourist
rooming house must:
[1] Obtain from the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection or its agent, the City of
Watertown Health Department, under § 319-21, a license
as a tourist rooming house.
[a] Under a tourist rooming house license, an operator
may rent as many as four units, including, but not
limited to, rooms, cottages or cabins. A hotel license is
needed if five or more units are being rented.
(b) A tourist rooming house must comply with General Code
Chapter 76, Article II, Finance and Taxation, Room Tax, except:
[1] A tourist rooming house that is rented through a lodging
marketplace must comply with 66.0615(5), Wis. Stats.
(c) All refuse containers shall be screened from view.
(d) All tourist rooming houses shall be located above the first floor.
(e) Occupancy limits shall not exceed the number of occupants
allowed under Ch. ATCP 72, Wis. Adm. Code.
(f) Food or liquor shall not be prepared and/or provided by any
person who maintains, manages or operates a tourist rooming
house.
AA. Accessory dwelling unit: a dwelling unit that is located on the same lot
as a principal residential structure to which it is accessory, and that is
subordinate in area to the principal dwelling, not including an in-family
suite under § 550-79B. Internal, attached, and detached accessory
dwelling units shall be allowed accessory to a principal residential
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-56
1:1201
structure, subject to the following: [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
(1) No more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on a
parcel.
(2) Rooftop decks shall not be allowed.
(3) The minimum gross floor area of accessory dwelling units shall be
300 square feet.
(4) Under no circumstance shall an accessory dwelling unit's square
footage exceed the first habitable floor of the principal structure.
(5) An owner of the property must occupy at least one dwelling unit on
the parcel as their primary place of residence.
(6) Accessory dwelling units shall not be used for short-term rentals
under § 550-56Y.
(7) Accessory dwelling units that are internal to a principal residential
structure shall also comply with the following requirements:
(a) Internal accessory dwelling units are limited to 800 square
feet. In no case shall the floor area of the internal accessory
dwelling unit exceed the floor area of the first floor of the
primary structure.
(b) The entire internal accessory dwelling unit shall be located on
one level.
(c) The creation of the accessory dwelling unit shall not result in
additional entrances facing the public street on the principal
structure.
(8) Accessory dwelling units that are attached to a principal residential
structure shall also comply with the following requirements:
(a) The maximum floor area for an attached accessory dwelling
unit shall be 800 square feet.
(b) The creation of the accessory dwelling unit shall not result in
additional entrances facing the public street on the primary
structure.
(c) Any stairways leading to an upper story of an accessory
dwelling unit shall be enclosed.
(d) The primary exterior materials of an attached accessory
dwelling unit shall match the primary exterior materials of the
principal structure.
(9) Detached accessory dwelling units shall also comply with the
following requirements:
§ 550-56 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-56
1:1202
§ 550-57. Temporary land uses.
(a) A detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height
of the principal residential structure. In no case shall the
highest point of the roof of the detached accessory dwelling
unit exceed the highest point of the roof of the principal
residential structure.
(b) The floor area of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not
exceed 1,000 square feet, including any areas designed or
intended to be used for the parking of vehicles and any halfstory
floor area.
[1] Upper story detached accessory dwelling units may be
built above an accessory structure, including, but not
limited to, a detached garage, so long as the accessory
structure's footprint does not exceed 1,000 square feet.
(c) A detached accessory dwelling shall comply with the required
setbacks and maximum building coverage for an accessory
structure within that zoning district.
(d) The distance between the detached accessory dwelling unit
and the principal structure shall be a minimum of 12 feet.
(e) Not less than 10% of the total area of the facade of a detached
accessory dwelling unit facing an alley or public street shall be
windows.
(f) Exterior stairways shall be allowed, provided that the finish of
the railing matches the finish or trim of the detached accessory
dwelling unit. Raw or unfinished lumber shall not be permitted
on an exterior stairway.
(g) A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located entirely to
the rear of the principal residential structure.
A. General temporary outdoor sales. Description: Includes the display of
any items outside the confines of a building which is not otherwise
permitted as a permitted or conditional use or a special event otherwise
regulated by the City Code. Examples of this land use include but are
not limited to: seasonal garden shops, tent sales, bratwurst stands and
garage sales; however, up to two garage sales are exempt from the
provisions of this subsection.
(1) Temporary use regulations.
(a) Display shall be limited to a maximum of 12 days in any
calendar year.
(b) Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-57
1:1203
(c) Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary
signs in Article XII.
(d) Adequate parking shall be provided.
(e) If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area,
sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(f) Shall comply with § 550-143, standards and procedures
applicable to all temporary uses.
B. Outdoor assembly. Description: Includes any organized outdoor
assembly of more than 100 persons. (See Chapter 428 of the City of
Watertown Municipal Code.) [Amended 11-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-27]
C. Contractor's project office. Description: Includes any structure
containing an on-site construction management office for an active
construction project.
(1) Temporary use regulations.
(a) Structure shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor
area.
(b) Facility shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of
occupancy permit.
(c) Shall not be used for sales activity. (See Subsection F below.)
(d) Projects requiring land use to be in place for more than 365
days shall require a conditional use permit.
(e) Shall comply with § 550-143, standards and procedures
applicable to all temporary uses.
D. Contractor's on-site equipment storage facility. Description: Includes
any structure or outdoor storage area designed for the on-site storage
of construction equipment and/or materials for an active construction
project.
(1) Temporary use regulations.
(a) Facility shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of
occupancy permit.
(b) Projects requiring land use to be in place for more than 365
days shall require a conditional use permit.
(c) Shall be limited to a maximum area not exceeding 10% of the
property's gross site area.
(d) Shall comply with § 550-143, standards and procedures
applicable to all temporary uses.
§ 550-57 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-57
1:1204
E. Relocatable building. Description: Includes any manufactured building
which serves as a temporary building for less than six months.
(Facilities serving for more than six months shall be considered
conditional uses and subject to the general standards and procedures
presented in § 550-142.)
(1) Temporary use regulations.
(a) Shall conform to all setback regulations.
(b) Shall conform to all Building Code regulations.
(c) Shall comply with § 550-143, standards and procedures
applicable to all temporary uses.
F. On-site real estate sales office. Description: Includes any building which
serves as an on-site sales office for a development project.
(1) Temporary use regulations.
(a) Structure shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in gross floor
area.
(b) Facility shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use
within 10 days of the completion of sales activity.
(c) Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary
signs in Article XII.
(d) Projects requiring land use to be in place for more than 365
days shall require a conditional use permit.
(e) Shall comply with § 550-143, standards and procedures
applicable to all temporary uses.
G. Seasonal outdoor sales of farm products. Description: Includes any
outdoor display of farm products not otherwise regulated by the City of
Watertown Code.
(1) Temporary use regulations.
(a) Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(b) Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary
signs in Article XII.
(c) Adequate parking shall be provided.
(d) If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area,
sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(e) Shall comply with § 550-143, standards and procedures
applicable to all temporary uses.
§ 550-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-58
1:1205
§ 550-58. Natural resource disruption and required mitigation
standards.
In all developments, certain areas may be required to be set aside as
permanently protected green space for the purpose of natural resource
protection to meet a minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) requirement.
Where such permanently protected green space is required, and where the
land use is also permitted per the land use regulations of the applicable
conventional zoning district (see Article IV, Detailed Land Use Descriptions
and Regulations), the following regulations shall also be employed to
establish land use regulations. All land uses listed in Article IV but not listed
in this section are prohibited in permanently protected green spaces. For
all land uses, disruption to natural resource areas shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 545, Subdivision of Land, pertaining to drainage,
grading and erosion control. All land uses located within permanently
protected green space areas shall comply with the following.
A. Cultivation.
(1) Permitted as a conditional use (permanently protected green space
areas outside the Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning
District):
(a) Permitted only if designated on the submitted site plan and/or
the recorded plat or certified survey as an "area that may be
used for cultivation."
B. Passive outdoor public recreational area.
(1) Permitted by right (all permanently protected green space areas):
(a) Limited to a twenty-foot-wide area in permanently protected
natural resource areas. Permitted in other permanently
protected green space areas without restriction.
(b) Nonnative vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas beyond said
twenty-foot-wide area.
C. Active outdoor public recreational area.
(1) Permitted by right (permanently protected green space areas
outside the Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning District):
(a) Nonnative vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas.
(2) Permitted as a conditional use: (flood-fringe).
D. Outdoor institutional.
(1) Permitted by right (permanently protected green space areas
outside the Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning District):
§ 550-58 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-58
1:1206
(a) Nonnative vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas.
E. Lawn care.
(1) Permitted by right (permanently protected green space areas
outside the Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning District):
(a) Nonnative ground cover shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas. Clearance of
understory growth shall be permitted.
(2) Permitted as a conditional use (all permanently protected green
space areas, except wetlands):
(a) Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation
is permitted, with the exception of a twenty-foot-wide access
path, which may be cleared for passive recreation purposes.
(b) Each property abutting a natural resource area shall be limited
to one such access path.
(c) Nonnative vegetation (such as domestic lawn grasses) shall not
be introduced into natural resource areas beyond said twentyfoot-
wide access path.
F. Golf course.
(1) Permitted by right (permanently protected green space areas
outside the Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning District,
except wetlands):
(a) Nonnative vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas.
(2) Permitted as a conditional use (all permanently protected green
space areas):
(a) Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation
is permitted. Green space areas located within or adjacent to
golf play areas shall be incorporated into the course design as
out-of-bounds play hazards and shall be maintained in their
natural state.
G. Any permitted temporary use.
(1) Permitted by right (permanently protected green space areas
outside the Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning District):
(a) Activity shall in no manner encroach upon permanently
protected natural resources areas. Party securing the
temporary use permit shall be responsible for restoring all
such natural resource areas to an undamaged state or shall be
§ 550-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-58
1:1207
considered in violation of the provisions of this chapter
(§ 550-148).
H. Drainage structure.
(1) Permitted as a conditional use (all permanently protected green
space areas):
(a) Structure shall be deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
(b) Natural vegetation shall be restored in disturbed areas.
I. Filling.
(1) Permitted as a conditional use (all permanently protected green
space areas):
(a) Filling in the floodway shall be done only as required by a
necessary road, bridge, utility or other infrastructure facility
which has been deemed necessary by the Department of Public
Works.
(b) Natural vegetation shall be restored in disturbed areas.
(c) In no instance shall filling raise the base flood elevation.
J. Individual septic disposal system.
(1) Permitted as a conditional use (permanently protected green space
areas outside the Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning
District):
(a) Shall not locate closer than 30 feet to any other permanently
protected natural resource area.
K. Road and/or bridge.
(1) Permitted as a conditional use (all permanently protected green
space areas):
(a) May locate in or across a natural resource areas only in
conjunction with a boat landing or when deemed essential by
the Department of Public Works.
(b) May locate in other permanently protected green space areas
if designed to provide an essential service to an activity area
located within the green space area which cannot be efficiently
reached from another point.
(c) Road networks shall be designed to circumvent permanently
protected green space areas, thereby eliminating the need for
intrusions and crossings.
L. Utility lines and related facilities.
§ 550-58 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-58
1:1208
(1) Permitted as a conditional use (all permanently protected green
space areas):
(a) May locate in or across a natural resource areas only when
deemed essential by the Department of Public Works.
(b) May locate in other permanently protected green space areas
if designed to provide an essential service to an activity area
located within the green space area which cannot be efficiently
reached from another point.
(c) In general, utility lines shall be designed to circumvent
permanently protected green space areas, thereby eliminating
the need for intrusions and crossings.
M. Piers and wharfs.
(1) Permitted as a conditional use (all permanently protected green
space areas):
(a) A site plan shall be required per § 550-145 for construction,
erection, placement or extension of a pier or wharf, with
specific information provided regarding its location in relation
to the shoreline and abutting riparian property lines and
regarding dimensions and building materials.
§ 550-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-58
1:1209

ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Use Regulations
[Amended by Ord. No. 03-21; 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 14-4]
§ 550-59. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all uses in the City except in the following
circumstances:
§ 550-60. Definition.
A "nonconforming use" is an active and actual use of land or structures,
or both, legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter or
subsequent applicable amendment thereto, which has continued as the
same use to the present and which would not be permitted under the
current terms of this chapter.
§ 550-61. Continuance of nonconforming use.
Any nonconforming use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this
chapter may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing
upon such date, except as specified in this article. Any legal use under the
previous Zoning Ordinance which is made nonconforming by this chapter
may apply for a conditional use permit (per § 550-142) to be granted legal
conforming status. Any legal use under the previous Zoning Map which is
made nonconforming by a change to the Official Zoning Map may apply for
a Zoning Map amendment (per § 550-141) to an appropriate zoning district
to be granted legal conforming use status.
§ 550-62. Modification of nonconforming use.
A. The use did not legally exist at the time of adoption.
B. The use is subject to legal proceedings.
C. The use is subject to a court order to the contrary of this article.
A. Except as permitted in Subsection B below, a nonconforming use shall
not be expanded or changed to another nonconforming use unless such
modification would make the nonconforming use have a more desirable
effect in terms of implementing the purpose of this chapter (as
determined by the Zoning Administrator). If such a modification occurs,
said use shall not be modified back to the original nonconforming use or
to any other nonconforming use which does not better accomplish the
purposes of this chapter.
B. A nonconforming nonresidential use which is not served by public
sanitary sewer and/or public water may be permitted to expand without
being served by public sanitary sewer and/or public water if said
facilities are not available within 1,000 feet of the subject property and
§ 550-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-62
1:1211
§ 550-63. Discontinuance of nonconforming use.
When any nonconforming use of any structure or land is discontinued for a
period of 12 months or is changed into a conforming use, any future use of
said structure or land shall be in complete conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 550-64. Maintenance of nonconforming use.
The normal maintenance of aspects of the structure and/or equipment
and furnishings unique to the nonconforming use is permitted, including
necessary repairs and incidental alterations which do not exacerbate the
adverse impacts of the nonconforming use in relation to the purposes
of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this article, whenever a
nonconforming use is damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its current
equalized assessed value, it shall not be restored except in conformity with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
§ 550-65. Reconstruction of two-family dwellings in areas formerly
zoned R-2.
A legal nonconforming two-family structure which is destroyed by fire,
tornado or other disaster may apply for consideration as a conditional use
to be reconstructed so as not to expand the floor area or footprint of the
structure if said structure is located in an area which was zoned to permit
two-family dwellings on the day preceding the effective date of this chapter.
§ 550-66. Nonconforming lots, structures and buildings.
See §§ 550-77, 550-84 and 550-85.
§ 550-67. Continued use exemptions. [Amended 7-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-6]
The established uses at the corresponding addresses and in the zoning
districts listed below, as of the adoption date of the Official Zoning Map,
are hereby granted legal conforming use status. Building additions and
reconstruction of damaged or demolished buildings shall fully conform to all
bulk requirements (setbacks, height and floor area) of the zoning district.
Any change in land use of these properties to a conforming use in the zoning
district shall eliminate the application of the ability to legally continue or
reestablish the listed use.
upon the granting of a conditional use permit per the requirements of
§ 550-142.
§ 550-62 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-67
1:1212
Address Use Zoning District
1028/1030 Boughton Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1314/1316 Center Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1308/1310 Center Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1014 Center Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
106 Oak Hill Court Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
813 North Water Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
134/136 West Leonard
Street
Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1005/1007 North Water
Street
Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1506 East Main Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1003/1005 Pleasant Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
909 Highland Avenue Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
612 Werner Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1407 South Ninth Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1226 South Ninth Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1126 South Tenth Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
205 West Milwaukee Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
1303 South Ninth Street Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
704 West Madison Street 4-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
300 South Washington
Street
3-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
201 South Church Street 4-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
§ 550-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-67
1:1213
Address Use Zoning District
216 North Church Street 3-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
302 North Church Street 3-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
228 Margaret Street 3-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
222/224/226 Margaret
Street
3-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
608 East Division Street 3-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
510-512 North Fourth
Street
4-unit
apartment
TR-6, Two-Family
Residential
1101-1103 North Fourth
Street
Duplex SR-4, Single-Family
Residential
111 South First Street (PIN:
291-0815-0421-105)
Boardinghouse CB, Central Business
516 East Main Street (PIN:
291-0815-0412-132)
Boardinghouse CB, Central Business
§ 550-67 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-67
1:1214
ARTICLE VI
Group Developments
§ 550-68. Definition.
§ 550-69. Use regulations.
A. A "group development" is any development containing:
(1) Two or more structures containing principal land uses on the same
lot.
(2) Any single structure on a single lot which contains five or more
dwelling units or two or more nonresidential uses.
(3) Any new institutional, commercial and office buildings in excess of
5,000 gross square feet and all multibuilding group developments
in which the combined total of all structures on a site, regardless of
diverse ownership, use or tenancy, exceeds 5,000 square feet.
(4) Any building additions to institutional, commercial and office
buildings that bring the total building size to over 5,000 gross
square feet. These regulations shall apply to the building addition,
the older portions of the building constructed prior to the adoption
of this article, and to the site.
(5) Any new development other than single-family residential in the
overlay zoning districts described in §§ 550-149, 550-150 and
550-151.
B. Common examples of group developments include six-unit apartment
buildings, apartment complexes, condominium complexes, strip
centers, shopping centers and office centers. (One-tenant office or
commercial buildings containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross
floor area, four-unit apartment buildings, and other land uses in which
each nonresidential building contains only one tenant, or where the lot
contains only one structure, or where each residential building contains
four or fewer dwelling units, are not group developments even though
such developments may contain parcels under common ownership.)
C. A group development does not offer the ability to customize the
regulations of this chapter as could be achieved using a planned
development per § 550-38. A group development approval is not
required for an approved specific implementation plan.
A. Permitted by right: not applicable.
B. Conditional use regulations. Any land use that is permitted as a
permitted by right land use or as a conditional land use within the
applicable zoning district(s) is permitted to locate within a group
development. The detailed land use regulations of this section that
pertain to individual land uses shall also apply to individual land uses
§ 550-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-69
1:1215
within a group development, as will all other applicable provisions of
this chapter. Therefore, land uses permitted by right in the zoning
district shall be permitted by right within an approved group
development (unless otherwise restricted by the conditions of approval
imposed during the conditional use approval for the group development
as a whole), and land uses permitted as a conditional use in the zoning
district shall be permitted within the group development only with
conditional use approval for the specific use. In all cases, the following
conditional use conditions shall be applied to the group development as
a whole and to individual uses within the group development:
(1) All required off-street parking spaces and access drives shall be
located entirely within the boundaries of the group development.
(2) The development shall contain a sufficient number of waste bins to
accommodate all trash and waste generated by the land uses in a
convenient manner.
(3) No group development shall take access to a local residential
street.
(4) All development located within a group development shall be
located so as to comply with the intent of this chapter regarding
setbacks of structures and buildings from lot lines. As such,
individual principal and accessory structures and buildings located
within group developments shall be situated within building
envelopes that serve to demonstrate complete compliance with
said intent. Said building envelopes shall be depicted on the site
plan required for review of group developments. The use of this
approach to designing group developments will also ensure the
facilitation of subdividing group developments in the future (if such
action is so desired).
(5) The following standards shall apply to all group developments:
(a) Building exterior materials shall be of high quality on all sides
of the structure, including glass, brick, decorative concrete
block or stucco. Decorative architectural metal with concealed
fasteners may be approved with special permission from the
City.
(b) Building exterior design shall be unified in design and
materials throughout the structure and shall be
complementary to other structures in the vicinity. However, the
development shall employ varying building setbacks, height,
roof, treatments, door and window openings, and other
structural and decorative elements to reduce the apparent size
and scale of the structure. A minimum of 20% of the combined
facades of the structure shall employ actual facade protrusions
or recesses. A minimum of 20% of the combined linear roof
eave or parapet lines of the structure shall employ differences
in height of eight feet or more. Roofs with particular slopes
§ 550-69 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-69
1:1216
may be required by the City to complement existing buildings
or otherwise establish a particular aesthetic objective.
(c) Mechanical equipment, refuse containers and any permitted
outdoor storage shall be fully concealed from on-site and offsite
ground-level views with materials identical to those used
on the building exterior.
(d) Standard corporate trademark building designs, materials,
architectural elements and colors all shall be acceptable, as
determined by the City, only as subtly integrated into the more
generic design of the building as a whole. Color schemes of all
architectural elements shall be muted, neutral, nonreflective
and nonuse- or nontenant-specific.
(e) Public entryways shall be prominently indicated from the
building's exterior design and shall be emphasized by on-site
traffic flow patterns. All sides of the building that directly face
or abut a public street shall have public entrances.
(f) Loading areas shall be completely screened from surrounding
roads and residential, office and commercial properties. Said
screening may be through internal loading areas, screening
wall that will match the building exterior in materials and
design, fully opaque landscaping at time of planting, or
combinations of the above. Gates and fencing may be used for
security purposes but not for screening and shall be of high
aesthetic quality.
(g) Vehicle access from public streets shall be designed to
accommodate peak traffic volumes without disrupting traffic
on public streets from inadequate throat length, access drive
width or design or inadequate driveway location. The impact of
traffic generated by the proposed development shall be
demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis performed by the
applicant's traffic engineer so as to not adversely impact offsite
public roads, intersections and interchanges during the
traffic peak associated with a full parking lot. Where the
project shall adversely impact off-site traffic, the City may deny
the application, may require a size reduction in the proposed
development, or may require off-site improvements.
(h) Parking lot design shall employ interior landscaped islands
with a minimum of 400 square feet at all parking islands, and
in addition shall provide a minimum of one landscaped island
of a minimum of 400 square feet in each parking aisle for every
20 cars in that aisle. Aisle-end islands shall count toward
meeting this requirement. Landscaped medians shall be used
to break large parking areas into distinct pods, with a
maximum of 100 spaces in any one pod.
§ 550-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-69
1:1217
(i) A minimum of one cart-return area of 200 square feet shall be
provided for every parking area pod. There shall be no exterior
cart-return or cart-storage areas located within 25 feet of the
building in areas located between the building and a public
street.
(j) The applicant shall demonstrate full compliance with City
standards for stormwater, utilities, erosion control and public
safety.
(k) On-site landscaping shall be provided per the landscaping
requirements of this chapter, except that building foundation
landscaping and paved area landscaping shall be provided at
1.5 times the required landscape points for development in the
zoning district.
(l) A conceptual plan for exterior signage shall be provided at
time of detailed site plan or GDP that provides for coordinated
and complementary exterior sign location, configurations and
colors throughout the planned development. All freestanding
signage within the development shall complement the onbuilding
signage. Freestanding sign materials and design shall
complement the building exterior and may not exceed the
maximum height requirement of this chapter and the Building
Code.
(m) The entire development shall provide for full and safe
pedestrian and bicycle access within the development and
shall provide appropriate connections to the existing and
planned pedestrian and bicycle facilities in the community and
in surrounding neighborhoods, including sidewalk connections
to all building entrances from all public streets. The
development shall provide secure bicycle parking and
pedestrian furniture in appropriate quantities and location. A
central pedestrian gathering area shall be provided.
(n) Where such developments are proposed to provide a new
location for a business already located within the community, a
required condition of approval for the new development shall
be a prohibition on conditions of sale, lease or use of the
previously occupied building or site which provide limits
beyond the range of applicable local, state or federal
regulations. If such limits are required, the applicant may seek
City approval to demolish the previously occupied structure
and prepare the site for some future development.
(o) The applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the
proposed development and uses cannot be adequately sited
within or on existing developed properties or buildings within
the community.
§ 550-69 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-69
1:1218
§ 550-70. Discrimination against condominium forms of ownership.
It is not the intent of this article, nor any other provision of this chapter, to
discriminate against condominium forms of ownership in any manner which
conflicts with § 703.27, Wis. Stats. As such, the provisions of this article
are designed to ensure that condominium forms of ownership are subject
to the same standards and procedures of review and development as other
physically identical forms of development.
(p) The Plan Commission may waive any of the above standards by
a three-fourths' vote of members in attendance, but only if
supplemental design elements or improvements are
incorporated into the project that compensate for the waiver of
the particular standard.
§ 550-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-70
1:1219

ARTICLE VII
Density and Intensity
§ 550-71. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate the maximum permitted density (for
residential projects) and maximum permitted intensity (for nonresidential
projects) of development on any given site within the jurisdiction of this
chapter (see § 550-9). The development potential of any site is determined
by a variety of factors, including but not limited to the area of the site; the
proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural resources; the zoning
district(s) in which the site is located; the development option(s) the site is
developed under; and the use(s) considered for development.
Rationale: This article regulates the development potential of all property
within the jurisdiction of this chapter. This article is designed to ensure
the implementation of many goals and objectives of the City of Watertown
Comprehensive Plan. (See also § 550-5 of this chapter.) Many of these
are extremely difficult to address using conventional zoning techniques,
particularly those which rely on minimum lot area requirements to
establish maximum permitted residential densities and maximum floor
area ratios to establish the character of nonresidential developments. Such
approaches provide for a minimum flexibility and/or the needless
destruction of sensitive natural resources. The approach employed by
this article, relying on maximum gross densities (MGDs) and minimum
required landscape surface ratios (LSRs) in combination with maximum
permitted floor area ratios (FARs) for nonresidential development (both
in conjunction with a variety of development options available in every
zoning district), results in a very high degree of site design flexibility and
the protection and implementation of desired community character and
adopted community goals and objectives.
§ 550-72. How to use this article.
This article contains the standards that determine the maximum amount of
development permitted on any given site. Prior to using the provisions of
this article to determine the development potential of a given property, the
guidelines provided by § 550-76A through C should be reviewed. This article
recognizes inherent differences between residential and nonresidential land
uses, and thus regulates their development in slightly different manners.
The description of the process addressing residential development in
§ 550-76A and B refers to the requirements of § 550-74, Residential density
standards. The description of the process addressing nonresidential
development in § 550-76A and C refers to the requirements of § 550-75,
Nonresidential intensity standards.
§ 550-73. Required natural resources site evaluation.
A. Purpose. An important goal of the City of Watertown Comprehensive
Plan is the protection of natural resources that are sensitive to
§ 550-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:1221
disruption caused by development and/or other land use activities.
These resources include floodways, floodplain areas, flood-fringe,
shorelands, wetlands, drainageways, lakeshores, steep slopes and
woodlands. These resources serve important functions that are lost
when these areas are subject to development and/or other land use
activities in the absence of correct mitigation approaches. In many
instances, these functions cannot be provided by other natural or manmade
features. Specific broad categories of such functions include the
protection and enhancement of air, surface water, groundwater and soil
quality; habitat provisions and diversification; aesthetic diversification;
and buffering effects.
B. Mitigation. In certain instances, natural features can accommodate
development and/or other land use activities without a significant loss
of their functional benefits if proper mitigation practices are employed.
Article IX, Natural Resources Protection Regulations, and Chapter 532,
Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning, provide detailed standards
regarding permitted mitigation techniques and requirements.
C. Natural resources site evaluation worksheet.
(a) Determine the gross site area (GSA) of the site:
1. Total site area as determined by actual
on-site survey.
________ acres
2. Subtract area located within proposed
rights-of-way of roads and within
proposed boundaries of public facilities
which are designated within the City's
Comprehensive Plan and/or required for
dedication per subdivision regulations.
- ________ acres
3. Subtract land which, although part of the
same parcel, is not contiguous to or is not
accessible from the proposed road
network serving the project.
- ________ acres
4. Subtract land which is proposed for a
different development option or a
different zoning district.
- ________ acres
5. Subtract area of navigable waters (lakes
and streams).
- ________ acres
6. Equals gross site area (GSA) =________ acres
(b) Determine the required resource protection
area (RPA) of the site:
1. Portion of gross site area containing
floodways.
________ acres
2. Portion of gross site area containing
floodplain areas.
________ acres
§ 550-73 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-73
1:1222
§ 550-74. Residential density standards.
See Article II and Appendix C.222
§ 550-75. Nonresidential intensity standards.
See Article II and Appendix C.223
§ 550-76. Detailed instructions for density and intensity
regulations.
3. Portion of gross site area containing
flood-fringes.
________ acres
4. Add portion of gross site area containing
wetlands.
+________ acres
5. Add portion of gross site area containing
drainageways.
+________ acres
6. Add portion of gross site area containing
lakeshores.
+________ acres
7. Add portion of gross site area containing
woodlands.
+________ acres
8. Add portion of gross site area containing
steep slopes
+________ acres
9. Subtract portions of natural resource
areas [(b)1 to 8] made developable using
approved environmental mitigation
techniques.
-________ acres
10. Equals required resource protection area
(RPA).
=________ acres
(c) Determine the net developable area (NDA) of
the site:
1. Enter gross site area (GSA) [from (a)6
above].
________ acres
2. Subtract required resource protection
area (RPA) [from (b)10 above].
-________ acres
3. Equals net developable area (NDA). =________ acres
A. Instructions for both residential and nonresidential development.
(1) Step 1: Check planning recommendations for the subject property.
222. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Density and Intensity Standards table, is attached to this
chapter.
223. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Density and Intensity Standards table, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-76
1:1223
(a) Check Comprehensive Plan recommendations. The City's
Comprehensive Plan should be checked for implications
related to the subject property, particularly the Land Use and
Transportation Plan Maps. (Copies of the Comprehensive Plan
are available from the City.) From time to time, the
Comprehensive Plan may be amended. The City's Public Works
Department should be consulted regarding changes to the
Comprehensive Plan that may affect the subject property or its
environs.
(b) Check Official Map recommendations. The City's Official Map
should be checked for proposed capital facilities and
dedication requirements, including schools, parks, stormwater
management facilities and street improvements, which may
affect the subject property. The Official Map is on display at the
City's Public Works Department. From time to time the Official
Map may be amended. The City's Public Works Department
should be contacted regarding changes to the Official Map that
may affect the subject property or its environs.
(2) Step 2: Check the zoning of the subject property. The potential
amount and type of development any given site may contain is
directly related to the zoning district in which the site is located.
The subject property should be identified on the City's Official
Zoning Map (see § 550-18) and the current zoning designation
should be compared with the description of that district provided in
Article II. The Official Zoning Map is on display at the City's Public
Works Department. From time to time, the Official Zoning Map may
be amended. The Zoning Administrator should be contacted
regarding potential changes in the Official Zoning Map that may
affect the subject property or its environs.
(3) Step 3: Complete a natural resources site evaluation for the site.
The effect of protected natural resources on the development
potential of the subject property should be evaluated. All resources
listed in § 550-73, Required natural resources site evaluation,
should be identified on the subject property, located on a map (or
air photo) of the subject property, and the total area of the property
(in acres) covered by those resources, known as required resource
protection area (RPA), should be determined, as should gross site
area (GSA) and the net developable area (NDA) of the subject
property. (Section 550-73C contains a worksheet to simplify these
calculations.) The Zoning Administrator should be contacted if
assistance is desired in completing these calculations.
B. Instructions for only residential development. (For Steps 1 through 3
see Subsection A above.)
(1) Step 4: Determine what types of dwelling units are permitted.
Article II should be checked to determine which types of dwelling
§ 550-76 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-76
1:1224
units are permitted within the zoning district for the subject
property. (Section 550-15 describes each dwelling unit type.)
(2) Step 5: Check the minimum site area requirement against the gross
site area. The required minimum site area (MSA), given in the
zoning district identified in Step 2, should be compared with the
gross site area (GSA) required on the subject property as
determined under the natural resources site evaluation in Step 3
above. If the GSA is less than the MSA required by the selected
development option, then a different development option must be
selected or additional property should be acquired.
(3) Step 6: Determine maximum gross density permitted on the site.
The maximum gross density (MGD) given in the zoning district
identified in Step 2 above should be noted and used in Step 7 below.
(4) Step 7: Determine the maximum number of units permitted on the
site. The maximum gross density (MGD) identified in Step 6 above
multiplied by the gross site area (GSA) calculated in Step 3 above
equals the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on the
subject property under the selected development option within the
selected zoning district. The ability to actually develop this number
of dwelling units on the subject property is not guaranteed by the
provisions of this chapter. Inefficient site design, poor property
configuration, and other factors may result in a lower number of
units actually fitting on the site.
(5) Step 8: Check the minimum permitted lot area. The minimum lot
area (MLA) requirement given in the zoning district identified in
Step 2 is the smallest size lot permitted within the zoning district.
The MLA must equal or be less than the lot size requirement for the
type of dwelling unit proposed for the project in Step 4 above. If the
MLA given in the zoning district is larger than the lot size
requirement given in Step 4, then a dwelling unit type with a larger
lot size must be selected (in which case, it may be advantageous to
repeat Steps 4 through 8 using a different dwelling unit type).
C. Instructions for only nonresidential development. (For Steps 1 through
3 see Subsection A above.)
(1) Step 4: Determine what types of land uses are permitted. Article II
should be checked to determine which types of land uses are
permitted within the zoning district designated on or proposed for
the subject property. A complete description of each land use is
presented in Article IV.
(2) Step 5: Check the minimum lot area requirement against the gross
site area present on the subject property. The required minimum
lot area (MLA) given in the zoning district identified in Step 2
should be compared with the gross site area (GSA) required on the
subject property as determined under the natural resources site
evaluation in Step 3 above. If the GSA is less than the MLA required
§ 550-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-76
1:1225
by the zoning district, then additional property should be acquired.
In other words, the GSA (from Step 3) must be greater than or
equal to the MLA (from Step 5).
(3) Step 6: Check the minimum landscape surface ratio requirement
against the required resource protection area present on the
subject property. The required landscape surface ratio (LSR) given
in the zoning district identified in Step 2 should be multiplied by
the gross site area (GSA) used in Step 5 above. The resulting
product is the area of the site which must be permanently
protected as green space. This area should be compared with the
required resource protection area (RPA) required on the subject
property as determined under the natural resource site evaluation
in Step 3 above. If the area of the site containing sensitive natural
resources exceeds the area of permanently protected landscape
surface required, then more floors may have to be used in order to
approach maximum development potential on the site. In other
words, if the RPA (from Step 3) is greater than the LSR, the use of
more floors may permit the development of more floor area on the
subject property.
(4) Step 7: Determine maximum floor area ratio permitted on the site.
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for the zoning district
identified in Step 2 above should be noted. This number will be
used in Step 8 below.
(5) Step 8: Determine the maximum floor area permitted on the site.
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) identified in Step 7 above
multiplied by the gross site area (GSA) calculated in Step 3 above
equals the maximum square footage of gross floor area permitted
on the subject property within that zoning district. The ability to
actually develop this amount of floor area is not guaranteed by the
provisions of this chapter. Inefficient site design, poor property
configuration and other factors may result in a smaller amount of
area actually fitting on the site.
(6) Step 9: Check the maximum building size requirement (NO and NB
District). The maximum building size (MBS) requirement given in
the zoning district identified in Step 2 above is the largest size
building permitted within the Neighborhood Office and
Neighborhood Business Districts. The MBS must equal or be
greater than the building size proposed for the project in Step 8
above. If the MBS given in § 550-75 is smaller than the proposed
building size calculated in Step 8 above, then a smaller building
must be built or the use of additional buildings should be
considered.
§ 550-76 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-76
1:1226
§ 550-77. Nonconforming development regulations. [Amended
2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2]
Rationale: The combinations of maximum floor area ratio (FAR)
and minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) requirements within
each zoning district are designed to result in a consistent
community character of development within that district. The
minimum lot area (MLA) requirements for each zoning district
are used to ensure that a consistency of neighborhood character
within each zoning district is maintained and attainable under
efficient site design practices. The maximum building size (MBS)
requirements ensure that development within the Neighborhood
Office and Neighborhood Business Districts retains a
neighborhood function and maintains a scale that is compatible
with nearby residential development.
A. Blanket conforming status.
(1) Blanket conforming status for any and all requirements of this
chapter is hereby automatically granted to all development sites in
their configuration existing or as finally approved as of February 1,
2014.
(2) After February 1, 2014, additional site development that would
result in the enlargement, expansion or extension of uses,
structures or other development per Subsection A(3)(a) to (h)
below will not be allowed to occur without bringing such additional
site development into full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or to the extent practical without removal of lawful
structures, in accordance with the following Subsections B through
E below.
(3) This subsection is intended to prevent the creation of
nonconforming sites related to the building and site design
requirements of this chapter. These building and site design
components may include one or more of the following:
(a) Bulk, intensity and density requirements.
(b) Exterior building materials requirements.
(c) Exterior building design requirements.
(d) Parking, loading, access drive and other paved area design
requirements.
(e) Landscaping requirements.
(f) Bufferyard requirements.
(g) Fencing requirements.
(h) Lighting requirements.
§ 550-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-77
1:1227
(4) This subsection ensures that sites approved prior to February 1,
2014, do not encounter difficulty because they would otherwise be
considered nonconforming.
B. All new buildings, structures and parking areas, including additions,
shall comply with all site design requirements of this chapter, including
the components of Subsection A(3)(a) to (h) above, for the new portion
of the development.
C. On lots where the site configuration and undeveloped area are
sufficient to comply with site design requirements, no enlargement,
expansion or extension of a use, structure or paving shall be permitted
if it makes compliance with the site design requirements of this chapter,
including Subsection A(3)(a) to (h) above, impossible, even if said
enlargement, expansion or extension of the use, structure or paving
would otherwise be permissible.
D. On lots where the configuration and undeveloped area of the
nonconforming site provide insufficient space to bring the site into full
compliance with all site requirements, but nevertheless provide space
to reduce the degree of one or more nonconformities, the Plan
Commission shall make a determination as to the manner and degree to
which each site's nonconformities shall be brought into conformance
specifically to improve public safety and/or reduce public nuisances.
E. Enlargements, expansions or extensions that would result in creation of
one or more nonconformities, render a nonconforming site incapable of
being brought into full or greater compliance with nonconforming site
requirements, or increase the degree of existing nonconformities with
the site development standards of this chapter shall not be permitted,
unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals under
§ 550-147.
Rationale: The "blanket conforming status" provision of this section
is intended to prevent the creation of certain nonconforming
developments within the jurisdiction of this chapter. The adoption of
the provisions of this section ensures that developments approved
prior to the adoption of this chapter do not encounter difficulty in
transferring ownership because they would otherwise be considered
nonconforming.
§ 550-77 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-77
1:1228
ARTICLE VIII
Bulk Regulations
§ 550-78. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate the requirements for building
location and bulk in both residential and nonresidential developments. The
provisions of this article interact closely with the provisions of Article VII,
Density and Intensity.
§ 550-79. Residential bulk standards.
A. All residential lots created under the provisions of this chapter shall
comply with the standards of this section. These standards are related
to the specific zoning district used. (Refer to Article II.) (See Bulk
Regulations table in Appendix D224 to compare the bulk regulations for
all zoning districts.)
B. Rules to distinguish a one-family dwelling with an in-family suite from a
two-family dwelling:
(1) The dwelling unit shall appear as a single-family dwelling. A
separate walled garage area and/or driveway is not permitted.
(2) A separate address is not permitted.
(3) Separate utility connection and/or meters are not permitted.
(4) A physical all-weather connection between the main living area and
the in-family suite must be present. This required connection may
not occur through an attic, basement, garage, porch or other
nonliving area. A door may be used to separate the in-family suite
from the rest of the dwelling unit but may not be locking, except
that a locking door may be used for the bedroom and/or bathroom
doors of this in-family suite.
(5) The in-family suite may contain separate kitchen, dining, bathroom,
laundry, living, sleeping and recreation areas, including exterior
porches, patios and/or decks. In addition to the internal physical
connection required above, separate outdoor access and/or
separate access to the garage may be provided. However, external
stairs which serve as the primary access to the in-family suite are
prohibited.
(6) The in-family suite may not be occupied by a nonfamily member (as
defined by the State of Wisconsin One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code).
(7) In-family suites should be considered and regulated as part of a
single-family dwelling unit.
224. Editor's Note: Appendix D is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-79
1:1229
§ 550-80. Nonresidential bulk standards.
All nonresidential lots created under the provisions of this chapter shall
comply with the standards of this section. These standards are related to
the specific zoning district used. (Refer to Article II.) (See Bulk Regulations
table in Appendix D225 to compare the bulk regulations for all zoning
districts.)
§ 550-81. Yard setback adjustments.
(8) When an application is submitted for a building permit to
accommodate what is explicitly listed as, or could possibly serve as,
an in-family suite, the building plan shall be marked as "not a
separate dwelling unit nor apartment," and a signed letter from the
applicant stating agreement with this condition shall be required.
This letter shall be recorded by the property owner with the County
Register of Deeds.
A. Front yard setback adjustment.
(1) For lots located adjacent to a street with an officially mapped or
existing right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet, a forty-foot
setback is required to address anticipated future conditions of
noise and air quality.
(2) The required front yard setback for any use may be reduced for a
principal structure on any lot where more than 50% of the same
type of principal structure on the same block face or street face do
not meet the required front yard setback. In such instances, the
required front yard setback for the proposed structure shall be the
average of all the adjoining same type principal structures on said
block face or street face.
(3) In order to preserve and maintain the character of established
neighborhoods within the City of Watertown, which are typified by
front yard setbacks substantially in excess of the minimum
required front yard setback, the following regulation shall apply: on
block faces with an average front yard setback more than five feet
over the minimum, required front yard setback shall be increased
to the average of the adjoining same type principal structures on
said block face or street face.
B. Rear yard setback adjustment. [Added by Ord. No. 13-33]
(1) For any lot used exclusively as single-family or two-flat dwellings
and located within the following described boundaries, the
required rear yard setback for such residential structures of the
rear lot line to the house or attached garage shall be reduced to a
minimum of 15 feet within the SR-4, TR-6 or MR-8 District for
225. Editor's Note: Appendix D is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-79 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-81
1:1230
§ 550-82. Intrusions into required yards.
The minimum setback requirements of each zoning district establish the
minimum required yards for all uses except those exempted by the
provisions of this section.
additions that do not exceed a height of one story and 15 feet,
including a basement or other foundation.
(2) The said boundaries are: beginning at the intersection of North
Church Street and the Union Pacific Railroad tracks; thence
southerly along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the
intersection with the CP Railroad tracks; thence southeasterly
along the CP Railroad tracks to the intersection with South
Concord Avenue; thence northerly along South Concord Avenue to
the intersection with Oconomowoc Avenue; thence easterly along
Oconomowoc Avenue to the center of the Rock River; thence
downstream along the center of the Rock River; thence due west to
the intersection of Water Street and Margaret Street; thence
westerly along Margaret Street to the intersection with North
Church Street; thence northwesterly along North Church Street to
the intersection with the Union Pacific Railroad tracks.
A. No yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard
less than the minimum required by this chapter. If an existing yard is
less than the minimum required, it shall not be reduced further, except
where exempted by the provisions of this section.
B. No required yard or lot area allocated to satisfy the minimum yard or lot
area requirements for one building or structure shall be used to satisfy
the minimum yard or lot area requirement for another building or
structure.
C. In instances where the required bufferyard width (per § 550-99)
exceeds the minimum required setback width, the minimum required
bufferyard width shall prevail. Absolutely no intrusions of a building or
structure are permitted within the required bufferyard.
D. Permitted intrusions into required yards. The following intrusions by
buildings and structures are permitted into the specified required
yards.
(1) Permitted intrusions into required front or street yards:
(a) Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features,
cornices, eaves and gutters for residential buildings, provided
they do not extend more than 2 1/2 feet into the required yard.
(b) Yard lights, ornamental lights, and nameplate signs for
residential lots, provided that they comply with the
illumination requirements of § 550-110, and provided they do
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-82
1:1231
§ 550-83. Exceptions to maximum height regulations.
not locate closer than five feet to the front or street property
line.
(c) Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, decks, stoops or similar
appurtenances to residential buildings which do not extend
above the floor level of the adjacent building entrance,
provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet to any street
right-of-way.
(d) Fences on residential or nonresidential lots which do not
exceed three feet in height, provided they do not locate closer
than two feet to any street right-of-way. Permitted fence types
shall comply with the provisions of § 550-123E.
(2) Permitted intrusions into required rear or side yards:
(a) Sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves
and gutters for residential buildings, provided they do not
extend more than 2 1/2 feet into the required yard.
(b) Fences may locate on the property line. Permitted fence types
shall comply with the provisions of § 550-123.
(c) Fire escapes (on residential buildings) that do not extend more
than three feet into the required yard.
(3) Permitted intrusions into required rear yards: Terraces, steps,
uncovered porches, decks, stoops or similar appurtenances to
residential buildings which do not extend more than one foot above
grade, provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet to the rear lot
line.
E. All front yard and street yard areas. With the exception of fences, no
accessory structures shall be permitted within any portion of a front
yard or street yard, except when there is a shoreyard. In instances
where there is a shoreyard, shoreyards shall be treated as front yards
and street yards as rear yards, whereby accessory structures may be
located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same
lot.
A. The maximum height regulations listed for residential and
nonresidential uses and accessory structures in each zoning district are
the maximum permitted heights for all buildings and structures, except
those exempted by this section below.
B. The following are permitted to exceed the maximum height regulations
by 10 feet within any district where permitted: church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes which do not contain usable space, public
monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, cooling towers, and elevator penthouses. Such uses may
§ 550-82 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-83
1:1232
§ 550-84. Substandard lot regulations. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-5]
§ 550-85. Nonconforming structure and building regulations.
[Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 14-3]
exceed said maximum by more than 10 feet with the approval of a
conditional use permit.
C. Any building or structure not otherwise accounted for by Subsection B
above may exceed said maximum height regulations with the granting
of a conditional use permit which specifically states the maximum
permitted height of the proposed building or structure.
A. The following section shall apply to all lots in the City except in the
following circumstances:
(1) The lot did not legally exist as of February 1, 2014.
(2) The lot is subject to legal proceedings.
(3) The lot is subject to a court order to the contrary of this section.
B. Blanket conforming status.
(1) Blanket conforming status for any and all requirements of this
chapter is hereby automatically granted to all nonconforming or
substandard lots in their configuration existing or as finally
approved as of the effective date of this chapter. This subsection
ensures that lots approved and created prior to the adoption of this
chapter do not encounter difficulty because the lots would
otherwise be considered nonconforming or substandard.
(2) After the effective date of this chapter, no lot shall be created which
does not meet the density, intensity and bulk requirements of the
zoning district.
C. A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this chapter in any
zoning district, which does not meet the minimum lot area, width and
frontage requirements for the zoning district, may be utilized for new or
modified development, provided that such development complies with
all of the density, intensity and bulk regulations for that zoning district.
D. Abutting vacant substandard lots under the same ownership must be
combined prior to development.
E. Except for outlots that received variances prior to the effective date of
this chapter, this section shall not apply to outlots without access to a
public right-of-way that existed prior to the effective date of this
chapter since they are not intended for development.
A. The following section shall apply to all structures in the City except in
the following circumstances:
§ 550-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-85
1:1233
(1) The structure did not legally exist at the time of adoption.
(2) The structure is subject to legal proceedings.
(3) The structure is subject to a court order to the contrary of this
section.
(4) Federal, state and City floodplain, wetland and shoreland-wetland
regulations shall control in case of a conflict.
B. Blanket conforming status. Blanket conforming status for any and all
requirements of this chapter is hereby automatically granted to any
structure lawfully existing upon February 1, 2014. After said date,
structures may not be enlarged, expanded or extended without bringing
the enlargement, expansion or extension into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or unless a variance is granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals under § 550-147.
(1) This subsection is intended to eliminate the continued classification
and/or the creation of structures as nonconforming subject to the
requirements of this chapter. This provision addresses two different
situations:
(a) Any structure erected prior to the adoption of zoning that does
not meet some or all of the bulk or intensity requirements of
this chapter.
(b) In some instances, this chapter establishes new bulk or
intensity requirements that existing legal structures under the
previous zoning ordinance do not meet.
(2) This section, therefore, ensures that owners of such structures
legally established prior to February 1, 2014, do not encounter
difficulty because the structures would otherwise be considered
nonconforming.
C. The following shall apply to all structures that do not meet bulk and
other requirements of this chapter:
(1) Ordinary maintenance. Ordinary maintenance repairs, including
repairs reasonably necessary to prevent the deterioration of a
structure, and remodeling of a structure are permitted, as well as
necessary nonstructural repairs and alterations which do not
extend, enlarge or intensify the structure. Ordinary maintenance
repairs and remodeling include internal and external painting,
decorating, paneling, the addition of acoustical ceilings, the
installation of heating, electricity, plumbing (including fixtures) or
insulation, and the replacement of doors, windows and other
nonstructural components.
(2) Structural repairs, structural alterations and minor changes. Any
and all structural repairs, structural alterations and minor changes
may be made so long as no such changes expand upon an existing
§ 550-85 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-85
1:1234
bulk, density or intensity violation. A conforming garage may be
added or expanded.
(3) Additions. Additions, expansions and enlargements may be added;
however, such additions must meet the requirements of this
chapter unless a variance is granted under § 550-147.
(4) Destruction and reconstruction. A damaged, destroyed or removed
structure may be restored to the size, location, design and use that
it had immediately before the damage, destruction or removal
occurred without any limits on the costs of the repair,
reconstruction or improvement if either Subsection C(4)(a) or (b)
below applies. The burden of proof in regard to the location,
dimensions, configuration and exterior building materials of the
damaged or removed structure shall be upon the property owner to
demonstrate prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(a) The structure was damaged or destroyed by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, infestation or other act
identified by § 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., on or after March 2, 2006.
(b) The structure was damaged, destroyed, removed or partially
removed by other means on or after the effective date of this
chapter.
(5) Intentional removal and replacement.
(a) If 50% or more of the total floor area of a structure is
intentionally removed by the property owner, the replacement
structure must meet the requirements of this chapter unless a
variance is granted under § 550-147.
(b) If less than 50% of the total floor area of a structure is
intentionally removed by the property owner, it may be
restored to the previous footprint, floor area and height.
(c) Existing garages, decks and porches may be replaced in their
entirety to the previous footprint, floor area and height.
(6) Unsafe structures. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the
Building Inspector or any other City official from initiating remedial
or enforcement actions when any structure is declared unsafe or
presents a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
D. Timing of building permit. Any structure for which a building permit
has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, or
an amendment to it, which will become nonconforming under the
provisions of this chapter or that amendment thereto, may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided
construction is started within 365 calendar days after issuance of the
permit for single- and two-family construction and within 365 calendar
days after issuance of a permit for all other development, and
§ 550-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-85
1:1235
construction is completed within 730 calendar days (two years) after
the start of construction. If all such conditions are met, the structure
shall thereafter be a legal conforming structure.
Rationale: The "blanket conforming status" provision of Subsection
B above is intended to eliminate the continued classification and/or
creation of certain structures as nonconforming within the jurisdiction
of this chapter. This provision addresses two different situations. First:
prior to the provision of full-time inspection services, a number of
structures were approved in the City of Watertown that did not meet
setback requirements. Second: this chapter requires greater side yard
setback requirements for certain lot sizes than did previous
regulations for similar sized lots. The adoption of the provisions of
Subsection B above ensures that structures approved prior to the
adoption of this chapter do not encounter difficulty in transferring
ownership because they would otherwise be considered
nonconforming structures.
§ 550-85 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-85
1:1236
ARTICLE IX
Natural Resource Protection Regulations
§ 550-86. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth the requirements for the mandatory
protection of natural resources and permanently protected green space
areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter (see § 500-9). The provisions
of this article interact closely with the provisions of § 550-58 (Natural
resource disruption and required mitigation standards), § 550-73 (Required
natural resources site evaluation), and §§ 550-74 and 550-75 which provide
residential and nonresidential development standards. Section 550-76
provides a complete overview of the interrelationship between the abovelisted
sections. Appendix B provides a table of permitted land uses in
permanently protected green space areas.226 In part, the provisions of this
article are designed to ensure the implementation of the City of Watertown
Comprehensive Plan and §§ 62.231 and 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 550-87. How to use this article.
This article contains the standards that govern the protection, disturbance
and mitigation of disruption of all natural resources and other permanently
protected green space areas. The provisions of this article are intended to
supplement those of the City of Watertown, Dodge and/or Jefferson County,
the State of Wisconsin, and the Federal Government of the United States
that pertain to natural resource protection. Prior to using the provisions
of this article to determine the permitted disruption of such areas, the
requirements provided below should be reviewed. This article recognizes
the important and diverse benefits that natural resource features provide in
terms of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
Each of the following sections is oriented to each natural resource type and
is designed to accomplish several objectives:
A. First, a definition of the natural resource is provided.
B. Second, the specific purposes of the protective regulations governing
each natural resource type are provided.
C. Third, the required method of identifying and determining the
boundaries of the natural resource area is given.
D. Fourth, mandatory protection requirements are identified.
NOTE: Protection requirements for specific land uses and natural
resource types designed to minimize disruption of natural resource
functions are presented in § 550-58.
226. Editor's Note: Appendix B is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-88
1:1237
§ 550-88. Floodway, Flood-Fringe, and Floodplain Overlay Zoning
Districts.
See Chapter 532, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning.
§ 550-89. Shoreland-Wetland Overlay Zoning District.
See Chapter 532, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning.
§ 550-90. Drainageway Overlay Zoning District.
A. Definition. Drainageways are nonnavigable, aboveground
watercourses, detention basins and/or their environs which are
identified by the presence of one or more of the following:
(1) All areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of a
"perennial stream," as shown on a detailed on-site survey prepared
by the applicant [see § 550-145C(8)].
(a) Where an existing development pattern exists, the
drainageway for a proposed principal structure may be
reduced to the average drainageway of the principal structure
on each adjacent lot, but the drainageway may not be reduced
to less than 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark of any
"perennial stream." [Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-24]
(2) All areas within 50 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of an
"intermittent stream" or "open channel drainageway," as shown on
a detailed on-site survey prepared by the applicant [see
§ 550-145C(8)].
(a) Where an existing development pattern exists, the
drainageway for a proposed principal structure may be
reduced to the average drainageway of the principal structure
on each adjacent lot, but the drainageway may not be reduced
to less than 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark of an
"intermittent stream" or "open channel drainageway." [Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-24]
B. Purpose of drainageway protection requirements. Drainageways serve
in the transporting of surface runoff to downstream areas. As such,
drainageways serve to carry surface waters, supplement floodplain,
wetland and lakeshore water storage functions in heavy storm or melt
events, filter waterborne pollutants and sediments, promote infiltration
and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat at the land/
water margin. Drainageway protection requirements preserve each of
these functions as well as greatly reducing the potential for soil erosion
along drainageways by protecting vegetative ground cover in areas
which are susceptible to variable runoff flows and moderate-to-rapid
water movement.
§ 550-88 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-90
1:1238
§ 550-91. Woodland Overlay Zoning District.
C. Determination of drainageway boundaries. General drainageway
boundaries are depicted on the Official Zoning Map. Upon the proposal
of development activity on any property which contains a drainageway
depicted on the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall prepare a
detailed site analysis per the requirements of § 550-145C(8). This
analysis shall depict the location of all drainageway areas on the subject
property as related to the provisions of Subsection A above.
D. Mandatory drainageway protection requirements. Drainageways shall
remain in an undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in
Appendix B per the requirements in § 550-58. Vegetation clearing to
maintain drainageway functions is permitted with the written approval
of the Director of Public Works. All areas designated as drainageways
shall be located within a public easement or dedication for maintenance
purposes to preserve proper drainage flow.
A. Definition. Woodlands are areas of trees whose combined canopies
cover a minimum of 80% of an area of one acre or more, as shown on a
detailed on-site survey prepared by the applicant [see § 550-145C(8)].
B. Purpose of woodland protection requirements. Woodlands provide a
wide variety of environmental functions. These include atmospheric
benefits such as removing airborne pollutants, carbon dioxide uptake,
oxygen production, and evapotranspiration returns. Water quality
benefits include substantial nutrient uptake rates (particularly for
nitrogen and phosphorus) and surface runoff reduction in terms of both
volumes and velocities. Woodlands provide unique wildlife habitats and
food sources. Woodlands are excellent soil stabilizers, greatly reducing
runoff-related soil erosion. Woodlands also serve to reduce wind
velocities which further reduces soil erosion. Finally, under proper
management techniques, woodlands serve as regenerative fuel sources.
C. Determination of woodland boundaries. General woodland boundaries
are depicted on the Official Zoning Map. Upon the proposal of
development activity on any property which contains a woodland
depicted on the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall prepare a
detailed site analysis per the requirements § 550-145C(8). This analysis
shall depict the location of all woodland areas on the subject property
as related to the provisions of Subsection A above.
D. Mandatory woodland protection requirements. Woodlands shall remain
in an undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in Appendix
B per the requirements of § 550-58 and areas subject to the following
mitigation requirements:
(1) Selective cutting operations are permitted by right in all woodland
areas (per the requirements of § 550-50F).
§ 550-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-91
1:1239
§ 550-92. Steep Slope Overlay Zoning District.
(2) Clear-cutting is permitted as a conditional use in all woodland
areas (per the requirements of § 550-50G).
A. Definition. Steep slopes are areas which contain a gradient of 12% or
greater (equivalent to a ten-foot elevation change in a distance of 83
feet or less), as shown on a detailed on-site survey prepared by the
applicant [see § 550-145C(8)].
B. Purpose of steep slope protection requirements. Steep slopes are
particularly susceptible to damage resulting from site disruption,
primarily related to soil erosion. Such damage is likely to spread to
areas which were not originally disturbed. Such erosion reduces the
productivity of the soil, results in exacerbated erosion downhill, and
results in increased sedimentation in drainageways, wetlands, streams,
ponds and lakes. Beyond adversely affecting the environmental
functions of these resources areas, such sedimentation also increases
flood hazards by reducing the floodwater storage capacity of
hydrological system components, thus elevating the flood level of the
drainage system in affected areas. Beyond these threats to the public
safety, disruption of steep slopes also increases the likelihood of
slippage and slumping, unstable soil movements which may threaten
adjacent properties, buildings and public facilities such as roads and
utilities.
C. Determination of steep slope boundaries. General steep slope
boundaries are depicted on the Official Zoning Map. Upon the proposal
of development activity on any property which contains a steep slope
depicted on the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall prepare a
detailed site analysis per the requirements of § 550-145C(8). This
analysis shall depict the location of all steep slope areas on the subject
property as related to the provisions of Subsection A above.
D. Mandatory steep slope protection requirements. Steep slopes shall
remain in an undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in
Appendix B227 per the requirements of § 550-58.
227. Editor's Note: Appendix B is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-91 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-92
1:1240
ARTICLE X
Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations
§ 550-93. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate the minimum requirements for
the landscaping of foundations, developed lots, street frontages, paved
areas, permanently protected green space areas, reforestation areas, and
bufferyards.
§ 550-94. How to use this article.
§ 550-95. Landscaping points, landscaping measurements and
sample landscaping layouts.
A. This article contains the standards that govern the amount, size, type,
installation and maintenance of required landscaping. This article
recognizes the important and diverse benefits which landscaping
provides in terms of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of
the community and implementing the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Each section of this article is oriented to a specific category of required
landscaping. The landscaping requirements described in this article are
cumulative in nature and are required for all development, except
single-family residential and agricultural uses, in the following
locations: around building foundations, in developed lots, along street
frontages, in or around paved areas, in permanently protected green
space areas, in reforestation areas, and in bufferyards. Descriptions of
these areas and their associated landscape requirements are included
in landscaping requirements for regular development (building
foundation, developed lots, street frontages, paved areas) (§ 550-96);
landscaping requirements for permanently protected green space areas
(§ 550-97); landscaping requirements for reforestation (§ 550-98); and
landscaping requirements for bufferyards (§ 550-99).
C. In each instance, a "landscaping point" concept is used to provide a
maximum amount of flexibility in terms of the selection of plant
materials. Section 550-95 presents sample landscape point combination
alternatives used by this chapter. At the end of this chapter (and in
more detail in Appendix F228), § 550-100 provides a listing of plant
species fitting into the climax tree, tall deciduous tree, medium
deciduous tree, low deciduous tree, tall evergreen tree, medium
evergreen tree, low evergreen tree, tall deciduous shrub, medium
deciduous shrub, low deciduous shrub, medium evergreen shrub, low
evergreen shrub, and noncontributory plants used by this chapter.
Section 550-101 provides requirements for the installation and
maintenance of required landscaping, and § 550-102 describes the
procedure for calculating landscaping requirements for this section.
228. Editor's Note: Appendix F, Detailed Classification of Plant Species, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-95
1:1241
A. All landscaping requirements are stated in terms of the number of
landscaping points required. The required number of landscaping
points is dependent upon the type of land use, the zoning district and
the size of the development. A different number of points is awarded for
each plant, depending upon its typical growth rate, its mature height,
and whether it is a deciduous or evergreen species. A minimum
installation size is required for each of these plant categories. These
requirements are as follows:
Table 550-95: Landscaping Points and Minimum Installation
Sizes
Plant Category
Landscaping
Points Per Plant
Minimum Permitted
Installation Size
Climax Tree 75 2-inch caliper
Tall Deciduous Tree 30 1 1/2-inch caliper
Medium Deciduous
Tree
15 6-foot tall
Low Deciduous Tree 10 4-foot tall
Tall Evergreen Tree 40 5-foot tall
Medium Evergreen
Tree
20 4-foot tall
Low Evergreen Tree 12 3-foot tall
Tall Deciduous Shrub 5 36-inch tall
Medium Deciduous
Shrub
3 24-inch tall
Low Deciduous Shrub 1 18-inch tall
Medium Evergreen
Shrub
5 18-inch tall/wide
Low Evergreen Shrub 3 12-inch tall/wide
Noncontributory Plants 0 N/A
Source: A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin, E. R.
Hasselkus, UW-Extension Publication: A2865
B. Depiction of sample landscaping schemes. Appendix E229 depicts
sample landscaping schemes that may be used for building foundations,
developed lots, street frontages, paved areas, reforestation, and
bufferyards. In general, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative A
are best for building foundations; landscaping schemes similar to
Alternative B are best for developed lots; landscaping schemes similar
to Alternative C are best for street frontages; landscaping schemes
similar to Alternative D are best for paved areas (including parking lots,
walkways and plazas); landscaping schemes similar to Alternative E are
229. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-95 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-95
1:1242
best for reforestation; and landscaping schemes similar to Alternative
F are best for bufferyards. A detailed listing of which plant species fit
each plant type is provided in § 550-100.
C. Measurement for landscaping requirements.
(1) A minimum amount of landscaping points, based upon the zoning
district, is required for:
(a) The linear feet of building foundations;
(b) The gross floor area of buildings on developed lots;
(c) The linear feet of street frontage; and
(d) The total combined area of paved areas.
(2) The following diagram illustrates the measurement techniques
used to determine these requirements:
Landscape Measurements
Landscaping Calculation Equations for This Example:
Paved Area = (P1 x P2) + (P3 x P4) + (P5 x P6) + (P7 x P8) + (P9
x P10)
Street Frontage = S1 + S2
Building Perimeter = F1 + F2 + F3 + F4 + F5 + F6 + F7 + F8
§ 550-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-95
1:1243
§ 550-96. Landscaping requirements for regular development.
Landscaping is not required for single-family (§ 550-49) or agricultural
(§ 550-50) land uses.
Building Floor Area = (B1 x B2) + (B3 x B4) + (B5 x B6)
A. Building foundations. This subsection requires that certain buildings, or
building additions, constructed after the effective date of this chapter,
be accented by a minimum amount of landscaping placed near the
building foundation.
(1) Landscaping required by this subsection shall be placed so that at
maturity the plant's dripline is located within 10 feet of the building
foundation. Such landscaping shall not be located in those areas
required for landscaping as street frontages, paved areas,
protected green space areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards.
See Appendix E, Alternative A, for a suggested scheme.230
(2) For each 100 feet of building foundation perimeter, the following
number of landscaping points (per § 550-95) shall be provided on a
prorated basis and installed and permanently maintained per the
requirements of § 550-101.
(3) Climax trees and tall trees shall not be used to meet this
requirement. The intent of this subsection is to require a visual
break in the mass of buildings and to require a visual screen of a
minimum of six feet in height for all exterior perimeter
appurtenances (such as HVAC/utility boxes, standpipes,
stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes).
(4) Where the officially approved site plan depicts a future building
extension, the foundation landscaping requirement shall be
calculated by measuring the length of the total perimeter. However,
foundation plantings need only be installed based on the landscape
points calculated from the portions of the building perimeter that
will not be affected by building extension. If this results in point
requirements which are not met through the initial planting, then
said requirement shall be met within five years of building permit
issuance or as extended in writing by the Plan Commission.
B. Street frontages. This subsection requires that street frontages on
certain lots developed after the effective date of this chapter contain a
minimum amount of landscaping in those areas which abut the right-ofway
of a public street.
(1) All landscaping used to meet this requirement shall be located
within 10 feet of the public right-of-way. In no instance shall such
landscaping be located within a public right-of-way. See Appendix
230. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-95 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-96
1:1244
E, Alternative C, for a suggested landscaping scheme.231
Landscaping shall not impede vehicle or pedestrian visibility.
(2) For every 100 linear feet of street frontage where a developed lot
abuts a public street right-of-way, the following number of
landscaping points (as described in § 550-95) shall be provided on a
prorated basis and installed and maintained per the requirements
of § 550-101.
(3) Shrubs shall not be used to meet this requirement. A minimum of
50% of all points shall be devoted to climax and/or tall trees, and a
minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to medium trees.
C. Paved areas. This subsection requires that paved areas on certain lots
developed after the effective date of this chapter contain a minimum
amount of landscaping within, or within 10 feet of, the paved area. The
intent is to require a continuous visual screen of parking areas from
public rights-of-way at a minimum height of 40 inches.
(1) A minimum of 360 square feet of landscaped area, which shall be
located within 10 feet of the paved area, is required for the
placement of every 100 landscaping points. Said area does not have
to be provided in one contiguous area. Sample configurations are
depicted in Appendix E, Alternative D.232 Plants used to fulfill this
requirement shall visually screen parking, loading and circulation
areas from view from public streets.
(2) For every 20 off-street parking stalls or 10,000 square feet of
pavement (whichever yields the greater landscaping requirement)
located in a development, the following number of landscaping
points (as described in § 550-95) shall be provided on a prorated
basis and installed and maintained per the requirements of
§ 550-101. A minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to
climax and/or tall trees, and a minimum of 40% of all points shall be
devoted to shrubs.
(3) Parking lot design shall employ interior landscaped islands with a
minimum of 400 square feet at all parking aisle ends, and in
addition shall provide a minimum of one landscaped island of a
minimum of 400 square feet in each parking aisle for every 20 cars
in that aisle. Aisle-end islands shall count toward meeting this
requirement. Landscaped medians shall be used to break large
parking areas into distinct pods, with a maximum of 100 spaces in
any one pod.
231. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
232. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-96
1:1245
§ 550-97. Landscaping requirements for other permanently
protected green spaces.
§ 550-98. Landscaping requirements for required reforestation.
§ 550-99. Landscaping requirements for bufferyards.
D. Developed lots. This subsection requires that certain lots developed
after the effective date of this chapter contain a minimum amount of
landscaping.
(1) Landscaping required by this subsection is most effective if located
away from those areas required for landscaping as building
foundations, street frontages, paved areas, protected green space
areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards. See Appendix E,
Alternative B, for a suggest landscaping scheme.233
(2) The following number of landscaping points (as described in
§ 550-95) shall be provided on a prorated basis for every 1,000
square feet of gross floor area and installed and maintained per the
requirements of § 550-101.
(3) The intent of this subsection is to provide yard shade and to require
a visual screen of a minimum of six feet in height for all detached
exterior appurtenances (such as HVAC, utility boxes, standpipes,
stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes.)
A. This section requires that each acre of other permanently protected
green space after the effective date of this chapter be planted with a
minimum amount of landscaping.
B. For every one acre of other permanently protected green space in a
development, 200 landscaping points (as described in § 550-95) shall be
provided. In addition, adequate ground cover shall be provided to
stabilize the soil.
A. This section requires that each area required to be reforested be
reforested and maintained in a manner appropriate to site conditions.
B. A detailed reforestation plan shall be submitted by the property owner
and approved by the City prior to clear-cutting. This plan shall be
reviewed by a reforestation consultant chosen by the City, with funding
for consulting services provided by the petitioner to the City.
Rationale: The provisions of this section are designed to ensure that
reforestation efforts required as part of woodland disruption
mitigation standards result in the thorough and reasonably rapid
replacement of the important and varied environmental functions
which woodlands provide.
233. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-96 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-99
1:1246
A. Purpose. This section provides the landscaping and width requirements
for bufferyards on lots developed after the effective date of this chapter.
A bufferyard is a combination of distance and a visual buffer or barrier.
It includes an area together with the combination of plantings, berms
and fencing that are required to eliminate or reduce existing or
potential nuisances. These nuisances can often occur between adjacent
zoning districts. Such nuisances are dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights,
signs and incompatible land uses, buildings or parking areas.
Rationale: One of zoning's most important functions is the separation
of land uses into districts which have similar character and contain
compatible uses. The location of districts is supposed to provide
protection, but in the City of Watertown this is not the case since
zoning districts permitting uses as diverse as single-family residential
and industrial uses were located next to one another long before the
effective date of this chapter. Bufferyards will operate to minimize the
negative impact of any future use on neighboring uses.
B. Required locations for bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be located along
(and within) the outer perimeter of a lot wherever two different zoning
districts abut one another. Bufferyards shall not be required in front
yards.
C. Determination of required bufferyard. The determination of bufferyard
requirements is a two-staged process. First, the required level of
bufferyard opacity is determined using the Required Bufferyard Opacity
Values Table in Appendix E.234 Opacity is a quantitatively derived
measure which indicates the degree to which a particular bufferyard
screens the adjoining property. The required level of opacity indicated
by the Required Bufferyard Opacity Values Table is directly related to
the degree to which the potential character of development differs
between different zoning districts. The provisions of this section
indicate the minimum requirements for bufferyards located along
zoning district boundaries.
(1) Identification of required level of opacity. The Required Bufferyard
Opacity Values Table shall be used to determine the minimum level
of opacity for the required bufferyard. The required level of opacity
is determined by the value given in the cell of the table at which the
column heading along the top row of the table (representing the
subject property's zoning district) intersects with the row heading
along the left-hand side of the table (representing the adjacent
property's zoning district). The value listed is the required level of
opacity for the bufferyard on the subject property.
(2) Identification of detailed bufferyard requirements.
234. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-99
1:1247
§ 550-100. Classification of plant species.
For the purpose of this chapter, plant materials are classified into 13
groupings: climax tree, tall deciduous tree, medium deciduous tree, low
deciduous tree, tall evergreen tree, medium evergreen tree, low evergreen
tree, tall deciduous shrub, medium deciduous shrub, low deciduous shrub,
medium evergreen shrub, low evergreen shrub, and noncontributory plants.
Species suitable for landscaping use and compatible with Dodge and/or
Jefferson County climate and soil factors are listed below. The Zoning
Administrator shall review proposals for, and the applicability of, species
not contained in this list and is authorized to approve appropriate similar
species. See Appendix F for a very detailed listing of plant species and
characteristics.237
(a) If a proposed use adjoins a parcel for which a bufferyard is
required by the presence of a zoning district boundary, that use
shall provide a bufferyard with the level of the opacity
indicated in the Required Bufferyard Opacity Values Table.
(b) For each level of opacity listed in the Required Bufferyard
Opacity Values Table, a wide variety of width, landscaping
point, berm, and structure combinations are possible. These
are listed in the Detailed Bufferyard Requirements Table in
Appendix E.235 The requirements listed in the Detailed
Bufferyard Requirements Table pertain to the number of
landscaping points, the minimum bufferyard width, and the
type of berm or fencing required within every 100 feet of
required bufferyard. A variety of landscaping point options are
available and may be mixed within distinct portions of the
same bufferyard. Section 550-95 describes the various
available landscaping point alternatives. Section 550-100
provides a listing of tree and shrub species which correspond
to the landscaping point descriptions.
D. Tables for required bufferyards. See Appendix E for the Required
Bufferyard Opacity Values Table and the Detailed Bufferyard
Requirements Table.236
A. Climax trees (75 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer saccharum Sugar maple
Ginkgo biloba Ginko
Quercus sp. Oak: Red, White, Pin
235. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
236. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Landscaping and Bufferyard Regulations, is attached to this
chapter.
237. Editor's Note: Appendix F, Detailed Classification of Plant Species, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 550-99 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-100
1:1248
B. Tall deciduous trees (30 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer sp. Maple: Red, Norway
Fraxinus sp. Ash: White, Green
Gleditsia triancanthos Honeylocust
Populus grandidentata Bigtooth aspen
Tilia sp Linden: Basswood, Littleleaf,
Redmond
C. Medium deciduous trees (15 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Betula sp. Birch: River, Paper
Prunus sp. Cherry: Choke, Pin
D. Low deciduous trees (10 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Amelanchier sp. Serviceberry
Crataegus sp. Hawthorn: Cockspur, Downy,
Washington
Malus sp. Crabapple sp.
E. Tall evergreen trees (40 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Abies concolor White fir
Pinus sp. Pine: Red, White, Scots
Tsuga Canadensis Canada hemlock
F. Medium evergreen trees (20 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Thuja occidentalis American arborvitae
G. Low evergreen trees (12 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Juniperus sp. Juniper: Mountbatten, Redcedar
Thuja sp. Arborvitae: Pyramidal, Techny
H. Tall deciduous shrubs (5 landscaping points).
§ 550-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-100
1:1249
§ 550-101. Requirements for installation, maintenance and use of
landscaped and bufferyard areas.
Botanical Name Common Name
Comus sp. Dogwood: Grey, Pagoda
Syringa sp. Lilac: Chinese, Hyacinth
Viburnum sp. Viburnum: Arrowwood,
Wayfaringtree, Nannyberry
I. Medium deciduous shrubs (3 landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Corylus americana American filbert, hazelnut
Cotoneaster sp. Cotoneaster
Forsynthia sp. Forsythia: Border, Early, Weeping
Rosa sp. Rose: Virgina, Rugosa
J. Low deciduous shrubs (one landscaping point).
Botanical Name Common Name
Berberis thunbergii Japanese barberry
Spiraea sp. Spirea: Froebel, Snowmound
K. Tall to medium evergreen shrubs (five landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Juniperus chinensis Juniper: Pfitzer
Taxus sp. Yew: Japanese
L. Low evergreen shrubs (three landscaping points).
Botanical Name Common Name
Juniperus sp. Juniper: Sargent, Creeping,
Andorra
A. Installation.
(1) Any and all landscaping and bufferyard material required by the
provisions of this chapter shall be installed on the subject property
in accordance with the approved site plan (see § 550-145) within
730 days of the issuance of an occupancy permit for any building on
the subject property.
(2) Surety.
(a) If the subject property is to be occupied prior to the installation
of all required landscaping and bufferyard material, the
property owner shall sign an agreement stating the intent to
§ 550-100 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-101
1:1250
install the landscaping within the seven-hundred-thirty-day
period. This agreement shall also contain a statement
indicating that there are fines associated with not complying
with this agreement.
(b) If a part of a plat of subdivision is approved per the
requirements of this chapter, said amount may be split into
amounts which are applicable to phases of the plat approved
per the requirements of Chapter 545, Subdivision of Land.
(c) Governmental units to which these bond and guarantee
provisions apply may, in lieu of said contract or instrument of
guarantee, file a resolution or letter from officers authorized to
act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of
this article.
(3) Existing plant material which meets the requirements of § 550-95
and which will be preserved on the subject property following the
completion of development may be counted as contributing to the
landscaping requirements.
(4) All landscaping and bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn or
native ground cover unless such vegetation is already fully
established.
(5) The exact placement of required plants and structures shall be
depicted on the required detailed landscaping plan and shall be the
decision of each property owner within the requirements of this
section, except that the following requirements shall be met:
(a) Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in clusters in order to
maximize their chance for survival.
(b) Where a combination of plant materials and/or berming and/or
fencing is used in a bufferyard, the fence and/or berm shall be
located toward the interior of the subject property, and the
plant material shall be located toward the exterior of the
subject property.
(c) A property owner may establish through a written agreement,
recorded with the Register of Deeds office, that an adjacent
property owner shall agree to provide a partial or full portion
of the required bufferyard on an immediately adjacent portion
of his land, thereby exempting the developer from providing all
or a portion of the bufferyard on his property.
(d) In no manner shall landscaping or bufferyard materials be
selected and/or located in a manner that results in the creation
of a safety or visibility hazard.
(e) The restrictions on types of plants listed in § 550-96 shall apply.
§ 550-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-101
1:1251
§ 550-102. Calculating landscaping and bufferyard requirements.
In calculating the number of required landscaping points under the
provisions of this article, all areas and distances on which required
calculations are based shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number
of square feet or linear feet. Any partial plant derived from the required
calculations of this article (for example 23.3 canopy trees) shall be rounded
up to the nearest whole plant (24 canopy trees).
§ 550-103. Depiction on required site plan.
Any and all proposed landscaping on the subject property required to meet
the standards of this chapter shall be clearly depicted and labeled as to its
location and makeup on the site plan required for the development of the
subject property.
B. Maintenance. The continued and continual maintenance of all required
landscaping and bufferyard materials shall be a requirement of this
chapter and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on
which said materials are required. This requirement shall run with the
property and is binding upon all future property owners. Development
of any and all property following the effective date of this chapter shall
constitute an agreement by the property owner to comply with the
provisions of this section. Upon failure to comply with these provisions,
the City may enter upon the property for the purpose of evaluating and
maintaining all required landscaping and bufferyard materials and may
specially assess the costs thereof against the property. Failure to
comply with this requirement shall be considered a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to any and all applicable enforcement
procedures and penalties.
C. Use of required bufferyard and landscaped areas. Any and all required
bufferyards or landscaped areas may be used for passive recreation
activities. Said areas may contain pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails,
provided that no required material is eliminated; the total width of the
required bufferyard, or the total area of required landscaping, is
maintained; and all other regulations of this chapter are met. In no
event, however, shall swimming pools, tennis courts, sports fields, golf
courses, or other such active recreation uses be permitted in such
areas. Furthermore, in no instance shall any parking be permitted in
such areas, nor shall any outdoor display or storage of materials be
permitted in such areas. Paving in such areas shall be limited to that
required for necessary access to, through or across the subject
property.
D. Utility easements. Landscaping materials, fences and berms which are
located within a duly recorded utility easement and/or a pedestrian
easement shall not count toward meeting a landscaping requirement.
However, the width of such areas may be counted as part of a
landscaping requirement.
§ 550-101 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-103
1:1252
ARTICLE XI
Performance Standards
§ 550-104. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to indicate the requirements for access,
visibility, off-street parking, off-street loading, exterior storage, exterior
lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odors, electromagnetic radiation,
glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic and noxious materials, waste
materials, drainage, exterior construction materials, and hazardous
materials for all development occurring within the jurisdiction of this
chapter (see § 550-9).
§ 550-105. Access standards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of access to public rights-of-way in accordance with the
utilization of various sites.
B. City approval required. Each access point onto a public street or rightof-
way shall be included in a City-approved site plan or plat.
C. Number of access points.
(1) Each lot shall have not more than two access points on any street
frontage adjacent to any lot. Said access shall require approval by
the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Public Works.
(2) In no instance shall any lot be permitted more than one access
point on any one street if its frontage on said street is less than 100
linear feet (as measured along the right-of-way line).
(3) On arterial streets and in certain areas experiencing, or expected
to experience, congestion and/or safety problems, access to a lot
may be required to be located via an access point located on an
adjacent property or another street frontage.
(4) For residential uses, two access points serving the same street
frontage may be approved by the Director of Public Works.
D. Residential uses. Residential uses shall not have access points onto a
nonresidential collector or arterial street unless such street has the
only available frontage.
E. Nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses shall not have access points
onto a residential street unless such street has the only available
frontage.
F. Access near street intersections. At its intersection with the street
right-of-way line on an arterial or nonresidential collector street, no
access point shall be located closer than 100 feet to the intersection of
§ 550-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-105
1:1253
any two street rights-of-way unless such street is the only available
frontage on the subject property. In all cases, access points shall be
located as far from an intersection as the lot size permits.
G. Distance between access drives. The minimum distance between access
drives serving the same property shall be 25 feet (edge to edge), as
measured at the property line. A distance in excess of said 25 feet may
be required if, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator and the
Director of Public Works, present or projected traffic factors warrant a
greater distance.
H. Angle of intersection with public right-of-way. All access drives shall
intersect with any public right-of-way at an angle of not less than 75°
and shall intersect at an angle of 90° wherever possible.
I. Distance from property line. For all development created after the
adoption of this chapter, the distance from an access drive to the
property line of an adjacent property shall not be less than three feet, as
measured along the right-of-way line.
J. Width of driveways. All access drives shall have a minimum width of 10
feet for one- and two-family dwellings and 18 feet for all other land
uses. All curb openings for access drives shall have a maximum width of
25 feet for a one- or two-car garage or 30 feet for a three-car garage for
all residential uses and 35 feet for all nonresidential uses, as measured
at the right-of-way line. Access drives may be flared between the rightof-
way line and the roadway up to a maximum of five additional feet.
[Amended 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-8]
(1) Conditional use permit required.
(a) All residential curb openings for access drives that exceed the
maximum width, as measured at the right-of-way line, will
require the granting of a conditional use permit which
specifically states the maximum permitted width of the
proposed driveway at the right-of-way line.
(b) All nonresidential curb openings for access drives that exceed
the maximum width, as measured at the right-of-way line, will
require the granting of a conditional use permit which
specifically states the maximum permitted width of the
proposed driveway at the right-of-way line.
K. Traffic control. The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized
and controlled in a manner which avoids congestion on public streets
and other safety hazards. Traffic into and out of all off-street parking,
loading and traffic circulation areas serving six or more parking spaces
shall be forward moving, with no backing into streets or pedestrian
ways. Traffic control devices shall be required as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
§ 550-105 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-105
1:1254
§ 550-106. Visibility standards.
L. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all proposed access drives on
the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and
configuration on the site plan required for the development of the
subject property. (Refer to § 550-145.)
M. Paving of access. All access approach areas located within a street
right-of-way shall be paved to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works with a hard, all-weather surface and shall be maintained so as to
prevent the transport of gravel, dirt or other eroded material from the
subject property into the right-of-way.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of vehicular visibility.
B. Requirement. In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to
motorists, there shall be a triangular area of clear vision formed by the
two intersecting streets and a chord connecting said center lines, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. Generally, the following
standards shall apply:
Table 550-106: Vision Clearance Triangle Standards
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Distance from Right-of-Way
Intersection
(feet)
Less than 50 50
50 50
51 to 60 40
61 to 66 34
67 to 82.5 15
Greater than 82.5 15
(1) No object or planting which obstructs sight lines over 2 1/2 feet in
height above the surface of the roadbed shall be allowed in a vision
clearance triangle, except the following:
(a) Telephone, telegraph and power transmission poles.
(b) Lines and portable equipment.
(c) Open-type fence (e.g., chain link, woven wire or wrought iron
fencing) not exceeding a height of four feet above the roadbeds
and not encroaching closer than three feet to any public rightof-
way.
§ 550-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-106
1:1255
§ 550-107. Off-street parking and traffic circulation standards.
(d) The growing of flowers and shrubbery, provided that they shall
not exceed 2 1/2 feet in height above the roadbeds.
(e) Deciduous trees, provided that said trees shall not be planted
closer than 10 feet to the point of intersection of the right-ofway
lines.
(2) No overhanging tree branches or foliage which obstructs sight
lines, regardless of whether said trees are planted within the traffic
visibility triangle, shall be allowed within the space between 2 1/2
feet and 10 feet above the surface of the roadbed in a vision
clearance triangle.
(3) Enforcement of this subsection shall be upon written complaint to
the Zoning Administrator.
C. Depiction on required site plan. Except in the downtown where no
requirement is imposed, any and all visibility triangles located on the
subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration
on the site plan required for the development of the subject property.
(Refer to § 550-145.)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of off-street parking and circulation in accordance with
the utilization of various sites. Please refer to § 550-120, Drainage
standards.
B. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all parking and traffic
circulation areas proposed to be located on the subject property shall
be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan
required for the development of the subject property. (Refer to
§ 550-145.) Each and every on-site parking space designed to serve as
required parking shall not be located farther than 300 feet, except as
permitted by a conditional use permit, of shortest walking distance
from the access to all of the various areas it is designated to serve. A
garage stall, meeting the access requirements of Subsection F(4) below,
shall be considered a parking space. Parking spaces for any and all
vehicles exceeding 18 feet in length shall be clearly indicated on said
site plan.
C. Use of off-street parking areas. The use of all required off-street parking
areas shall be limited to the parking of operable vehicles not for lease,
rent or sale. Within residential districts, required parking spaces shall
only be used by operable cars and trucks.
D. Traffic circulation and traffic control. Site circulation shall be designed
to provide for the safe and efficient movement of all traffic entering,
exiting and on the site. Circulation shall be provided to meet the
§ 550-106 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-107
1:1256
individual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through
movements and, where required, shall be depicted on the required site
plan. Circulation patterns shall conform to the general rules of the
road, and all traffic control measures shall meet the requirements of
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
E. Maintenance of off-street parking and traffic circulation areas. All offstreet
parking and traffic circulation areas shall be maintained in a
dust-free condition at all times. In no instance or manner shall any offstreet
parking or traffic circulation area be used as a storage area,
except as provided for by § 550-109.
F. Off-street parking and traffic circulation design standards.
(1) Surfacing and marking. All off-street parking and traffic circulation
areas (including all residential driveways, except those within the
RH District) shall be paved with a hard, all-weather surface to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Said surfaces intended
for six or more parking stalls shall be marked in a manner which
clearly indicates required parking spaces.
(2) Curbing. All off-street parking areas designed to have head-in
parking within 6 1/2 feet of any lot line shall provide a tire bumper
or curb of adequate height, which is properly located to ensure that
no part of any vehicle will project beyond the required setbacks of
this chapter (see §§ 550-79 and 550-80).
(3) Lighting. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving
six or more cars shall be lit so as to ensure the safe and efficient use
of said areas during the hours of use. An illumination level of
between 0.4 and 1.0 footcandle is recommended for said areas, and
said illumination level shall not exceed the standards of § 550-110.
(4) Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway that is wide enough and designed to
provide a safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the
parking space without directly backing or maneuvering a vehicle
into a public right-of-way, except alleys or parking areas existing as
of the adoption date of this chapter. All off-street parking and traffic
circulation facilities shall be designed with an appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which least
interferes with traffic movements. No driveway across public
property, or requiring a curb cut, shall exceed a width of 35 feet for
commercial and industrial land uses or 25 feet for residential land
uses. [See also Table 550-107F(9).] Off-street parking spaces for
residential uses may be stacked or in front of one another for the
same building unit. Parking spaces located behind an enclosed
garage and located directly off a through aisle shall be a minimum
of 30 feet deep.
§ 550-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-107
1:1257
(5) Signage. All signage located within, or related to, required offstreet
parking or traffic circulation shall comply with the
requirements of Article XII.
(6) Handicapped parking spaces. Parking for the handicapped shall be
provided at a size, number, location and with signage as specified
by state and federal regulations.
(7) Parking space design standards. Other than parking required to
serve the handicapped, every and all provided off-street parking
spaces shall comply with the minimum requirements of Table
550-107F(9). The minimum required length of parking spaces shall
be 17 feet, plus an additional 1.5-foot vehicle overhang area at the
end of the stall. All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical
clearance of at least seven feet.
(8) Snow storage. Required off-street parking and traffic circulation
areas shall not be used for snow storage.
(9) Parking lot design standards. Horizontal widths for parking rows,
aisles and modules shall be provided at widths no less than listed in
Table 550-107F(9) and shown below.
Table 550-107F(9): Parking Layout Dimensions
Parking Angle
Minimum Permitted
Dimensions
0°
(parallel) 45° 60° 75° 90°
Stall width at parking
angle (SW) (feet)
9 9 9 9 9
Stall width parallel to
aisle (WP) (feet)
17.90 12.7 10.4 9.3 9
Stall depth to wall (D)
(feet)
91 17.51 191 19.51 18.51
Stall depth to interlock
(DI) (feet)
— 15.3 17.5 18.8 —
Stall length (including
1.5-foot curb
overhang) (SL) (feet)
18.5 18.5 18.5 18.5 18.5
Aisle width (AW) (feet) 122 122 162 17.202 262
Throat length (right-ofway
to parking angle)
(T)
Refer to requirements in Table
550-107G(6)
Parking module width
(PMW) (feet)
Wall to wall (singleloaded)
(W1)
21 29.5 35 42.5 44.5
§ 550-107 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-107
1:1258
Table 550-107F(9): Parking Layout Dimensions
Parking Angle
Minimum Permitted
Dimensions
0°
(parallel) 45° 60° 75° 90°
Wall to wall
(double-loaded)
(W2)
30 47 54 62 63
Wall to interlock
(double-loaded)
(W3)
— 44.8 52.5 61.3 —
Interlock to
interlock (doubleloaded)
(W4)
— 42.6 51 60.6 —
NOTES:
1 Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage and located
directly off a through aisle shall meet the requirements of stall
depth to wall (D).
2 This dimension represents (AW) for one-way traffic. For twoway
traffic, add 12 feet to a maximum (AW) of 26 feet.
Diagram for Table 550-107F(9): Typical Parking Layout
Dimensions
G. Calculation of minimum required parking spaces.
(1) General guidelines for calculating required parking spaces. The
requirements of Subsection G(3) below shall be used to determine
the minimum required number of off-site parking spaces which
must be provided on the subject property. Requirements are
generally tied to the capacity of the use, the gross floor area of the
use, or the number of employees who work at the subject property
§ 550-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-107
1:1259
during the largest work shift. The term "capacity," as used herein,
means the maximum number of persons that may be
accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by State
Building Code regulations, whichever number is greater.
References herein to "employee(s) on the largest work shift" mean
the maximum number of employees working at the facility during
a single given day, regardless of the time period during which
this occurs, and regardless of whether any such person is a fulltime
employee. The largest work shift may occur on any particular
day of the week or during a lunch or dinner period in the case
of a restaurant. In all cases, one reserved parking space shall be
provided for each vehicle used by the operation during business
hours. Said spaces shall be in addition to those required by
Subsection G(3) below. Where said parking needs of any land use
exceed the minimum requirements of this chapter, additional
parking spaces sufficient to meet the average maximum weekly
peak-hour parking space demand shall be provided by said land
use.
(2) Joint and off-site parking facilities.
(a) Parking facilities which have been approved by the Director of
Public Works to provide required parking for one or more uses
shall provide a total number of parking spaces, which shall not
be less than the sum total of the separate parking needs for
each use during any peak hour parking period when said joint
parking facility is utilized at the same time by said uses.
(b) Each parking space designed to serve as joint parking shall not
be located farther than 300 feet, except as permitted by a
conditional use permit, from the access to all of the various
areas it is designated to serve. See § 550-54A.
(c) The applicant(s) for approval of a joint parking facility shall
demonstrate to the Director of Public Works' satisfaction that
there is no substantial conflict in the demand for parking
during the principal operating hours of the two or more uses
which the joint parking facility is proposed to serve.
(d) A legally binding instrument, such as a cross-access and
parking easement, approved by the Mayor, shall be executed
by any and all parties to be served by said joint parking facility.
This instrument shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds
office and filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer. A fee shall be
required to file this instrument (see § 550-157).
(3) Minimum off-street parking requirements for land uses. The offstreet
parking requirements for each land use are listed within
Article IV.
§ 550-107 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-107
1:1260
(4) Provision of fee in lieu of parking spaces development. Within the
Central Business (CB) District, the parking requirements of this
chapter are hereby waived.
(5) Locational prohibitions for off-street parking areas.
(a) Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal
structure on a residential lot and a street right-of-way, except
within residential driveways and parking lots designated on
the approved site plan (see § 550-145).
(b) For all development created after the adoption of this chapter,
no private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways or
any other areas located within a public right-of-way not
explicitly designated by the Director of Public Works.
(6) Minimum permitted throat length. Table 550-107G(6) below shall
be used to determine the minimum permitted throat length of
access drives serving parking lots, as measured from the right-ofway
line along the center line of the access drive.
Table 550-107G(6): Minimum Permitted Throat Length
Type of Access
Street
Land
Use Type
Scale of
Development
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
0 to 100 dwelling units 25 —
101 to 200 dwelling
Residential units 50 75 Any
residential
201+ dwelling units 75 125
0 to 50,000 gross
square feet 25 50
50,000 to 100,000
gross square feet 25 75
100,000 to 200,000
gross square feet 50 100
Office
200,001+ gross square
feet 100 150
0 to 2,000 gross square
feet 25 75
In-Vehicle
sales 2,001+ gross square
feet 50 100
Commercial
Indoor
entertainment
0 to 15,000 gross
square feet 25 50
§ 550-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-107
1:1261
§ 550-108. Off-street loading standards.
Table 550-107G(6): Minimum Permitted Throat Length
Type of Access
Street
Land
Use Type
Scale of
Development
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
15,000+ gross square
feet 25 75
Commercial 0 to 150 rooms 25 75
lodging 151 + rooms 25 100
0 to 25,000 gross
square feet 25 50
25,001 to 100,000
gross square feet 25 75
100,000 to 500,000
gross square feet 50 100
Other
commercial
uses
500,001+ gross square
feet 75 200
0 to 100,000 gross
square feet 25 50
100,001 to 500,000
Industrial gross square feet 50 100
All
industrial
uses
500,000+ gross square
feet 50 200
All other
uses
6+
parking
spaces
25 50
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent congestion of public
rights-of-way and private lots so as to promote the safety and general
welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the
provision of loading facilities on various sites.
B. Applicability. Any use which has a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet
or more, and which requires deliveries or makes shipments, shall
provide off-street loading facilities in accordance with the regulations of
this section.
C. Location. All loading berths shall be located 25 feet or more from the
intersection of two street right-of-way lines. Loading berths shall not be
located within any required front yard or street yard setback area.
Access to the loading berth shall be located in conformance with
§ 550-107 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-108
1:1262
§ 550-105. All loading areas shall be located on the private lot and shall
not be located within or so as to interfere with any public right-of-way.
D. Size of loading area. The first required loading berth shall be designed
in accordance with Table 550-108D. All remaining required loading
berths shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length. All required loading
berths shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. The following
standards shall be the minimum used to design loading areas:
Table 550-108D: Loading Standards
Design
Vehicle
Length
(feet)
Dock
Angle
(a)
Clearance
(D)
(feet)
Berth
Width
(W)
(feet)
Apron
Space
(A)
(feet)
Total
Offset
(F)
(feet)
10 63 113
90° 50 12 56 106
14 52 102
10 46 90
60° 44 12 40 84
14 35 79
10 37 73
12 32 68
WB-40 50
45° 36
14 29 65
10 77 132
90° 55 12 72 127
14 67 122
10 55 103
60° 48 12 51 99
14 46 94
10 45 84
12 40 79
WB-50 55
45° 39
14 37 76
§ 550-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-108
1:1263
E. Access to loading area. Each loading berth shall be located so as to
facilitate access to a public street or alley and shall not interfere with
other vehicular or pedestrian traffic per § 550-107 and shall not
interfere with the function of parking areas. In no instance shall loading
areas rely on backing movements into public rights-of-way.
F. Surfacing and marking. All required loading areas shall be paved and
maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. Said surface shall be
marked in a manner which clearly indicates required loading areas.
G. Use of required loading areas. The use of all required loading areas
shall be limited to the loading and unloading of vehicles. Said area shall
not be used to provide minimum required parking spaces.
H. Lighting. All loading areas shall be lit so as to not exceed the standards
of § 550-110.
I. Signage. All signage located within or related to loading areas shall
comply with the requirements of Article XII.
J. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all required loading areas
proposed to be located on the subject property shall be depicted as to
their location and configuration on the site plan required for the
development of the subject property. (Refer to § 550-145.)
K. Calculation of required loading spaces.
(1) Indoor institutional land uses. One loading berth shall be required
for each building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to
29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a
gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, two loading
berths shall be required.
(2) Commercial (except offices), storage/disposal, transportation, and
industrial land uses. One loading berth shall be required for each
building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 29,999
square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor
area of 30,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth
shall be required for any portion of each 50,000 square feet of
gross floor area in addition to the original 29,999 square feet.
§ 550-108 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-108
1:1264
§ 550-109. Exterior storage standards for residential, office and
commercial districts. [Amended by Ord. No. 08-11]
(3) Office land uses. One loading berth shall be required for each
building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 99,999
square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor
area of 100,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth
shall be required for any portion of each 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area in addition to the original 99,999 square feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control the use of residential,
office and commercial property for exterior storage so as to promote
the safety and general welfare of the public. For exterior storage in
agricultural and industrial districts, refer to Article IV.
B. Requirements for exterior storage in residential zoning districts.
(1) No person shall park or store recreational vehicles and/or trailers
on a lot in a residential district except within a fully enclosed
structure or except as provided herein. [Amended 8-18-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-31]
(2) No person shall place or store vehicle parts on a lot in a residential
district except within a fully enclosed structure or except as
provided herein.
(3) No person shall park or store more than two nonfunctioning items
of lawn and exterior maintenance equipment on a lot in a
residential district except within a fully enclosed structure or
except as provided herein.
(4) Outside parking of recreational vehicles, equipment and trailers is
subject to the following provisions: [Amended 8-18-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-31]
(a) No more than a total of two recreational vehicles or trailers
may be parked or stored outside a fully enclosed structure in
the rear or side yard, whether or not on a paved driveway.
(b) No more than one recreational vehicle or trailer may be parked
or stored in a front yard paved driveway of a residence.
Multiple recreational vehicles mounted on a single trailer
under this subsection shall be counted as a single recreational
vehicle.
(c) A recreational vehicle or trailer shall be located not closer than
three feet to a side or rear lot line.
(d) The recreational vehicle shall be maintained and be in good
condition and safe for effective performance for the function in
which it was intended. The exterior of the vehicle shall be
intact.
§ 550-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-109
1:1265
(e) Recreational vehicles and trailers shall be roadworthy. Vehicles
and trailers that require a license shall be properly licensed
with current registration.
(f) No recreational vehicles, equipment or trailers shall be parked
or stored in any open space outside a building unless the
property owner, who must reside on the property, wholly owns
such equipment. If the property is rented, such storage shall be
permitted to the tenant only, provided that the tenant owns
such equipment.
(g) All equipment shall be parked or stored as inconspicuously as
possible on the property. The area around the equipment or
vehicle must be kept weed-free and free of accumulation of
other storage material.
(5) Commercial vehicles. No trucks in excess of 20 feet in length or in
excess of 26,000 pounds in weight or tractors, flat bed trucks,
dump trucks, semitrucks, bobcats or other similar pieces of
mechanical equipment shall be kept on a lot for a period of time
longer than 72 consecutive hours unless they are kept in a garage
and out of public view.
C. Definitions.
(1) For purposes of this section, "vehicle parts" shall include but not be
limited to vehicle or recreational vehicle body components, tires,
tire and wheel components, engine components, chassis
components and any other similar items used for or on motor
vehicles or recreational vehicles.
(2) For purposes of this section, "items of lawn and exterior
maintenance equipment" shall include but not be limited to push or
riding lawn mowers, snow blowers, chain saws, weed whackers,
leaf blowers, sidewalk edgers, trimmers, hedge or bush trimmers
and power washers, or their components.
(3) For the purpose of this section, a "trailer" shall be defined as a
vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or
passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, but does not include a mobile home. [Added
8-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-31]
D. Requirements for exterior storage in nonresidential districts. In all
office, commercial and industrial zoning districts (see § 550-17 for a
listing of these districts), all materials, equipment and trailers shall be
stored within a completely enclosed building, except for the following,
which shall not be located within any front yard or required street yard
(except for vehicles and/or trailers in designated parking spaces) and
shall be stored a minimum of five feet from any and all property lines:
screened refuse containers; construction materials, landscape
materials and related equipment associated with on-site construction;
§ 550-109 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-109
1:1266
§ 550-110. Exterior lighting standards.
and off-street parking. Such exterior storage shall require a conditional
use permit per § 550-142. [Amended 8-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-31]
E. Inoperative motor vehicles and junk. Refer to Chapter 497 of the City
Code.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the spill-over of light
and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and land uses in
the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to
prevent the creation of nuisances.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all lighting
within the jurisdiction of this chapter, except for lighting within public
rights-of-way and/or lighting located on public property.
C. Depiction on required site plan. Any and all exterior lighting shall be
depicted as to its location, orientation and configuration on the site plan
required for the development of the subject property. (Refer to
§ 550-145.)
D. Requirements.
(1) Orientation of fixture. In no instance shall an exterior lighting
fixture be oriented so that the lighting element (or a transparent
shield) is visible from a property located within a residential zoning
district. The use of shielded luminaires and careful fixture
placement is encouraged so as to facilitate compliance with this
requirement.
(2) Intensity of illumination.
(a) In no instance shall the amount of illumination attributable to
exterior and interior lighting, as measured at the property line,
exceed 0.50 footcandle above ambient lighting conditions on a
cloudless night.
(b) The maximum average on-site exterior lighting in
nonresidential zoning districts shall be 2.4 footcandles (500
watts metal halide or high-pressure sodium, 250 watts lowpressure
sodium).
(c) The maximum average on-site exterior lighting in residential
zoning districts shall be 0.90 footcandle (185 watts metal
halide or high-pressure sodium, 90 watts low-pressure
sodium).
(d) The following exceptions shall be permitted:
[1] Outdoor recreation facilities and assembly areas:
maximum average on-site exterior lighting of 3.60
§ 550-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-110
1:1267
§ 550-111. Vibration standards.
footcandles (750 watts metal halide or high-pressure
sodium, 375 watts low-pressure sodium).
[2] Auto display lots and gas station pump islands: maximum
average on-site exterior lighting of 0.20 footcandle (50
watts metal halide or high-pressure sodium, 25 watts lowpressure
sodium).
(3) Location. Light fixtures shall not be located within required
bufferyards.
(4) Flashing, flickering and other distracting lighting. Flashing,
flickering and/or other exterior or interior lighting which may
distract motorists is prohibited. [Refer to § 253-51A(3).]
(5) Minimum lighting standards. All areas designated on required site
plans for vehicular parking, loading or circulation and used for any
such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial illumination in
such areas at a minimum intensity of 0.4 footcandle.
(6) Nonconforming lighting. All lighting fixtures and structures
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
considered as legal conforming uses (see Article V); except,
however, that where nonconforming lighting is deemed to create a
public nuisance by the Zoning Administrator, it shall not be subject
to the protections of Article V and may be ordered to be modified or
removed so as to conform to the standards of this section.
(7) Special events lighting. Any temporary use using exterior lighting
which is not in complete compliance with the requirements of this
section shall secure a temporary use permit. (Refer to § 550-143.)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of
vibration which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of
the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all uses and
activities which create detectable vibrations, except that these
standards shall not apply to vibrations created during the construction
of the principal use on the subject property.
C. Depiction on required site plan. Any activity or equipment which create
detectable vibrations outside the confines of a building shall be
depicted as to its location on the site plan required for the development
of the subject property. (See § 550-145.)
D. Requirements. No activity or operation shall cause or create earthborne
vibrations in excess of the displacement values given below.
§ 550-110 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-111
1:1268
E. Method of measurement. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the
adjacent lot line or the nearest residence district boundary line, as
described below. Vibration displacements shall be measured with an
instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three mutually
perpendicular directions. The maximum permitted displacements shall
be determined in each zoning district by the following formula: D = K/f,
where:
D = Displacement in inches
K = A constant to be determined by reference to the tables below
f = The frequency of vibration transmitted through the ground,
cycles per second
F. Standards in the General Industrial District. In the General Industrial
District, the maximum earth displacement permitted at the points
described below shall be determined by use of the formula above and
the appropriate K constant shown in the table below:
Location K
On or beyond any adjacent lot line
Continuous 0.015
Impulsive 0.030
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour
period
0.075
On or beyond any residence district
boundary line
Continuous 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour
period
0.015
G. Standards in the Heavy Industrial District. In the Heavy Industrial
District, the maximum earth displacement permitted at the points
described below shall be determined by use of the formula above and
the appropriate K constant shown in the table below:
Location K
On or beyond any adjacent lot line
Continuous 0.030
Impulsive 0.060
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour
period
0.150
On or beyond any residence district
boundary line
Continuous 0.003
§ 550-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-111
1:1269
§ 550-112. Noise standards.
Location K
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour
period
0.015
H. Standards in the Planned Industrial District. In the Planned Industrial
District, the maximum earth displacement permitted at the points
described below shall be determined by use of the formula above and
the appropriate K constant shown in the table below:
Location K
On or beyond any residence district
boundary line
Continuous 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour
period
0.015
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of noise
which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all uses and
activities which create detectable noise, except that these standards
shall not apply to noise created during the construction of the principal
use on the subject property or by incidental traffic, parking, loading,
maintenance or agricultural operations.
C. Requirements.
(1) All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to
intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness. In no event shall the
sound-pressure level of noise radiated continuously from a facility
exceed at the lot line of the subject property the values given in
Table 550-112C(1) (set out hereafter) as measured by, at the
minimum, a Type 2 sound meter that is in compliance with ANSI
Standard S1.4-1983, where said lot abuts property within any
residential, office or commercial zoning district or the Planned
Industrial (PI) District. (See § 550-17.)
§ 550-111 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-112
1:1270
§ 550-113. Air pollution standards.
Table 550-112C(1): Maximum Permitted Noise Level at Lot
Line For Noise Radiated Continuously*
Zoning District
Increase in Noise Level
over Ambient Level
RH, CR-10, ER-1, SR-4, TR-6,
MR-8, MR-10, SNR
Plus 3 dBA
NO, PO, PB, NB, GB, CB, PI Plus 5 dBA
GI, HI Plus 8 dBA
* If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is present only
during daytime hours, one or more of the corrections in Table
550-112C(2) below shall be added to or subtracted from each
of the decibel levels given above in Table 550-112C(1).
(2) Noises that were in effect as of the effective date of this chapter
shall be considered legal nonconforming noises. The burden of
proof to demonstrate that said noises were in effect prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the noise
producer.
Table 550-112C(2): Adjustment Factors for Maximum Noise
Levels
Type of Operation in Character of
Noise
Correction in
Decibels
Daytime operation only Plus 5
Noise source operates less than 20% of
any one-hour period
Plus 5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of
any one-hour period
Plus 10*
Noise source operates less than 1% of
any one-hour period
Plus 15*
Noise of impulsive character
(hammering, etc.)
Minus 5
Noise of periodic character (hum,
speech, etc.)
Minus 5
* Apply only one of these corrections.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of air
pollution which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of
the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to air pollution
§ 550-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-113
1:1271
§ 550-114. Odor standards.
§ 550-115. Electromagnetic radiation standards.
created during the construction of the principal use on the subject
property or by incidental traffic, parking, loading or maintenance
operations.
C. Standards.
(1) The emission, from all sources within any lot, of particulate matter
containing a particle diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
(2) Emission of smoke or particulate matter of density equal to or
greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart (United States
Bureau of Mines) is prohibited at all times.
(3) Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards and roads within the boundaries of
any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
paving, oiling or other acceptable means.
(4) All applicable state and federal standards shall be met.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of odor
which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to odors created
during the construction of the principal use on the subject property or
by incidental traffic, parking, loading or maintenance operations. Public
landfills and public sanitary sewage treatment plants shall be exempted
from the requirements of this section as essential public services.
C. Standards. Except for food preparation and cooking odors emanating
from residential land uses and odors associated with property
development and maintenance (such as construction, lawn care, and
the painting and roofing of structures), no odors shall be created for
periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes per any day which are
detectable (by a healthy observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a
designee who is unaffected by background odors such as tobacco or
food) at the boundary of the subject property, where said lot abuts
property within any residential, office, commercial zoning district, or
the Planned Industrial (PI) District. (See § 550-17.)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of
electromagnetic radiation which adversely affects adjoining properties
in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
general welfare of the public.
§ 550-113 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-115
1:1272
§ 550-116. Glare and heat standards.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any
planned or intentional source of electromagnetic radiation for such
purposes as communication, experimentation, entertainment,
broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity
measurement, weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey,
personal pleasure, or any other use directly or indirectly associated
with these purposes, which does not comply with the then-current
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such
sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, said operation in
compliance with the Federal Communications Commission shall be
unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in
performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic
receptors of quality and proper design because of proximity, primary
field, blanketing, spurious radiation, harmonic content, modulation or
energy conducted by power or telephone lines. The determination of
"abnormal degradation in performance" and "of quality and proper
design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as
defined in the latest principles and standards of the American Institute
of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the
Electronic Industries Association. In case of any conflict between the
latest standards and principles of the above groups, the following
precedence in the interpretation of the standards and principles shall
apply:
(1) American Institute of Electrical Engineers;
(2) Institute of Radio Engineers; and
(3) Electronic Industries Association.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of glare
or heat which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent
the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the
public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to glare created
during the construction of the principal use on the subject property or
by incidental traffic, parking, loading or maintenance operations.
C. Standards. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or
from temperature processes such as combustion or welding or
otherwise, so as to be visible at the lot line of the subject property, shall
be permitted. (See also § 550-110.) Furthermore, there shall be no
transmission of heat or heated air so as to be discernible (by a healthy
observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a designee) at the lot line.
§ 550-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-116
1:1273
§ 550-117. Fire and explosion standards.
§ 550-118. Toxic or noxious material standards.
§ 550-119. Waste material standards.
Solar systems regulated by § 66.0401, Wis. Stats., shall be entitled to
the protection of its provisions.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of fire
and/or explosion hazards which adversely affect adjoining properties in
order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general
welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards. Any use involving materials which could decompose by
detonation shall locate such materials not less than 400 feet from any
residential or office zoning district (see § 550-17), except that this
standard shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum
or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes. All activities
and storage of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be
provided with adequate safety and firefighting devices in accordance
with all fire prevention codes of the State of Wisconsin.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the handling of toxic
or noxious material which adversely affects adjoining properties in
order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general
welfare of the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards.
(1) No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject
property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious
material in such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger
the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or
damage to the property or business.
(2) No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private
sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or
solid materials, except in accordance with the regulations of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. [Amended
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the handling of waste
material which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of
the public.
§ 550-116 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-119
1:1274
§ 550-120. Drainage standards.
§ 550-121. Exterior construction material standards.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards.
(1) No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject
property, or through percolation into the subsoil, waste material in
such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to the
property or business. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
(2) No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private
sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or
solid materials except in accordance with the regulations of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of
drainage which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of
the public.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards. No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted
that results in water runoff which causes property damage, a nuisance
and/or erosion on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly
conveyed to a public storm drain, drainageway or other such public
drainage facility per the approval of the Director of Public Works. All
parking lots 4,000 square feet or larger shall be internally drained with
catch basins connected to a municipal storm sewer.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the use of certain
exterior construction materials so as to attain a degree of uniformity in
exterior appearance and thus maintain and enhance the attractiveness
and property value of certain zoning districts. [Amended 10-4-2016
by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
C. Standards for all residential, office, commercial districts, and the PI
Zoning District. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-03]
(1) Except for exposed foundations not to exceed three feet in height
from the adjacent grade, all non-single-family development located
within the RH, CR-10ac, ER-1, SR-4, TR-6, MR-8, MR-10, SNR, NO,
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-121
1:1275
§ 550-122. Hazardous materials standards.
PO, NB, PB, GB, CB and PI Districts shall employ only high-quality
decorative exterior construction materials on the visible exterior of
the following portions of all structures and buildings:
(a) Any portion of the building or structure visible from adjacent
residentially zoned property;
(b) Any portion of the building or structure located within 50 feet
of a public right-of-way; or
(c) Any other portion of the building or structure visible from a
public street and/or situated at an angle of 60° or less from a
line which is parallel to the nearest right-of-way (for uncurved
rights-of-way) or from a line which is parallel to a chord
connecting the right-of-way boundary on the inside side of the
curve at points located at, or opposite from, the two outer
boundaries of the subject property along the right-of-way line
(for curved rights-of-way).
(2) The following exterior construction materials shall not be
considered "high quality decorative": nondecorative concrete block
or cinder block, nondecorative concrete foundation walls or panels,
corrugated walls or panels, nondecorative plywood, asphaltic
siding, or other nondecorative surfaces as determined by the Plan
Commission.
D. Trademark architecture shall not be permitted, except as provided in §
550-69B(5)(d) for group developments. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
E. Architectural design is subject to the site plan review process (see
§ 550-145).
F. Exceptions. The conditional use process (per § 550-142) may be used to
propose the use of a material otherwise prohibited by Subsection C
above.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide information to the
City regarding the nature of land uses which involve research,
production, storage, disposal, handling and/or shipment of hazardous
materials. Other regulations are also included in Chapter 303 of the
Municipal Code.
B. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities involving any one or more of the following:
(1) Microorganism cultures subject to § 94.65, Wis. Stats.;
(2) Pesticides subject to § 94.67(25), Wis. Stats.;
(3) Biological products subject to § 95.39, Wis. Stats.;
§ 550-121 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-122
1:1276
§ 550-123. Fencing standards.
(4) Hazardous substances subject to § 100.37(1)(c), Wis. Stats.;
(5) Toxic substances subject to § 101.58(2)(j), Wis. Stats.;
(6) Infectious agents subject to § 101.58(2)(f), Wis. Stats.;
(7) Any material for which the State of Wisconsin requires notification
of a local fire department; or
(8) Any other uses, activities or materials that are subject to county,
state or federal hazardous or related materials regulations.
C. Standards. All land uses involving such hazardous materials shall
submit a written description of such materials and the operations
involving such materials conducted on their property as part of the
required site plan submittal. (See § 550-145.)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the materials,
location, height and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls and
decorative posts in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the general welfare of the public. In all zoning districts fences
and landscape walls are permitted only in the manner outlined below.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24]
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FENCE — An enclosed barrier consisting of wood, stone or metal
intended to prevent ingress or egress.
LANDSCAPE WALL — A vertical structure or partition that encloses an
area or separates two areas.
C. Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all fencing,
landscape walls and decorative posts equal to, or exceeding, 30 inches
in height, for all land uses and activities.
D. Permit required. No fence or wall shall be installed without first
obtaining a permit. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied
by the fee in the amount stated in § 550-157.
E. Standards.
(1) Materials.
(a) Residential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing
fencing, landscape walls and decorative posts include wood,
stone, preformed concrete block, concrete, brick, wrought
iron, chain link, and wire mesh, except that wire mesh fencing
is not permitted within required front yard or street yard
setbacks. Any fence within a street yard, including along
§ 550-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-123
1:1277
property lines that intersect a right-of-way, shall be a maximum
of 60% opaque.
(b) Nonresidential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing
fencing, landscape walls and decorative posts include wood,
stone, preformed concrete block, concrete, brick, wrought
iron, chain link, and wire mesh. Except for industrial security
fences, barbed wire fencing shall not be permitted. Any fence
within a street yard, including along property lines that
intersect a right-of-way, shall be a maximum of 60% opaque.
Industrial security fencing shall be an open-type fence (e.g.,
chain link, woven wire, or wrought iron) and may be topped
with barbed wire.
(c) Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing, including the use of
wood or plastic snow fences for the purposes of limiting snow
drifting between November 1 and April 1, protection of
excavation and construction sites, and the protection of plants
during grading and construction and during special events, is
permitted for up to 60 consecutive days.
(d) Snow fences. Snow fences constructed of wood and wire and/
or plastic shall be permitted only as temporary fences.
(2) Location.
(a) On all properties, no fence, landscape wall or decorative post
shall be located closer than two feet to the front yard or street
yard property line. Fences may be located on any property line
abutting a side or year yard. The property owner is responsible
for finding and exposing or establishing through a survey that
corner location (property/lot stakes).
(b) No fence, landscape wall or decorative post which obstructs
sight lines over 2.5 feet in height above the survey of the
roadbed shall be allowed in a traffic visibility triangle, per
§ 550-106B(1).
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height of any fence, landscape
wall or decorative post shall be the following:
(a) Fences in excess of 48 inches tall shall not be permitted within
a front yard setback nor in any location in a front yard that is
closer to the street than the building; [Amended 10-4-2016
by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-11]
(b) Eight feet when located on any residentially zoned property
but not within a required front yard setback or a required
street yard setback; and
§ 550-123 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-123
1:1278
§ 550-124. Signal-receiving antenna (satellite dish) standards.
(c) Ten feet when located on any nonresidentially zoned property
but not within a required front yard or a required street yard.
(4) Orientation. Any and all fences, landscape walls or decorative posts
shall be erected so as to locate visible supports and other structural
components toward the subject property.
(5) Maintenance. Any and all fences, landscape walls or decorative
posts shall be maintained in a structurally sound and attractive
manner as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(6) Swimming pools. Fencing for swimming pools shall be provided per
§ 550-127. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
F. Enforcement. Enforcement of this section shall be upon written
complaint to the Zoning Administrator, subject to his written order to
abate any existing violation within 20 days thereof, prior to any
enforcement by citation. Any such order of the Zoning Administrator is
subject to the appeals process found in § 550-156D along with the fees
in § 550-157.
G. Nonconforming fences, landscape walls and decorative posts. Fences,
landscape walls and decorative posts in existence at the time of
adoption of this chapter shall be considered legal nonconforming
except for maintenance standards contained in Subsection E(5) above.
A. Purpose. This section regulating the placement of signal-receiving
antennas (including roof-mounted antennas which are greater than 15
feet and satellite dishes which are greater than 36 inches) is adopted
to:
(1) Provide uniform regulation of all signal-receiving antenna devices;
(2) Secure placement of such antennas in an aesthetically sensitive
manner while allowing users reasonable reception of signals;
(3) Protect the public from injury from antennas that are inadequately
mounted, unduly susceptible to wind pressure, improperly installed
and wired, or are placed on structures insufficiently designed or
constructed to safely support the antenna; and
(4) Provide for placement of such antennas in locations that preserve
access to rear property areas by firefighting apparatus and
emergency personnel.
B. Conditional use permit required. No owner shall, within the City of
Watertown, build, construct, use or place any type of signal-receiving
antenna which exceeds the size requirements of this section or which is
a ham/short wave radio antenna of a height of 75 feet or higher or
which is a ham/short wave radio antenna of a height of less than 75 feet
§ 550-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1279
that does not meet all of the requirements of § 550-56V(2) of this
chapter, until a conditional use permit has been issued. [Amended by
Ord. No. 10-10]
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OWNER — The holder of record of an estate in possession in fee simple,
or for life, in land or real property, or a vendee of record under a land
contract for the sale of an estate in possession in fee simple or for
life, but does not include the vendor under a land contract. A tenant in
common or joint tenant shall be considered such owner to the extent of
his interest. The personal representative of at least one owner shall be
considered an owner.
SIGNAL-RECEIVING ANTENNA — Any apparatus capable of receiving
communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in
a planetary orbit. This definition includes all types of signal-receiving
antennas, including, without limitation, parabolic antennas, home earth
stations, satellite television disks, UHF and VHF television antennas,
and AM, FM, ham and short-wave radio antennas, regardless of the
method of mounting.
D. Application. Application for a signal-receiving antenna permit shall be
made in writing to the Zoning Administrator. With such application,
there shall be submitted a fee (see § 550-157) and a sufficient set of
mounting plans and specifications, including a general plot plan,
showing the location of the proposed signal-receiving antenna with
respect to streets, lot lines and buildings. If such application meets all
requirements of this section, the application shall be approved.
E. Installation standards. Signal-receiving antennas installed in any
zoning district within the City shall comply with the following
provisions:
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Any signal-receiving antenna and its mounting post shall be
located a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
(b) Subject to the provisions herein, signal-receiving antennas
shall only be located in the rear yard of any lot. If reasonable
reception of signals is not possible with a rear yard placement
due to the physical characteristics of the lot and area, the
signal-receiving antenna shall be placed in the side yard of the
lot. In the event that reasonable reception of signals is not
possible by locating the signal-receiving antenna on the rear or
side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed in the
front yard or on the roof of structures on the property. For
corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a
street.
§ 550-124 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-124
1:1280
(c) If side yard, front yard or roof mounting is requested, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine where reasonable
reception is possible, based on evidence provided by the
person seeking to erect or construct the antenna.
(2) Mounting. Signal-receiving antennas attached to the wall or roof of
any principal or accessory structure shall be permitted only if the
structure is properly constructed to carry all imposed loading and
complies with applicable state and local building code
requirements. The Zoning Administrator may require engineering
calculations.
(3) Diameter. The diameter of the signal-receiving antenna shall not
exceed 15 feet in diameter for commercial uses or 10 feet in
diameter for residential uses, except for systems used to provide
community antenna television services.
(4) Height.
(a) A ground-mounted signal-receiving antenna, including any
platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or
affixed, may not exceed 18 feet in height, as measured from the
ground to the highest point of the dish.
(b) A roof-mounted antenna may not exceed 15 feet in height
above the surrounding roofline as measured from the lowest
point of the existing roofline.
(5) Wind pressure. All signal-receiving antennas shall be permanently
mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for
installation. All such installations shall meet a minimum wind load
design velocity of 80 miles per hour.
(6) Electrical installations. Electrical installations in connection with
signal-receiving antennas, including grounding of the system, shall
be in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code,
Wisconsin State Electrical Code and the instructions of the
manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall
govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the
signal-receiving antenna to the receivers shall be installed
underground unless installation site conditions preclude
installation underground. If a signal-receiving antenna is to be used
by two or more residential property owners, all interconnecting
electrical connections, cables and conduits must also be buried.
The location of all such underground lines, cables and conduits
shall be shown on the application for a permit. All signal-receiving
antennas shall be grounded against direct lightning strikes.
(7) Temporary placement. No portable or trailer-mounted signalreceiving
antenna shall be allowed, except for temporary
installation for on-site testing and demonstration purposes for
periods not exceeding five days. However, such trial placement
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1281
§ 550-125. Wind energy systems standards.
shall be in accordance with all provisions of this section. Failure to
comply shall result in a citation being issued for violation of this
section. Any person making such temporary placement shall first
give written notice to the Zoning Administrator of the date when
such placement shall begin and end.
(8) Advertising. No form of advertising or identification, sign or mural
is allowed on the signal-receiving antenna other than the
customary manufacturer's identification plates.
(9) Interference with broadcasting. Signal-receiving antennas shall be
filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection
of any electromagnetic radiation that would cause any harmful
interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or
reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful
interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of
the signal-receiving antenna shall promptly take steps to eliminate
the harmful interference in accordance with Federal
Communications Commission regulations.
(10) Compliance with federal regulations. The installation and use of
every signal-receiving antenna shall be in conformity with the
Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and regulations
adopted thereunder.
(11) Aesthetic considerations. Signal-receiving antennas shall be
located and designed to reasonably reduce visual impact from
surrounding properties at street level.
F. Enforcement.
(1) It shall be unlawful to construct, use, build or locate any signalreceiving
antenna in violation of any provisions of this section. In
the event of any violation, the Common Council or any property
owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may
institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of
this section.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
general penalty found in § 500-158.
A. Construction of wind energy systems. No person shall construct or
operate a wind energy conversion system (WECS) without having fully
complied with the provisions of this section.
B. Permits required.
(1) A zoning permit shall be obtained to allow construction of a WECS.
§ 550-124 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-125
1:1282
(2) A WECS permit shall be obtained from the City Zoning
Administrator for the construction of all WECS.
C. Application requirements. An application for a permit to build a wind
energy system shall include the following:
(1) The property lines of the proposed site of construction.
(2) Proposed location of the WECS.
(3) Location and description of all structures located on the property
where the WECS site is proposed.
(4) Location of all aboveground utility lines within a radius equal to
two times the height of the proposed WECS.
(5) Location of all underground utility lines on the property where a
WECS site is proposed.
(6) Dimensional representation of the structural components of the
tower construction, including the base and footings.
(7) Schematic of electrical systems associated with the WECS,
including all existing and proposed electrical connections.
(8) Manufacturer's specifications and installation and operation
instructions or specific WECS design information.
(9) Certification by a registered professional engineer that the tower
design is sufficient to withstand wind load requirements for a
structure as defined by the Uniform Building Code.
D. Blade clearance. The minimum distance between the ground and any
protruding blade(s) utilized on a WECS shall be 15 feet, as measured at
the lowest point of the arc of the blades. The minimum distance shall be
increased as necessary to provide for vehicle clearance in locations
where over-sized vehicles might travel.
E. Climbing towers; tower access. Access to towers shall be controlled by
fences six feet in height around the tower and anti-climbing devices.
Existing local regulations regarding attractive nuisances shall cover
wind systems as well. A sign indicating shock hazard shall be placed on
the tower. Such sign shall state: "Warning. Electrical shock hazard. No
unauthorized persons on tower. No Trespassing." Cables, ropes or wires
used to secure the WECS shall be appropriately marked to prevent
accidental bodily harm.
F. Tower construction. Tower construction shall be in accordance with all
applicable sections of the Wisconsin State Building Code, including, but
not limited to, Department of Commerce Administrative Code, and any
future amendments, additions and/or revisions to the same.
G. Utility interconnection. The WECS, if interconnected to a utility system,
shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operate as set
§ 550-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-125
1:1283
forth in the electrical utility's then-current service regulations
applicable to WECS; these standards are subject to review by the Public
Service Commission.
H. Setback requirements.
(1) No WECS shall be constructed in any setback, dedicated easement,
or dedicated roadway.
(2) Installation of any WECS may not be nearer to any property lines or
rights-of-way for overhead electrical transmission or distribution
lines than three times the height of the WECS structure.
I. Noise. During all operations, from commencement through
abandonment, all noise and vibrations shall conform to the
requirements of the City of Watertown Code.
J. Interference with navigational systems. No WECS shall be installed or
operated in such a manner that is not in compliance with Federal
Aviation Administration regulations.
K. Electrical distribution lines. All WECS electrical distribution lines shall
be located underground.
L. Required safety features.
(1) All WECS shall be designed with an automatic overspeed control to
render the system inoperable when winds are blowing in excess of
the speeds for which the machine is designed.
(2) All WECS shall have a manually operable method to render the
system inoperable in the event of a structural or mechanical failure
of any part of the system, including the automatic overspeed
control.
(3) All WECS shall be designed with an automatic control to render the
system inoperable in case of loss of utility power to prevent the
WECS from supplying power to a de-energized electrical
distribution system.
(4) Any WECS declared to be unsafe by the Zoning Administrator by
reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire
hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth
in the City of Watertown Code.
M. Maintenance. The Zoning Administrator or his representative shall
have the right at any reasonable time to enter, in the company of the
owner or his agent, the premises on which a WECS has been
constructed to inspect all parts of said WECS installation and to require
that repairs or alterations be made within 30 days if, in his judgment,
there exists a deficiency in the structural stability of the system.
§ 550-125 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-125
1:1284
§ 550-126. Outdoor storage of firewood standards.
§ 550-127. Swimming pools. [Added by Ord. No. 04-24]
N. Inspections. A yearly inspection at a fee to be determined from time to
time by resolution of the Common Council shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator to certify the safety and maintenance of the WECS and
accessory structures.
A. No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned
property, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front
yard for a period of 30 days from the date of its delivery.
B. Firewood should be neatly stacked and may be stacked not closer than
three feet to any lot line and not higher than six feet from grade, except
adjacent to a fence, where firewood can be stacked against the fence as
high as the fence. "Fence," as used in this section, shall not include
hedges and other vegetation.
C. All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be
promptly and properly disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain
on the premises.
D. Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting
disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or
inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and may be
abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
E. Not more than 20% of the side and rear yard may be used for storage of
firewood at any one time.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — A receptacle, open tank or artificial pool of water
not located within a completely enclosed building, having a depth at
any point of 1.5 feet or more, whether above or below ground, and
more than 113 square feet in area (12 feet in diameter or equivalent in
square or rectangular). Decorative ponds not designed or intended for
swimming are not considered swimming pools.
B. Swimming pools exclusively for the private use of the owners and their
guests may not be located closer than 10 feet to any property line,
provided that pump and filter installation shall not be located closer
than 20 feet to any property line.
C. Fencing. The swimming pool, or the entire property on which the pool is
located, shall have a detached wall or fence at least four feet in height.
Such wall or fence must be constructed so as to prevent uncontrolled
access by children from the street or adjacent properties. All fence
openings or points of entry shall be equipped with gates which are selfclosing
and have self-latching devices placed at the top 1/4 of the gate.
§ 550-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-127
1:1285
§ 550-128. Administration and enforcement of performance
standards.
D. Exceptions. Subsection B does not apply to the following:
(1) An aboveground-type swimming pool with a deck which extends
out perpendicular from the sides of the pool and has an affixed
fence at least 36 inches in height above deck level. Access to such
deck or pool shall have removable steps or ladder or be enclosed
with a fence a minimum of four feet in height.
(2) The entire swimming area is covered or enclosed by a plastic or
fiberglass bubble, installed pursuant to manufacturer's
recommendations or engineering calculations, with a door or gate
which allows access into the swimming area which is self-closing
and self-latching, with such latch located at the top 1/4 of the gate.
(3) An aboveground-type swimming pool whose accumulative height,
with or without affixed fence, is at least four feet above the ground
at all points and has a removable or fold-up ladder.
E. A permit is required for the erection of all swimming pools as defined.
F. Permit fee. See § 550-157 for fee.
A. Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of
performance standards set forth herein range from those which can be
made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal
senses and no mechanical equipment to those requiring great technical
competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the
intent of this chapter that:
(1) Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Administrator
using equipment normally available to the City or obtainable
without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so
made before notice of violations is issued.
(2) Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it
unreasonable for the City to maintain the personnel or equipment
necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations,
procedures shall be available for causing corrections of apparent
violations of performance standards, for protecting individuals
from arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable administration and
enforcement of performance standard regulations, and for
protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for
administration and enforcement.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice, by certified
mail or other means ensuring a signed receipt for such notice,
to the person or persons responsible for the alleged violations.
The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged
violation and the reasons why the Zoning Administrator
§ 550-127 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-128
1:1286
believes there is a violation in fact and shall require an answer
or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator.
(b) The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to
reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of
the administrative official within the time limit set constitutes
admission of violation of the terms of this chapter. The notice
shall further state that, upon request of those to whom it is
directed, technical determination as described in this chapter
will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found costs of
such determinations shall be charged against those
responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties
as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no
violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by
the City.
B. Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be per § 550-158.
§ 550-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-128
1:1287

ARTICLE XII
Signs and Projections
[Added 5-5-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12]
§ 550-129. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the fabrication,
erection and use of signs and signage for all properties within the City
of Watertown. This article regulates the location, type, size and height of
signage in order to protect and promote the public welfare, health and
safety of persons within the community; to aid in the development and
promotion of business and industry; and to ensure implementation of the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Watertown within the City's zoning
districts.
§ 550-130. Sign permits.
A. The adoption of this article reflects the formal finding of fact on the part
of the City of Watertown Plan Commission and the Watertown Common
Council that regulation of signage furthers four compelling
governmental interests:
(1) To promote the public welfare, health and safety of all persons
using the public thoroughfares and rights-of-way within the City of
Watertown as to the signage displayed thereon or overhanging or
projecting into such public spaces;
(2) To advance the aesthetic goals of the City throughout the
community and to ensure the effectiveness and flexibility in the
design of and the creativity of the use of such devices without
creating detriment to the general public;
(3) To reduce the visual clutter caused by advertising signage, which
the City has determined is a significant cause of unsafe traffic and
visibility conditions; and
(4) To limit the spread of unattractive strip commercial development,
of which signs are a primary contributor, so as to be respectful of
the reasonable rights of other advertisers and business entities
whose messages are also displayed in such areas.
B. Furthermore, the City of Watertown advocates that this regulation
leaves ample and adequate alternative channels of commercial speech
communication for the messages portrayed on such advertising
signage, namely, print media, broadcast media, and point-of-purchase
display, and is narrowly defined so as to limit any prohibitions on
commercial speech on exterior signage.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B below, it shall be unlawful
for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move or convert any
sign in the City, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a
§ 550-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-130
1:1289
sign permit for each sign from the City of Watertown Zoning
Administrator as required under this article. This subsection shall apply
and be construed to require a permit for a change of copy on any sign
or for any conversions or changes in the sign structure for which a
permit has been previously issued. This subsection shall not apply for
a repainting with the same sign copy, cleaning, repair or other normal
maintenance of the sign or sign structure. No new permit is required
for signs which have permits on the date in which this article was
adopted and which conform with the requirements of this section on the
date of its adoption unless and until the sign is altered or relocated in
any way.
B. The following sign uses and purposes are permitted in all zoning
districts without the need for a sign permit. Such signs shall not count
as part of the maximum permitted sign area as regulated by § 550-134.
(1) Address numerals and identification signs not exceeding four
square feet in area.
(2) Legal notices and other signs established or ordered by any
governmental agency.
(3) Memorial signs and tablets displayed in cemeteries.
(4) On-premises directional signs which bear no advertising, if under
four square feet and if limited to business site or business name or
logo.
(5) Temporary signs which conform to the requirements of § 550-135.
(6) Political signs and flags of government, religious, fraternal or civic
organizations.
(7) Auxiliary signs per § 550-131A(2), if under four square feet.
C. Community information signs shall be permitted only as a conditional
use within all zoning districts and upon any property within the
jurisdiction of the City of Watertown Zoning Code. As such, the review
of a request for the erection of a community information sign shall
comply with the requirements of § 550-142 of this chapter. The
proposed size, configuration and design of the sign shall be described
as part of the conditional use requirements. As a conditional use, the
City of Watertown may revoke the designation of an approved
community information sign if such sign fails to comply with the
requirements of this article. Such action shall proceed per the
requirements of Subsection H. Upon revocation, the owner of said sign
shall have 30 days to remove the sign at the owner's expense.
(1) Such sign shall only display information regarding events and
information of general interest to the residents of Watertown. Copy
which may be considered as advertising a product, private or
§ 550-130 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-130
1:1290
restricted participation event, or activity for private profit shall be
prohibited.
(2) Such sign may be located on private or public property (except for
residential properties within the SR-4 and TR-6 Districts).
(3) Such sign shall conform to the visibility requirements of
§ 550-132A(9).
(4) Such sign shall not be counted as adding to the area of signage on
the subject property for the purposes of regulating sign area per
§ 550-134F.
D. Permit requirements:238
(1) The sign permit fee shall be as set by the Common Council and
provided under separate fee schedule for each sign application and
shall be required for all new signs and any modifications of any
existing sign face or sign structure.
(2) Any sign permit fee granted hereunder may not be assigned or
transferred to any other sign or modified sign face or sign
structure.
(3) Only those permanent or temporary signs which have been granted
a permit from the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the
provisions of this section may be erected, installed, constructed or
maintained.
(4) For all other signs (excluding freestanding signs), the owner or
tenant may include all such signs at one premises under one permit
if provisions of Subsection E are complied with.
(5) All signs which are located over a public right-of-way shall require
the property owner or tenant to procure public liability insurance
in a company licensed to transact business in Wisconsin for the
principal sum of not less than $25,000 liability to any one person or
$50,000 liability on account of any one accident. Such policy shall
further have an endorsement protecting the City of Watertown or
its interest as the result of any accident or injury for which the City
might become liable.
E. Application procedure. Each initial application for a sign permit shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator on forms to be provided by that
office prior to installation of a new sign or modification of an existing
sign face or sign structure. Application shall include:
(1) The name and address of the permit applicant.
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-130
1:1291
(2) A legible scaled drawing with description and dimensions of the
sign(s) to be erected or maintained under that permit and the sign's
proposed location on the building or site.
(3) Written proof of consent from the property owner upon which the
sign(s) are to be erected and maintained.
(4) Proof of payment of the appropriate sign permit fee, when
required.
(5) Evidence of liability, insurance policy or bond as required herein for
signs located over a public right-of-way per Subsection D above.
(6) Any other item of information that may be reasonably required by
the Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission for the purpose of
application evaluation.
F. Granting and issuance.
(1) All sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator, City Engineer and City Planner, who shall deny or
grant such applications within 10 business days of receipt of the
complete application and payment of fee per Subsections A through
E above. Upon granting, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the
sign permit.
(2) No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to
constitute permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign
nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an
action to abate an unlawful sign.
G. Basis for granting. In reviewing a sign permit application, the City staff
may consider the following factors in deciding whether or not to grant
the issuance of a sign permit.
(1) Whether the sign is compatible with the surroundings, pursuant to
the objectives of proper design and zoning criteria.
(2) Whether the sign is designed, installed and maintained to meet the
sign user's needs while at the same time promoting the
surrounding environment desired by the general public.
(3) Whether the sign is designed, constructed, installed or maintained
in such a manner that it does not endanger public safety or traffic
safety.
(4) Whether the sign is legible, readable and visible in the
circumstances in which it is to be used.
(5) Whether the sign, including size, height, illumination and location,
is respectful of reasonable rights of other advertisers whose
messages are displayed in the area.
§ 550-130 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-130
1:1292
(6) Whether the sign is in compliance with the provisions of this
article.
(7) Whether the sign is in compliance with the provisions of the City of
Watertown's Code relating to traffic safety, traffic visibility setbacks
and the zoning ordinance.
H. Revocation.
(1) Upon Class I notice and after a public hearing conducted by the
Plan Commission, any permit may be revoked by the Plan
Commission in the event that the applicant has failed to comply
with the provisions of these regulations or any conditions that may
have accompanied the permit at the time of granting.
(2) Any sign permit issued by the Zoning Administrator shall be null
and void and automatically revoked in the event that construction,
installation or manufacture of the sign has not been commenced
within 180 days from the date of the issuance of such permit. If
work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of 90 days any time after the work is commenced, the
original permit shall become null and void. A new permit shall first
be obtained to complete the work, and a new permit fee shall be
required.
(3) Upon any revocation, the sign(s) subject to such revoked permits,
whether freestanding, overhanging or projecting, shall be removed
by the licensee within 45 days of such revocation.
(4) Revocation shall not give cause to a right of total or partial
reimbursement of license fees paid.
I. Appeals. Any permit application reviewed by the City staff and/or the
Historic Preservation Commission which is denied or any revocation
under Subsection H above shall be subject to appeal to the Plan
Commission per the requirements of the conditional use process.
Charges for said appeal shall be returned if said appeal is successful.
J. Signs in historic and special districts.
(1) In designated historic districts and special districts, in addition to
the sign regulations in this article, all signs within any historic
district and special district shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 325, Historic Preservation, of the City's Municipal Code.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a sign permit for a new sign, as defined in
§ 550-131, or for a projecting sign, as defined in § 550-131B(6), the
applicant shall have the design reviewed by the Historic
Preservation Commission prior to approval.
(3) All internally illuminated signs, plastic or otherwise, are strictly
prohibited within a historic district.
§ 550-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-130
1:1293
(a) Except marquee signs, defined under § 550-131B(3) and that
comply with § 550-134C(1)(b)[3]. [Added 10-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-12]
(4) All projecting signs within a historic district or a special district
shall be designed to enhance and complement the historic
character of the buildings within the historic district or special
district and shall be subject to the following guidelines:
(a) No building may have more than one projecting sign per
customer entrance and no more than one projecting sign per
business for each street frontage where the building is built up
to the sidewalk.
(b) No projecting sign shall not be more than four feet in width,
with a maximum total projection, including bracketry, of five
feet from the building to which it is attached. The projecting
sign itself shall not be closer than six inches to the building to
which it is attached.
(c) Three-dimensional object or symbol signs are allowed, but may
not exceed two feet at their largest cross section. The sign
message shall be limited to the two surfaces perpendicular to
the building.
(d) No projecting sign shall exceed 12 square feet per side.
(e) Projecting signs and their supports shall not be less than 10
feet above grade.
(f) All fasteners and bracketry shall be securely fastened to the
building at both the top and bottom of the sign. All bracketry
shall be part of the overall design and shall be made to
enhance the sign. The fasteners shall be bolted to masonry
joints wherever possible to avoid damage to brick or
stonework.
(g) Projecting signs shall be positioned so they are an integral
design feature of the building and should help to define and
enhance architectural features. Signs shall only be placed in
the horizontal lintels or "sign space" above the storefront
windows or in other historically appropriate areas approved by
the Historic Preservation Commission.
(h) No projecting sign shall be placed, mounted or erected in such
a manner as to interfere with any exit, fire escape, window or
architectural ornamentation.
(i) Projecting signs may be externally illuminated only as follows:
[1] Shielded bulb lighting from below the sign.
[2] Gooseneck lighting from above the sign.
§ 550-130 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-130
1:1294
[3] Lighting shall be directed onto the sign and no other part
of the building.
(j) Sign colors should blend with the building facade to which the
sign is attached. No more than six colors shall be used. Colors
shall be selected from the low-intensity colors on the color
chart provided by the Historic Preservation Commission.
(k) The sign message shall be legible and relate to the business
use of the building to which it is attached. These requirements
may be accomplished through the use of words, names,
symbols and logos.
(l) Lettering styles shall be legible and contain no more than two
letter styles; lettering shall occupy no more than 60% of the
sign's total area, and capital letters shall be no more than 75%
of the height of the sign background.
(m) The allowance for projecting signs on buildings shall be limited
to a geographic area of the City of Watertown as outlined on
the Special District Boundary Map, which is attached to this
article and made a part hereof.239
(n) Allowable projecting sign materials shall be of one of the
following:
[1] Wood or wood laminates.
[2] Foam.
[3] Metal.
[4] Glass.
[5] Rules for modifying legal, nonconforming signs are found
in § 550-138B(1).
K. Enforcement. Upon written notice to the sign owner, if known, or the
owner of the property upon which the sign is located or affixed, the
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order the repair or
removal of any sign which is defective, which is an illegal
nonconforming sign, or which has been erected, installed, constructed
or maintained in violation of this article so as to be dangerous to the
public health and safety. In the event the person so notified should fail
to comply with such an order within 30 days of the date of such notice,
that person will be subject to the issuance of a citation under this
subsection.
(1) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this article shall be subject to a penalty, upon conviction thereof, by
forfeiture under § 1-4 of the Code, together with the costs of
239. Editor's Note: Official maps are on file in the City's offices.
§ 550-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-130
1:1295
§ 550-131. Signage definitions and general signage standards.
The following definitions shall be used by this article to assist in the
establishment of clear-cut signage regulations. In general, "sign purposes"
refers to where or how a sign is used. "Sign configurations" refers to the
style of the sign, and "sign measurement" explains how the dimensions of a
sign are determined.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors and in view of the general public, which is used to advertise,
identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, logos, symbols, fixtures, or projected
images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization
of nations, state, city, religious, fraternal or civic organization; also
merchandise and pictures or models of products or services incorporated
in a window display, works of art which in no way identify a product, or
scoreboards located on athletic fields. Building colors and outline lighting
which do not convey a logo or message specific to the use (as determined by
the Zoning Administrator) are not considered signs. Definitions of particular
functional, locational and structural types of signs are listed in this section.
(Traffic control and other public agency signs located within a right-ofway
are not included within this definition and are not regulated by the
provisions of this article.)
prosecution. Each separate offense and each day a violation
continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Other remedies in law or equity. Nothing under this subsection
shall prevent the City of Watertown from exercising any other
remedies in law or equity, and the penalties outlined herein are
cumulative and in addition to any other such remedies.
(3) Removal of defective or dangerous signs by the City. The Zoning
Administrator shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers
the public safety or health and extends or projects into any public
thoroughfare or right-of-way within the City, such as abandoned,
dangerous or materially defective signs or signs for which no
permit has been issued. Said removal shall only be accomplished
after at least a five-day written notice has been given, stating the
reasons for said emergency violation or removal. Said notice shall
state that, if the sign is not removed or the violation is not
corrected within said emergency five-day time period, the sign
shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection. All notices mailed by the Zoning Administrator shall be
mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, to
the owner of the sign, and to the occupant of the property, if the
identity and whereabouts of such persons can be determined.
Otherwise, notice should be mailed to such persons at the last
known address and posted on the sign or on the premises.
§ 550-130 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-131
1:1296
A. Sign purposes.
(1) Advertising sign (off-premises sign). A sign which directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted,
sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is
displayed. Advertising signs include billboards. [Refer to
§ 550-132A(10).] No new off-premises advertising signs shall be
permitted within the City, nor within any "City growth area"
established by intergovernmental agreement.
(2) Auxiliary sign. A sign which provides special information, such as
price, hours of operation, or warning, and which does not include
brand names or information regarding product lines or services. It
may contain a business logo if the logo is under one square foot in
area. Examples of such signs include "no trespassing" signs and
signs which list prices of gasoline, up to one price listing sign per
type of fuel, which must be displayed on a single structure. Refer to
§ 550-134C(2).
(3) Business sign (on-premises sign). A sign which directs attention to
a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold,
offered or manufactured upon the premises where the sign is
located. Refer to § 550-134.
(4) Community information sign. A permanent sign approved with a
conditional use permit per § 550-130C, which may have changeable
copy and which is limited to the display of information of interest to
the general community regarding scheduled public events and
public activities. Refer to § 550-130C.
(5) Directional sign, off-premises. A sign which indicates only the
name, direction and/or distance of a governmental facility. Refer to
§ 550-132A(6). This definition does not pertain to off-premises
advertising signs. Refer to § 550-131A(1).
(6) Directional sign, on-premises. A sign which indicates only the
name, logo (if under one square foot), and/or direction of a
pedestrian or traffic facility or a particular building within a
complex of structures on the property on which said facility or
building is located.
(7) Group sign. A sign displaying the collective name of a group of
uses, such as the title of a shopping center, office park, or industrial
park and its tenants. No sales or price information shall be
permitted. Portions of the sign containing names of individual
tenants shall be considered as part of the area of a group sign.
Group signs shall only be permitted within developments serving
two or more nonresidential tenants and are permitted on any form
of permitted business or identification signage.
§ 550-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-131
1:1297
(8) Identification sign. A sign indicating the name and/or address of the
project, property owner, tenant and/or manager of the property,
address, and name and phone number of the property manager.
(9) Temporary sign. A sign or advertising display (including festoons,
pennants, banners, pinwheels and similar devices) intended to be
displayed for a certain period of time (as permitted by § 550-135).
Included in the definition of "temporary signs" are retailers' signs
temporarily displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a
sale or special offer. If a sign display area is permanent but the
message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall
not be considered as temporary. A mobile or portable sign shall not
be considered a temporary sign or used for such a purpose. Refer
to § 550-135.
B. Sign types.
(1) Awning sign. A type of projecting, on-building sign [see Subsection
B(6) below] consisting of a fabric or fabric-like sheathing material.
(2) Freestanding sign. A self-supporting sign resting on or supported
by means of poles, standards or any other type of base on the
ground. This type of sign includes monument signs and pylon signs.
[Refer to Subsection B(5) and (7) below.] The base and support(s) of
any and all freestanding signs shall be concealed and shall comply
with the State Building Code. The height of a freestanding sign
shall be measured per Subsection C(1). Refer to § 550-132C(1).
(3) Marquee sign. A type of projecting, on-building sign [see
Subsection B(6) below] sheltering the entrance and/or entrance
approaches of a theater, auditorium, fairground, museum or other
use, which advertises present and scheduled events.
(4) Mobile sign. A sign mounted on a frame or chassis designed to be
easily relocated, including vehicles and/or trailers whose principal
commercial use is for signage. Refer to § 550-132A(5).
(5) Monument sign. A type of freestanding sign [see Subsection B(2)
above] whose bottom edge is located within one foot of a groundmounted
pedestal and whose top edge is no more than eight feet
high. Refer to § 550-132A(9) and B(1).
(6) Projecting sign. A type of on-building sign, other than a wall sign,
which is attached to and projects more than six inches, generally
perpendicular, from a structure or building face.
(7) Pylon sign. A type of freestanding sign [see Subsection B(2) above]
whose bottom edge is located more than one foot above a groundmounted
pedestal or whose top edge is located more than eight feet
high (see "monument sign").
§ 550-131 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-131
1:1298
(8) Wall sign. A type of on-building sign mounted parallel to a building
facade or other vertical building surface. Refer to § 550-132C(3).
(9) Personal greeting and congratulatory sign. A temporary sign which
is limited to 32 square feet, and which is limited to a
noncommercial personal greeting or message used to announce,
congratulate or greet members of a family or work staff.
C. Sign measurement.
(1) Ground level. The average elevation of the ground upon which the
sign supports are placed, except when the sign supports rest upon
a berm or other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In
such cases, the average elevation of the base of such berm or other
area shall be considered as the ground level.
(2) Sign area shall be measured in the following manner:
(a) In the case of a sign placed within a frame, a marquee sign, or
other structure, sign area consists of the entire surface area of
the sign on which copy could be placed. The supporting
structure or bracing of a sign, including the supports of
monument signs not used for copy, shall not be counted as a
part of the sign face area unless such structure or bracing is
made a part of the sign's message. Where a freestanding onpremises
sign (monument or pylon) has two or more display
faces, the total area of all of the display faces shall be
considered the sign face area.
(b) In the case of a sign whose message is fabricated together with
the background which borders or frames that message, sign
face area shall be the total area of the entire background.
(c) In the case of a sign whose message is applied to a background
which provides no border or frame (such as individual letters
to a building face or awning), sign face area shall be the
combined areas of the smallest rectangles which can
encompass each word, letter, figure, emblem and other
element of the sign message per a scaled, fully dimensioned
drawing approved by the Zoning Administrator. Where such
drawing is not provided, said area shall be the smallest area
enclosed in a single rectangle.
(d) Signs less than one square foot in area are not regulated by
this article.
The illustration below demonstrates how sign face area is
measured.
§ 550-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-131
1:1299
§ 550-132. General signage regulations.
The regulations contained in this section apply to signs in all districts.
A. Sign prohibitions and limitations.
(1) No sign shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form or
character in such manner as to interfere with moving traffic,
including signs which incorporate typical street type and/or traffic
control type signage designs and colors.
(2) Except for sequin-like eye-catcher devices and temporary signs, no
fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating or otherwise moving
signs or other decorations shall be permitted.
(3) No illuminated flashing signs shall be permitted. Flashing signs are
those which change their appearance more than once every 60
seconds. Electronic message center signs and time-andtemperature
signs are permitted with a conditional use permit.
Chasing lights shall be not be allowed.
(4) No illuminated sign shall be permitted unless the illumination of
the sign is so designed that the lighting element (except neon
signs) is not visible from any property within a residential zoning
district (per § 550-17 of this chapter). All illuminated signs shall
comply with the State Electrical Code.
(5) No mobile signs shall be permitted.
(6) Off-premises directional signs shall be permitted only for
governmental uses.
(7) No inflatable signs shall be permitted, except as temporary signs.
(8) No advertising vehicle signs shall be permitted, except as
temporary signs. Refer to §§ 550-131A(9) and 550-132C(4).
(9) No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic
visibility.
(10)No off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted except for the
small blue highway information signs as provided within the rightsof-
way of STHs 16, 19 and 26 per applicable State of Wisconsin
§ 550-131 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-132
1:1300
Statutes. Existing legal off-premises advertising signs made
nonconforming by this article shall be permitted to continue as
legal nonconforming structures. These signs may not be relocated,
structurally modified or replaced if damaged over 50%. These legal
nonconforming signs include the following list:
(a) Highway 26 north, at the approximate address of 1101 North
Church Street: one eight-foot-by-fifteen-foot double-faced
triangular sign and one eight-foot-by-nine-foot single-faced
sign;
(b) Highway 26 south, located at the approximate address of 38
Stimpson Street: one eight-foot-by-twenty-foot double-faced
sign;
(c) Highway 26 south, located at the approximate address of 1610
South Church Street: one eight-foot-by-ten-foot single-faced
sign;
(d) Highway 26 south, located at the approximate address of 1801
South Church Street: one ten-foot-by-eighteen-foot singlefaced
sign;
(e) Highway 19 west, located at the approximate address of 940
West Main Street: two ten-foot-by-eighteen-foot single-faced
side-by-side signs;
(f) Highway 19 east, located at the approximate address of 323
Summit Avenue: one eight-foot-by-eight-foot single-faced sign;
and
(g) Highway 16, located at the approximate address of 804
Hillside Lane: one eight-foot-by-twelve-foot double-faced sign.
B. Sign location requirements.
(1) No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by
reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color it
may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be
confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.
Freestanding signs may not locate within vision triangles nor
otherwise impede traffic or pedestrian visibility. Freestanding sign
setbacks from right-of-way lines vary by zoning district — refer to
§§ 550-133 and 550-134.
(2) No sign shall be located within a required buffer yard or within a
permanently protected green space area.
(3) No sign shall be mounted or displayed on the roof of a structure.
(4) No sign, temporary or otherwise, shall be displayed on private
property without the owner's or renter's permission.
§ 550-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-132
1:1301
(5) Private signs shall not be allowed within the road right-of-way lines,
with the following three exceptions, all of which may be displayed
between the private property line and the pavement edge or, where
the private signs are attached to a structure or buildings which is
immediately on the pavement edge, subject to written permission
of adjoining private property owner or renter. Said private signs
shall not be located in an area where the presence of the sign
would create a visibility or traffic hazard, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator or his designee:
(a) A political sign with an area no greater than five square feet
and a height no greater than three feet, pursuant to
§ 550-135D.
(b) Garage sale signs with an area no greater than five square feet
and a height no greater than three feet.
(c) Projecting sign, pursuant to § 550-130J.
(6) Projecting signs shall only be permitted if they exist as of the
effective date of this article or they are lawfully permitted signs in a
historic district or special district, pursuant to § 550-130J.
(7) Freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of 12 feet from
property lines or equivalent to their maximum height, whichever is
greater, except that on-premises directional signs less than 36
inches tall shall be located a minimum of one foot from a property
line.
(8) Awnings shall be located a minimum of 7 1/2 feet for the fabric and
eight feet for the frame over pedestrian ways.
(9) No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any
property or building without the express consent of the owner or
person entitled to possession of the property or building or their
authorized representative.
C. Sign configuration requirements.
(1) Freestanding sign configuration. A freestanding sign shall not be
erected so that it impedes visibility for safe pedestrian and/or
vehicular circulation. The footing and related supporting structure
of a freestanding sign including bolts, flanges, brackets, etc., shall
be concealed by the sign exterior, masonry covering, earth and
permanent ground cover, or through the use of evergreen shrubs.
Refer to § 550-131B(2).
(2) Projecting sign configuration. The bottom edge of a projecting sign
shall be located a minimum of 10 feet above the ground level
directly under the sign. Such sign shall be mounted on bracketry
which is directly attached to a building. In no instance shall such
§ 550-132 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-132
1:1302
§ 550-133. Sign regulations applicable to the CR-10, ER-1, SR-4,
TR-6, MR-8, MR-10 and SNR Zoning Districts.
sign be projecting more than five feet into and over a public rightof-
way or private street, drive or parking area.
(3) Wall sign configuration. A wall sign shall not extend beyond the
edge of any wall or other surface to which it is mounted, nor shall it
project more than 12 inches from its surface. The height of a wall
sign shall be measured from the base of the building below the sign
to the top of the sign face. The top of the sign shall be no higher
than the nearest portion of the building to which it is mounted
without a conditional use permit. Signs painted directly on a wall or
other portion of a building are not permitted. Refer to
§ 550-131B(8).
(4) Advertising vehicle sign configuration: No persons shall park any
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or on private properties
so as to be seen from a public right-of-way, which has attached
thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the
basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing
people to a business activity located on the same or nearby
property or any other premise. Licensed business vehicles
containing typical business signage and which are actively used on
a daily basis for business purposes, are exempt from this
prohibition. Refer to § 550-132A(8).
A. Rules for all signs.
(1) Signs shall comply with all provisions of the Municipal Code,
including §§ 550-131 and 550-132 for general signage definitions
and regulations.
(2) Signage on a lot shall be limited to the combined total of all signs
listed under Subsection B below, or as otherwise modified by
conditional use, conditional zoning, planned development, deed
restriction or other site-specific regulation, restriction or
requirement. The owner of a property containing more than one
tenant shall allocate signs to the tenants, up to the allowed
maximum for the entire property. This provision will allow the
property owner to allocate all of the allowed signage to one tenant
and none to another tenant if they see fit to do so.
B. Rules for particular sign purposes.
(1) Identification sign.
(a) For one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family dwelling:
[1] Permitted sign type: wall sign.
[2] Maximum permitted number per lot: one.
§ 550-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-133
1:1303
[3] Maximum permitted area per sign: two square feet.
(b) For multifamily dwelling of five or more units or institutional
use:
[1] Permitted sign type: wall sign, canopy sign or monument
sign.
[2] Maximum permitted number per lot: one monument, plus
one wall or canopy.
[3] Maximum permitted area per sign: 24 square feet.
(c) For group development or subdivision:
[1] Permitted sign type: wall sign, canopy sign or monument
sign.
[2] Maximum permitted number per development: per plat or
conditional use.
[3] Maximum permitted area per sign: 32 square feet.
[4] Maximum combined permitted area of all signs: per plat or
conditional use.
(2) Auxiliary sign (such as "Beware of Dog" or "No Trespassing") for all
land uses:
(a) Permitted sign type: wall sign.
(b) Maximum permitted number per lot: two.
(c) Maximum permitted area per sign: two square feet.
(3) On-premises directional sign (for multifamily, group development
or institutional use):
(a) Permitted sign type: wall sign or monument sign.
(b) Maximum permitted number per lot: one sign for each
vehicular entrance, one sign for each vehicular exit, one sign
for each parking area conditions list. Institutional uses may use
any additional number of signs as needed.
(c) Maximum permitted area per sign: nine square feet.
(4) Temporary sign: per § 550-135.
(5) On-premises business sign (for legal, nonconforming business
only): shall comply with provisions of § 550-134 for NB District.
(6) Off-premises directional sign (for governmental facility only):
(a) Permitted sign type: wall sign or monument sign.
§ 550-133 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-133
1:1304
§ 550-134. Sign regulations applicable to RH, NO, PO, NB, PB, GB,
PI, GI and HI Zoning Districts.
(b) Maximum permitted number per development: per conditional
use permit.
(c) Maximum permitted area per sign: four square feet.
(d) Maximum permitted area of all signs: per conditional use
permit.
(7) Community information sign: per § 550-130C.
A. Rules for all signs.
(1) Signs shall comply with all provisions of the Municipal Code,
including §§ 550-131 and 550-132 for general signage definitions
and regulations.
(2) Signage on a lot shall be limited to the combined total of all signs
listed under Subsection B below, or as otherwise modified by
conditional use, conditional zoning, planned development, deed
restriction or other site-specific regulation, restriction or
requirement. The owner of a property containing more than one
tenant shall allocate signs to the tenants, up to the allowed
maximum for the entire property. This provision will allow the
property owner to allocate all of the allowed signage to one tenant
and none to another tenant if he sees fit to do so.
B. Rules for particular sign purposes (all residential and institutional land
uses): shall comply with provisions of § 550-133.
C. Rules for particular sign purposes (all office, commercial and industrial
land uses).
(1) Business signs:
(a) For RH, NO, PO, NB, PB, PI, GI and HI Zoning Districts:
[1] Permitted sign type. On-building (wall or awning) sign.
[a] Maximum permitted number per lot: two on-building
signs per each business fronting on that wall, for each
exposed side of the principal use building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
[b] Maximum permitted area per sign: one square foot of
signage for every linear foot of exposed exterior wall
length on that supporting wall.
[2] Permitted sign type: freestanding (monument or pylon)
sign.
§ 550-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-134
1:1305
[a] Maximum permitted number per lot: one freestanding
sign per lot, for any lot containing more than four
public parking spaces.
[b] Maximum permitted area per sign: one square foot of
signage for every foot of the adjacent public street
frontage selected for the lot — up to a maximum sign
area of 150 square feet for all combined sign faces.
[c] Maximum permitted sign height: 10 feet.
[d] Minimum permitted sign setback: 12 feet.
(b) For CB Zoning District:
[1] Permitted sign type: on-building (wall, awning or marquee)
sign.
[a] Maximum permitted number per lot: two on-building
signs per each business fronting on that wall, for each
exposed side of the principal use building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
[b] Maximum permitted area per sign: one square foot of
signage for every linear foot of exposed exterior wall
length on that supporting wall.
[2] Permitted sign type: freestanding (monument or pylon)
sign.
[a] Maximum permitted number per lot: one freestanding
sign per lot, for any lot containing more than four
public parking spaces.
[b] Maximum permitted area per sign: one square foot of
signage for every foot of the adjacent public street
frontage selected for the lot — up to a maximum sign
area of 100 square feet for all combined sign faces.
[c] Maximum permitted sign height: 10 feet.
[d] Minimum permitted sign setback: 12 feet.
[3] Permitted sign type: marquee sign. [Added 10-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-12]
[a] All marquee signs shall require a conditional use
permit.
[b] All marquee signs shall be restored to their original
appearance and dimensions based on historic photos
and any other documentation.
§ 550-134 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-134
1:1306
[c] Marquee signs may have lighting restored to their
original appearance and dimensions based on historic
photos and any other documentation.
[d] Marquee signs shall only be permitted on structures
with evidence, historic photos and any other
documentation of a prior marquee sign.
(c) For GB Zoning District:
[1] Permitted sign type: on-building (wall or awning) sign.
[a] Maximum permitted number per lot: four on-building
signs per each business fronting on that wall, for each
exposed side of the principal use building not directly
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
[b] Maximum permitted area per sign: one square foot of
signage for every linear foot of exposed exterior wall
length on that supporting wall.
[2] Permitted sign type: freestanding (monument or pylon)
sign.
[a] Maximum permitted number per lot: one freestanding
sign per lot, for any lot containing more than four
public parking spaces.
[b] Maximum permitted area per sign: one square foot of
signage for every foot of the adjacent public street
frontage selected for the lot — up to a maximum sign
area of 200 square feet for all combined sign faces.
[c] Maximum permitted sign height: 25 feet in the GB
District.
[d] Minimum permitted sign setback: 12 feet or equal to
or greater than sign height, whichever is greater.
(2) Auxiliary sign (such as required gas price signs or "No
Trespassing" sign).
(a) Permitted sign type: Wall sign or freestanding sign.
(b) Maximum permitted number per lot: per approved site plan.
(c) Maximum permitted area per sign: Combined area of all
auxiliary signs shall not exceed an area equivalent to 50% of
the permitted freestanding or on-building sign area, whichever
is greater.
(3) On-premises directional sign.
(a) Permitted sign type: wall sign or monument sign.
§ 550-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-134
1:1307
§ 550-135. Temporary signs.
For all temporary signs the owner or tenant must contact the Zoning
Administrator and provide the name and address of the applicant and the
description and location of the sign to be erected prior to actual installation.
Only one temporary sign may be displayed on a property at any one time.
Except as provided by Subsections A through E below, any one lot is
permitted to display a temporary sign for a maximum of 30 days within any
twelve-month period. Furthermore, any one lot is limited to a maximum of
two temporary signs in any twelve-month period (political signs are exempt
from this restriction). A portable sign is not a temporary sign.
(b) Maximum permitted number per lot: one sign for each
vehicular entrance, one sign for each vehicular exit, one sign
for each parking area conditions list.
(c) Maximum permitted area per sign: nine square feet.
(4) Temporary sign: per § 550-135.
(5) Off-premises directional sign (for governmental facility only).
(a) Permitted sign type: wall sign or monument sign.
(b) Maximum permitted number per development: per conditional
use permit.
(c) Maximum permitted area per sign: four square feet.
(d) Maximum permitted area of all signs: per conditional use
permit.
(6) Community information sign: per § 550-130C.
A. For each lot: one "For Sale," "For Rent" or "Garage Sale" sign, not more
than six square feet in area, up to 32 square feet for vacant commercial
and industrial properties.
B. For construction on or development of a lot: one sign not more than 32
square feet in area, indicating the name of the contractors, engineers or
architect, or products being used in the construction of a building, but
only during the time that construction or development is actively under
way.
C. Temporary events.
(1) For a temporary event of public interest such as a neighborhood
garage sale or church fair, one sign is permitted, not over 32 square
feet in area, located upon the site of the event. Such sign shall not
be erected more than 30 days before the event and shall be
removed immediately after the event.
(2) For a temporary event such as a garage sale, signs not over five
square feet which containing the address of the sale are permitted
§ 550-134 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-135
1:1308
§ 550-136. Appearances, construction, and maintenance of signage.
and may be located in a public right-of-way. See § 550-132B(5)(b).
Such sign(s) shall not be erected more than one day before the
event, and all sign(s) must be removed before 6:00 p.m. of the day
following the event. Failure to remove the sign(s) will result in a
ten-dollar forfeiture.
D. Temporary political signs are permitted without restriction so long as
they locate per the requirements of § 550-132B(4) and (5), do not
impair vision, or do not otherwise create a public nuisance. Such sign
shall not be erected more than 60 days before any election for which
the person is a candidate or the referendum question will be voted on
and shall be removed within 48 hours after the candidate/question no
longer will seek voter approval at the next election.
E. For each real estate subdivision that has been approved in accordance
with the City of Watertown Land Division Regulations, two temporary
development project identification signs are permitted to be located on
some portion of the subject subdivision. Each such sign shall be not
more than 32 square feet in area. These signs shall comply with the
visibility standards of § 550-132A(9). These signs shall be permitted to
remain within the subject subdivision until a time at which building
permits have been issued for 80% or more of the lots in the subdivision.
F. One personal greeting/congratulatory sign per premises shall be
permitted for up to seven days, which is limited to eight feet in height
and 32 square feet in dimension and which is not intended for
commercial purposes.
A. All signage within the jurisdiction of this article shall remain in a state
of proper maintenance. Refer to Subsection B below.
B. Proper maintenance shall be the absence of loose materials (including
peeling paint, paper or other material), the lack of excessive rust, the
lack of excessive vibration or shaking, and the presence of the original
structural integrity of the sign, its frame and other supports, its
mounting, and all components thereof.
C. The repainting, changing of parts and preventive maintenance of signs
which completely conform to the requirements of this article, and result
in absolutely no change in the appearance of the sign from that
originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign
permit.
D. The owner, lessee or manager of a sign and the owner of the land on
which the same is located shall keep grass or weeds and other growth
cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on
which the sign is located.
E. Any signs which may be, or may hereafter become, rotted, unsafe or in
a state which is not properly maintained shall be repaired or removed
§ 550-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-136
1:1309
§ 550-137. Daily notice signs (sandwich board signs).
See § 457-10 in the Streets and Sidewalks Chapter of this Code.
§ 550-138. Nonconforming signs.
by the licensee or owner of the sign or owner of the property upon
which the sign stands upon notice of the Zoning Administrator.
F. All signs shall be constructed and mounted so as to comply with state
building codes.
G. All signs shall be constructed and maintained to conform with state
electrical codes.
H. The base of signs shall be landscaped so as to conceal footings,
mountings, brackets and related structural elements.
I. All signs shall in no instance create a traffic visibility or other safety
hazard.
J. Signage found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the provisions of § 550-130K.
A. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Signs existing as of the effective date of this article which do not
conform to the provisions of this article shall be nonconforming
signs and shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection B.
Nonconforming signs may be maintained. No nonconforming onpremises
sign shall be altered or moved to a new location without
being brought into compliance with the requirements of this
article. Refer to Subsection B(1) below.
(2) Business signs on the premises of a nonconforming use or building
may be continued per Subsection B, but new signs for such uses
shall not be allowed, nor shall they expand in number, area, height
or illumination. New signs, not to exceed the maximum allowable
aggregate sign area, may be erected only upon the complete
removal of all other signs existing at the time of adoption of this
article.
(3) Nonconforming signs shall be removed when the principal
structure located on the premises undergoes a change of use or
shall be removed per Subsection B. Closing businesses must
remove their signs within 60 days of closing.
(4) Signage not in compliance with the provisions of this section shall
be subject to the provisions of Subsection B.
(5) Whenever there is a change in the sign user (excluding off-premises
signs), owner, or owner of the property on which the sign is located,
the new sign user, owner, or new property owner shall forthwith
§ 550-136 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-138
1:1310
notify the Zoning Administrator of the change. No new sign permit
is required unless there is modification of the sign face or sign
structure.
B. Removal of nonconforming signs.
(1) Alteration of signs. All legal nonconforming signs may be
continued, unless altered as defined below.
(a) For the purpose of this article, alteration of a sign is considered
to be a change (except for permitted changes as set forth
below) to the exterior appearance of the sign, its frame, its
supporting structure, or its lighting, including changing the
message (except for marquee or off-premises advertising
signs), symbols, color, material, height, location or other
alterations as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Altering a sign does not include maintaining the effective
operation of or the existing appearance of the sign; replacing
the sign face or the supporting structure with identical
materials, colors and messages; changing the message of a
marquee sign; or changing the face of an off-premises
advertising sign.
(c) The owner of a nonconforming sign who is dissatisfied with the
determination of the Zoning Administrator may appeal that
determination to the Planning Commission within 60 days.
(2) All on-premise signs found not to be in compliance with the
provisions of this article shall be removed within 30 days of
receiving written notice of noncompliance and removal from the
Zoning Administrator.
(3) The penalties of § 550-130K of this article shall be applicable to
violations of the provisions of this article.
§ 550-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-138
1:1311

ARTICLE XIII
Procedures and Administration
§ 550-139. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedural requirements
for zoning text amendments, Zoning Map amendments, conditional use
review and approval, temporary use review and approval, site plan review
and approval, certificates of occupancy, variances, zoning provision
interpretations by the Zoning Administrator, and appeals of zoning
provision interpretations to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 550-140. Amendment of zoning regulations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to provisions of this chapter. [Refer to
the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats.]
B. Initiation of request for amendment of this chapter. Proceedings for
amendment of this chapter may be initiated by any one of the following
three methods:
(1) An application by any member of the general public;
(2) A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(3) By action of the Common Council.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed amendments to
this chapter, regardless of the party of their initiation per Subsection B
above, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall
be certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator. No placement of
the application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur
unless said certification has occurred. The item may be placed on any
agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the Zoning
Administrator, without an application. Upon certification, the official
notice regarding the application will be sent to the newspaper by the
Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of
all of the following:
(1) A copy of the portion of the current provisions of this chapter which
is proposed to be amended, with said provisions clearly indicated in
a manner which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier;
(2) A copy of the text which is proposed to replace the current text;
and
(3) As an optional requirement, the applicant may wish to provide
written justification for the proposed text amendment, consisting of
the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed text
amendment is in harmony with the recommendation of the
§ 550-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-140
1:1313
Comprehensive Plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with
the standards set out in Subsection D(3)(a) through (d) below.
D. Review by the Zoning Administrator. The proposed text amendment
shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return the application to the applicant. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall
so notify the applicant.
(2) Upon notifying the applicant that his application is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed text
amendment provided in the application per Subsection C(1)
through (3) above.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may also evaluate the application to
determine whether the proposed text amendment is in harmony
with the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly
as evidenced by compliance with the standards of Subsection
D(3)(a) through (d) below:
(a) The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of this
chapter as outlined in § 550-5.
(b) The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of the
general article in which the amendment is proposed to be
located.
(c) The proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of the
specific section in which the amendment is proposed to be
located.
(d) The following factors have arisen that are not properly
addressed in the current zoning text:
[1] The provisions of this chapter should be brought into
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan. (If a factor
related to the proposed amendment, note pertinent
portions of the Comprehensive Plan.)
[2] A change has occurred in the land market or other factors
have arisen which require a new form of development, a
new type of land use, or a new procedure to meet said
change(s).
[3] New methods of development or providing infrastructure
make it necessary to alter this chapter to meet these new
factors.
§ 550-140 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-140
1:1314
[4] Changing governmental finances require amending this
chapter in order to meet the needs of the government in
terms of providing and affording public services.
(e) If the proposed text amendment is concerned with the
provisions of Articles III through VI and/or Article VII, the
proposed amendment maintains the desired overall
consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use
impacts within the pertinent zoning districts.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per Subsection
D(2) and, if it has been prepared, the report per Subsection D(3) to
the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in
making its recommendation to the Common Council. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with
the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
E. Review and recommendation by the Plan Commission. The Common
Council shall not make an amendment to this chapter without allowing
for a recommendation from the Plan Commission per the provisions of
this subsection.
(1) The Plan Commission shall consider the application at a regular or
special meeting open to the public, which date shall be deemed the
date of filing with the Commission, within a reasonable period after
the acceptance and determination of the complete application as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. The applicant may appear
in person or by agent and/or by attorney.
(2) Within 60 days after the public meeting (or within an extension of
said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by
the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission may make a written
report to the Common Council and/or shall state in the minutes its
findings regarding Subsection D above and its recommendations
regarding the application as a whole. Said report and/or minutes
may include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by
the Plan Commission concerning the requirements of Subsection
D(3)(a) through (d) above.
(3) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after
the filing of said complete application [and in the absence of an
applicant-approved extension per Subsection E(2) above], then the
Common Council may proceed per Subsection F below. Failure to
receive said written report from the Plan Commission per
Subsection E(1) above shall not invalidate the proceedings or
actions of the Common Council.
(4) If the Plan Commission recommends approval of an application, it
shall state in the minutes or in a subsequently issued written report
its conclusion and any finding of facts supporting its conclusion as
to the following: that the potential public benefits of the proposed
§ 550-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-140
1:1315
amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the
proposed amendment, as identified in Subsection D(3)(a) through
(d) above, after taking into consideration the proposal by the
applicant.
F. Review and action by the Common Council. The Common Council shall
consider the Plan Commission's recommendation regarding the
proposed text amendment. The Council may request further
information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission,
Zoning Administrator and/or the applicant.
(1) A public hearing before the Common Council will be schedule to
consider the application within a reasonable time after receipt of
the written recommendation from the Plan Commission. The
applicant may appear in person or by agent and/or by attorney.
Notice of the proposed amendment and the public hearing shall
conform to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said
notice shall contain a description of the proposed text change. In
addition, at least 10 days before said public hearing, the Zoning
Administrator shall mail an identical notice to the applicant and to
the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000
feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this chapter. Failure to mail
said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate
proceedings under this section.
(2) At the next Common Council meeting, the Council may take final
action on the application at the time of public hearing or may
continue the proceedings, at the Council's or applicant's request.
The Common Council may approve the amendment as originally
proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with
modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning
Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, its
own members, or public input), or may deny approval of the
proposed amendment. If the Common Council wishes to make
significant changes in the proposed text amendment, as
recommended by the Plan Commission, then the procedure set
forth in § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats., shall be followed prior to Council
action.
(3) When the Common Council takes affirmative action on the
application, it shall state in the adopting ordinance its conclusion
and any finding of facts supporting its conclusion as to the
following: that the potential public benefits of the proposed
amendment sufficiently outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts of the proposed amendment, as identified in Subsection
D(3)(a) through (d) above, after taking into consideration the
proposal by the applicant and the recommendation of the Plan
Commission. Any action to approve or allow the proposed
amendment requires a majority vote of the Council. The Common
Council's approval of the proposed amendment shall be considered
§ 550-140 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-140
1:1316
§ 550-141. Amendment of Official Zoning Map.
the approval of a unique request and shall not be construed as
precedent for any other proposed amendment.
G. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
H. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 550-157.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to provisions of the Official Zoning
Map (see § 550-18). Refer to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis.
Stats.
B. Initiation of request for amendment to Official Zoning Map.
Proceedings for amendment of the Official Zoning Map may be initiated
by any one of the following three methods:
(1) An application of the owner(s) of the subject property, lease
holders, or contract purchasers;
(2) A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(3) By action of the Common Council.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed amendments to
the Official Zoning Map, regardless of the party of their initiation per
Subsection B above, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning
Administrator and shall be certified as complete by the Zoning
Administrator. No placement of the application on any agenda, as an
item to be acted upon, shall occur unless said certification has
occurred. The item may be placed on any agenda as a discussion-only
item, with the permission of the Zoning Administrator, without an
application. Upon certification, the official notice regarding the
application will be sent to the newspaper by the Zoning Administrator.
Said complete application shall be comprised of all of the following:
(1) The City shall prepare a map of the subject property, showing all
lands for which the zoning is proposed to be amended and all other
lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands
on said map as they appear on the current assessment records of
the City of Watertown. Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its
parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly
reproducible with a photocopier and shall be at a scale not less
§ 550-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-141
1:1317
than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject
property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be provided;
(2) The City shall supply a map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the
generalized location of the subject property in relation to the City
as a whole; and
(3) As an optional requirement, the applicant may wish to provide
justification for the proposed map amendment, consisting of the
reasons why the applicant believes the proposed map amendment
is in harmony with recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan,
particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards set out
in Subsection D(3)(a) through (c) below.
D. Review by the Zoning Administrator. The proposed amendment to the
Official Zoning Map shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as
follows:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return the application to the applicant. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall
so notify the applicant.
(2) Upon notifying the applicant that his application is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed map
amendment provided in the application, per Subsection C(3) above.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may also evaluate the application to
determine whether the proposed Zoning Map amendment is in
harmony with the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan,
particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards of
Subsection D(3)(a) through (c) below:
(a) The proposed Official Zoning Map amendment furthers the
purposes of this chapter as outlined in § 550-5 and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
(b) The following factors have arisen that are not properly
addressed on the current Official Zoning Map:
[1] The designations of the Official Zoning Map should be
brought into conformity with the Comprehensive Plan.
[2] A mistake was made in mapping on the Official Zoning
Map. (That is, an area is developing in a manner and
purpose different from that for which it is mapped.) Note:
§ 550-141 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-141
1:1318
If this reason is cited, it must be demonstrated that the
discussed inconsistency between actual land use and
designated zoning is not intended, as the City may intend
to stop an undesirable land use pattern from spreading.
[3] Factors have changed (such as the availability of new data,
the presence of new roads or other infrastructure,
additional development, annexation or other zoning
changes) making the subject property more appropriate
for a different zoning district.
[4] Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating
the need for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map.
(c) The proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map maintains
the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and
land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject
property.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per Subsection
D(2) and, if it has been prepared, the report per Subsection D(3) to
the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in the
making its recommendation to the Common Council. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with
the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
E. Initial review by the Plan Commission and scheduling of Common
Council public hearing. The Common Council shall not make an
amendment to the Official Zoning Map without allowing for a
recommendation from the Plan Commission per the provisions of this
subsection.
(1) The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place
for a public meeting to hear the application within 45 days of the
acceptance and determination of the complete application as
determined by the Zoning Administrator. The applicant may appear
in person, by agent and/or by attorney.
(2) Within 60 days after the public meeting (or within an extension of
said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by
the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall schedule a public
hearing before the Common Council.
F. Common Council public hearing and referral to Plan Commission. The
Common Council shall hold a public hearing on the requested Zoning
Map amendment and refer the matter and public hearing minutes to the
Plan Commission for its recommendations to the Common Council. The
applicant may appear before the Common Council in person, by agent,
and/or by attorney. Notice of the proposed amendment and the public
hearing shall conform to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats.
Said notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the
§ 550-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-141
1:1319
proposed change in zoning. In addition, at least 10 days before said
public hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall mail an identical notice
to the applicant, to all property owners within 300 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property as identified in Subsection C(1)
above, and to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within
1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this chapter. Failure
to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate
proceedings under this section.
G. Review and recommendation by the Plan Commission. The Common
Council shall not make an amendment to the Official Zoning Map
without allowing for a recommendation from the Plan Commission per
the provisions of this subsection.
(1) Within 60 days after the public hearing (or within an extension of
said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by
the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall make a written
report to the Common Council stating its findings regarding
Subsection D above and its recommendations regarding the
application as a whole. Said report shall include a formal finding of
facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission concerning
the requirements of Subsection D(3)(a) through (c).
(2) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after
the filing of said complete application [and in the absence of an
applicant-approved extension per Subsection G(1) above], then the
Common Council may act on the application within 30 days after
the expiration of said sixty-day period. Failure to receive said
written report from the Plan Commission per Subsection G(1)
above shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the
Common Council.
(3) If the Plan Commission recommends approval of an application, it
shall state in the minutes or in a subsequently issued written
decision its conclusion and any finding of facts supporting its
conclusion as to the following: that the potential public benefits of
the proposed amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts of the proposed amendment, as identified in Subsection
D(3)(a) through (c) above, after taking into consideration the
proposal by the applicant.
H. Review and action by the Common Council. The Common Council shall
consider the Plan Commission's recommendation regarding the
proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The Council shall hold
two readings of the ordinance unless the Council votes to waive this
requirement. The Council may request further information and/or
additional reports from the Plan Commission, the Zoning Administrator,
and/or the applicant. The Council may take final action on the
application to amend the Official Zoning Map following the second
reading or may continue the proceedings, at the Council's or the
applicant's request. The Common Council may approve the amendment
§ 550-141 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-141
1:1320
§ 550-142. Conditional use review and approval procedures.
as originally proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with
modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator,
the Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, its own members,
or public input) or may deny approval of the proposed amendment.
If the Common Council wishes to make significant changes in the
proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map, as recommended by
the Plan Commission, then the procedure set forth in § 62.23(7)(d),
Wis. Stats., shall be followed prior to Council action. Any action to
amend the Official Zoning Map requires a majority vote of the Council.
The Common Council's approval of the requested amendment shall be
considered the approval of a unique request and shall not be construed
as precedent for any other proposed amendment.
I. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
J. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 550-157.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that govern the
procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial,
of proposed conditional uses. Amendments to existing conditional
uses shall follow the same procedures as required for new
conditional uses.
(2) Certain uses in situations which are of a special nature or are so
dependent upon actual contemporary circumstances as to make
impractical the predetermination of permissibility or the detailing
in this chapter of specific standards, regulations or conditions
which would permit such determination in each individual situation
may be permitted as conditional uses.
(3) Under this chapter, a proposed conditional use shall be denied
unless the applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City,
that the proposed conditional use will not create undesirable
impacts on nearby properties, the environment or the community
as a whole.
B. Initiation of request for approval of a conditional use. Proceedings for
approval of a conditional use may be initiated by an application of the
owner(s) of the subject property, lease holders, or contract purchasers.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed conditional
uses, regardless of the party of their initiation per Subsection B above,
shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be
certified as complete by the Zoning Administrator. No placement of the
application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur
§ 550-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1321
unless said certification has occurred. The item may be placed on any
agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the Zoning
Administrator, without an application. Upon certification, the official
notice regarding the application will be sent to the newspaper by the
Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of
all of the following:
(1) The City shall prepare a map of the subject property, showing all
lands for which the conditional use is proposed and all other lands
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together
with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said
map as the same appear on the current assessment records of the
City of Watertown. Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its
parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly
reproducible with a photocopier and shall be at a scale that is not
less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject
property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be provided.
(2) The City shall supply a map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the
generalized location of the subject property in relation to the City
as a whole.
(3) A written description of the proposed conditional use, describing
the type of activities, buildings and structures proposed for the
subject property and their general locations.
(4) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development.
Said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of
§ 550-145C, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. If the
proposed conditional use is a group development (per § 550-145), a
proposed preliminary plat or conceptual plat may be substituted for
the required site plan, provided said plat contains all information
required on said site plan per § 550-145, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
(5) As an optional requirement, the applicant may wish to provide
written justification for the proposed conditional use, consisting of
the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed conditional
use is appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with
the standards set forth in Subsection D(3)(a) through (f) below.
D. Review by the Zoning Administrator. The proposed conditional use shall
be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return the application to the applicant. If the Zoning
§ 550-142 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-142
1:1322
Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall
so notify the applicant.
(2) Upon notifying the applicant that his application is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed conditional
use provided in the application per Subsection C(5) above.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the application to
determine whether the requested conditional use is in harmony
with the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly
as evidenced by compliance with the standards of Subsection
D(3)(a) through (f) below:
(a) The proposed conditional use (the use in general, independent
of its location) is in harmony with the purposes, goals,
objectives, policies and standards of the City of Watertown
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, and any other plan, program
or ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to
official notice by the City.
(b) The proposed conditional use (in its specific location) is in
harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and
standards of the City of Watertown Comprehensive Plan, this
chapter, and any other plan, program or ordinance adopted or
under consideration pursuant to official notice by the City.
(c) The proposed conditional use, in its proposed location and as
depicted on the required site plan [see Subsection C(4) above],
does not result in a substantial or undue adverse impact on
nearby property, the character of the neighborhood,
environmental factors, traffic factors, parking, public
improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other
matters affecting the public health, safety or general welfare,
either as they now exist or as they may in the future be
developed as a result of the implementation of the provisions of
this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, or any other plan,
program, map or ordinance adopted or under consideration
pursuant to official notice by the City or other governmental
agency having jurisdiction to guide development.
(d) The proposed conditional use maintains the desired
consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use
impacts as related to the environs of the subject property.
(e) The proposed conditional use is located in an area that will be
adequately served by, and will not impose an undue burden on,
any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or services
provided by public agencies serving the subject property.
(f) The potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use
outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1323
conditional use [as identified in Subsection D(3)(a) through (e)
above], after taking into consideration the applicant's proposal
and any requirements recommended by the applicant to
ameliorate such impacts.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the reports per Subsection
D(2) to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in
conflict with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
E. Review and action by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall
consider the Zoning Administrator's recommendation regarding the
proposed conditional use. The Commission may request further
information and/or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator
and/or the applicant. [Amended by Ord. No. 07-08]
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing to
consider the application within a reasonable time after receipt of
the application. The applicant may appear in person or by agent
and/or by attorney. Notice of the proposed conditional use and the
public hearing shall conform to the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d),
Wis. Stats. Said notice shall contain a description of the subject
property and the proposed conditional use. In addition, at least 10
days before said public hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall
mail an identical notice to the applicant, to all property owners
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as
identified in Subsection C(1) above, and to the clerk of any
municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion
of the jurisdiction of this chapter. Failure to mail said notice to said
clerk(s) of such neighboring municipalities, provided it is
unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section.
(2) The Plan Commission may take final action on the application at the
time of public hearing or may continue the proceedings. The Plan
Commission may approve the conditional use as originally
proposed, may approve the proposed conditional use with
modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning
Administrator, authorized outside experts, its own members, or
public input), or may deny approval of the proposed conditional
use. If the Plan Commission wishes to approve significant changes
in a proposed conditional use which result in more development
than proposed at the time of public notice, then the procedure set
forth in § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats., shall be followed prior to
Commission action.
(3) When the Plan Commission takes affirmative action on the
application, it shall state in the minutes its conclusion and any
finding of facts supporting its conclusion as to the following: that
the potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use
sufficiently outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the
§ 550-142 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-142
1:1324
proposed conditional use, as identified in Subsection D(3)(a) to
(f) above, after taking into consideration the proposal by the
applicant, the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, and
any public input. Any action to approve or allow the proposed
conditional use requires a majority vote of the Commission. The
Plan Commission's approval of the proposed conditional use shall
be considered the approval of a unique request and shall not be
construed as precedent for any other proposed conditional use.
F. Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
G. Termination of an approved conditional use. Upon approval by the Plan
Commission, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed
conditional use meets all general and specific conditional use
requirements in the site plan required for initiation of development
activity on the subject property per § 550-145. Once a conditional use is
granted, no erosion control permit, site plan approval (per § 550-145),
occupancy permit (per § 550-146), or building permit shall be issued for
any development which does not comply with all requirements of this
chapter. Any conditional use found not to be in compliance with the
terms of this chapter or conditions of its approval shall be considered in
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable
procedures and penalties. A conditional use may be revoked for such a
violation by majority vote of the Plan Commission following the
procedures outlined in Subsections B through F above.
H. Time limits on the development of conditional use. The start of
construction of any and all conditional uses shall be initiated within 365
days of their approval by the Plan Commission and shall be operational
within 730 days of said approval. Failure to initiate development within
this period shall automatically constitute a revocation of the conditional
use. For the purposes of this section, "operational" shall be defined as
the granting of a occupancy permit for the conditional use. Prior to such
a revocation, the applicant may request an extension of this period.
Said request shall require formal approval by the Plan Commission and
shall be based upon a showing of acceptable justification (as
determined by the Plan Commission).
I. Discontinuing an approved conditional use. Any and all conditional uses
which have been discontinued for a period exceeding 365 days shall
have their conditional use invalidated automatically. The burden of
proof shall be on the property owner to conclusively demonstrate that
the subject conditional use was operational during this period.
J. Successor conditional uses. [Amended by Ord. No. 14-1]
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1325
(1) Definition. A "successor conditional use" is a land use which has
been granted a conditional use permit by the City which is
proposed to undergo one or more of the following:
(a) No change in the specific land use within the same broad land
use category identified with the lettered headings listed in
Article IV of this chapter (such as remaining a restaurant under
"H. Indoor commercial entertainment" or remaining an
elementary school under "C. Indoor institutional");
(b) Only a change in the ownership of the subject property;
(c) Only a change in the ownership of the business or other
operator of the land use; and
(d) Other changes explicitly identified in a currently valid
conditional use permit which are identified as acceptable as a
successor conditional use.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to create a process
which:
(a) Verifies that the proposed change is a valid successor
conditional use;
(b) Creates a record that the proposed change is recognized by the
City as a successor conditional use;
(c) Clarifies that the same conditions of approval, development
and operation continue to apply to a successor conditional use;
and
(d) Reduces the costs and time needed to approve a successor
conditional use.
(3) Approval process. A successor conditional use shall not require the
granting of a new conditional use permit by the City. However, prior
to operation of the successor conditional use, the property owner
and the operator of the successor conditional use shall sign a
Successor Conditional Use Extension Form, provided by the Zoning
Administrator (or an official designee). This form shall list the
conditions from the original conditional use permit, and the
signatures shall indicate that the property owner and conditional
use operator understand the conditions and acknowledge that they
are extended to their successor conditional use. The executed form,
also signed by the Zoning Administrator (or an official designee) to
indicate acceptance of the extension, shall be recorded at the
County Register of Deeds for the subject property. To enable
operation of the successor conditional use, the Zoning
Administrator's office shall be provided with a copy of the form,
which includes the Register of Deeds' recording number.
§ 550-142 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-142
1:1326
(4) Proposed expansions are not eligible. Any physical enlargement of
a previously approved conditional use in terms of buildings,
structures, activity areas, and/or any expansion of the conditions of
operation, beyond the limits of site plans, floor plans and conditions
of operation approved through the conditional use process, shall
not be eligible for treatment as a successor conditional use and
must seek an amendment to its conditional use permit through the
conditional use process.
(5) Ineligible land uses. The following land uses are not eligible for
treatment as a successor conditional use and shall require approval
of a new limited conditional use permit which is specific to both the
business owner and to the property owner, per Subsection J(6)
below:
(a) Intermediate home day care (nine to 15 children) land uses in
residential zoning districts.
(b) Bed-and-breakfast land uses in residential zoning districts.
(6) Limited conditional use. Limited conditional use is any
development, activity or operation for which a conditional use
permit has been approved that is limited to a specific operator or
property owner or to a specific date or event upon which the
conditional use permit either expires or is required to be reviewed
and reapproved. The Plan Commission may recommend and the
Common Council may designate any proposed conditional use
request as a limited conditional use. The Plan Commission shall
specify which of the following characteristics are present that
create the need for the limited conditional use:
(a) A particular aspect of the specific land use.
(b) A particular aspect of the proposed operation (including, but
not limited to, operating hours).
(c) A particular aspect of the proposed location.
(d) A particular aspect of the proposed site design.
(e) A particular aspect of an adjacent property or of the
surrounding environs.
(f) Any other reason(s) the Common Council deems especially
relevant and material.
K. Recording of conditional use requirements. Except for conditional use
approvals for temporary uses, a conditional use permit form, containing
identifiable description and any specific requirements of approval, shall
be recorded by the City with the County Register of Deeds office.
L. Uses now regulated as conditional uses which were approved as legal
land uses, permitted by right or as conditional uses, prior to the
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1327
§ 550-143. Temporary use review and approval procedures.
effective date of this chapter. A use now regulated as a conditional use,
which was approved as a legal land use, either permitted by right or
as a conditional use, prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall be
considered as a legal, conforming land use so long as the previously
approved conditions of use and site plan are followed. Any modification
of the previously approved conditions of use or site plan shall require
application and City consideration under this section.
M. Fees. One or more fees are required for this procedure. Refer to
§ 550-157.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that govern the
procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial,
of a proposed temporary use.
(2) Temporary uses are those uses that have the potential to create
undesirable impacts on nearby properties if allowed to develop
simply under the general requirements of this chapter. In addition
to such potential, temporary uses also have the potential to create
undesirable impacts on nearby properties that potentially cannot
be determined except on a case-by-case basis. In order to prevent
this from occurring, all temporary uses are required to meet
certain procedural requirements applicable only to temporary uses,
in addition to the general requirements of this chapter and the
requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is
located.
(3) Land uses which fail to meet one of the requirements for temporary
uses of Article IV may be reviewed as a conditional use. (See
§ 550-45D.)
B. Regulations applicable to all temporary uses. A demonstration that the
developer proposes to meet all temporary use requirements of this
section must be made at time of site plan application. Furthermore, no
building permit shall be issued for any development that does not
comply with all requirements of this chapter (see § 550-146). Any
temporary use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this
chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to all applicable procedures and penalties.
C. Application requirements. All applications for proposed temporary uses
shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator prior to
certification of the proposed temporary use. Said complete application
shall be comprised of all of the following:
(1) A map of the subject property, showing all lands for which the
temporary use is proposed and all other lands within 200 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property. Said map shall clearly indicate
§ 550-142 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-143
1:1328
§ 550-144. Site Plan Review Committee.
the current zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its
parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly
reproducible with a photocopier and shall be at a scale not less
than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject
property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be provided;
(2) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location
of the subject property in relation to the City as a whole;
(3) A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the
type of activities, buildings and structures proposed for the subject
property and their general locations; and
(4) The Zoning Administrator may require a site plan of the subject
property. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the
requirements of § 550-145C, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
D. Approval by the Site Plan Review Committee. All temporary uses shall
require an approved site plan per § 550-145 by the Site Plan Review
Committee. An appeal from the decision of the Site Plan Review
Committee shall follow the procedures listed under § 550-145F.
E. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 550-157.
A. The Common Council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary to
create a Site Plan Review Committee to effectively carry out the policies
of the City of Watertown and to assist the Plan Commission and the
Common Council in managing the direction of growth and planning
within the City of Watertown.
B. There is hereby created a Site Plan Review Committee, which shall
consist of the City Engineer or Assistant City Engineer, City Planner,
City Building Inspector, Fire Chief, Watertown Utility Manager,
Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager, Police Chief or designee, and
other such members as are from time to time appointed by the Mayor.
C. Functions and duties.
(1) It shall be the function and duty of the Site Plan Review Committee
to review site development plans and to make recommendations to
the Plan Commission regarding the technical aspects of the
proposed development and the compatibility of the proposed site
development plan with adopted Common Council policies and
ordinances.
(2) The Committee shall notify and solicit comments and suggestions
on the proposed site development plan from other department
heads of the City or appropriate state or federal agencies or
§ 550-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-144
1:1329
§ 550-145. Site plan review and approval procedures.
appropriate public utilities and incorporate said comments and
suggestions into the Committee's site development plan review
process.
(3) In its review of such site development plans, the Committee shall
apply the stated purposes and standards set forth herein.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and
procedures for the review and approval of site plan applications. The
provisions of this section are designed to ensure that all proposed land
use and development activity complies with the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, this section requires that the initiation of all
development activity (including building permits, zoning certificates,
occupancy permits for a change of use of an existing lot or structure
where there is contemplated a site plan revision, clear-cutting, grading
or filling) requires the approval of site, building and operational plans
by the City Plan Commission before the building, occupancy and zoning
permits can be issued; except, however, that development activity
associated with an approved final plat of subdivision or certified survey
map for single-family and/or duplex/twin home dwelling units, and
development activity associated with the full and complete
implementation of a project approved within the PIP phase of the
planned unit development district (PUD), is exempt from this
requirement.
B. Procedure.
(1) Initiation of request for approval of a site plan. Proceedings for
approval of a site plan shall be initiated by the owner(s) of the
subject property, lease holders, contract purchasers, or their
legally authorized representative(s).
(2) Property and development subject to site plan review:
(a) All new commercial, industrial, public facility, institutional,
office or conditionally permitted use development construction
(including site work, infrastructure work, and public facility
work) and all external expansion of existing commercial,
industrial, public facility, institutional, office or conditionally
permitted use development, where the principal proposed use
of the new building area equals or exceeds 1,000 square feet or
the value of the construction exceeds $25,000.
(b) Any change of land use.
(c) All new residential construction of multiple-family structures
containing three or more dwelling units.
(d) All planned unit developments proposed under § 550-152 of
this chapter.
§ 550-144 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-145
1:1330
(e) All proposed subdivisions as required by § 545-4 of Chapter
545, Subdivision of Land.
C. Application requirements. Any property owner subject to the terms of
this section shall, prior to the commencement of any construction and
at or before the time of filing any other application or petition within the
City, file with the Zoning Administrator or his designee, at least seven
days before a regular Site Plan Review Committee meeting, two copies
of a proposed site development plan containing a brief written summary
of the proposed development as well as the following information:
(1) Written description of the intended use describing in reasonable
detail the:
(a) Existing zoning district(s) [and proposed zoning district(s) if
different];
(b) Land use plan map designation(s);
(c) Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet (§ 550-73);
(d) Current land uses present on the subject property;
(e) Proposed land uses for the subject property (per Article IV);
(f) Projected number of residents, employees and daily customers;
(g) Proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, impervious
surface area, and landscape surface area, and resulting site
density, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio, and
landscape surface area ratio;
(h) Operational considerations relating to hours of operation,
projected normal and peak water usage, sanitary sewer or
septic loadings, and traffic generation;
(i) Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance
creation pertaining to noncompliance with the performance
standards addressed in Article XI (§§ 550-104 through
550-124), including street access, traffic visibility, parking,
loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air
pollution, odor, electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire
and explosion, toxic or noxious materials, waste materials,
drainage, and hazardous materials. If no such nuisances will be
created (as indicated by complete and continuous compliance
with the provisions of Article XI), then the statement "The
proposed development shall comply with all requirements of
Article XI" shall be provided;
(j) Exterior building and fencing materials (§§ 550-121 and
550-123);
§ 550-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-145
1:1331
(k) Possible future expansion and related implications for
Subsection C(1)(a) to (j) above; and
(l) Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by
the Plan Commission of the intended use and its relation to
nearby properties.
(2) A small location map at 11 inches by 17 inches, showing the subject
property and illustrating its relationship to the nearest street
intersection. (A photocopy of the pertinent section of the City's
Land Use Plan Map, with the subject property clearly indicated,
shall suffice to meet this requirement.)
(3) A property site plan drawing (and reduction at 11 inches by 17
inches), which includes:
(a) A title block which indicates the name, address and phone/fax
number(s) of the current property owner and/or agent(s)
(developer, architect, engineer, planner) for the project;
(b) The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to
the plan;
(c) A North arrow and a graphic scale; said scale shall not be
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet;
(d) A legal description of the subject property;
(e) All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines
with bearings and dimensions clearly labeled;
(f) All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with
a key provided and explained on the margins of the plan as to
ownership and purpose;
(g) All required building setback lines;
(h) All existing and proposed buildings, structures and paved
areas, including building entrances, walks, drives, decks,
patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and walls;
(i) The location and dimension (cross section and entry throat) of
all access points onto public streets;
(j) The location and dimension of all on-site parking (and off-site
parking provisions if they are to be employed), including a
summary of the number of parking stalls provided versus
required by this chapter;
(k) The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on
the subject property and labels indicating the dimension of
such areas;
§ 550-145 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-145
1:1332
(l) The location of all outdoor storage areas and the design of all
screening devices;
(m) The location, type, height, size and lighting of all signage on
the subject property;
(n) The location, height, design/type, illumination power and
orientation of all exterior lighting on the subject property,
including the clear demonstration of compliance with
§ 550-110;
(o) The location and type of any permanently protected green
space areas;
(p) The location of existing and proposed drainage facilities; and
(q) In the legend, data for the subject property:
[1] Lot area;
[2] Floor area;
[3] Floor area ratio (b/a);
[4] Impervious surface area;
[5] Impervious surface ratio (d/a); and
[6] Building height.
(4) A detailed landscaping plan of the subject property, at the same
scale as the main plan (and reduction at 11 inches by 17 inches),
showing the location of all required bufferyard and landscaping
areas and existing and proposed landscape point fencing and berm
options for meeting said requirements. The landscaping plan shall
demonstrate complete compliance with the requirements of Article
X. (Note: The individual plant locations and species, fencing types
and heights, and berm heights need to be provided.)
(5) A grading and erosion control plan at the same scale as the main
plan (and reduction at 11 inches by 17 inches), showing existing
and proposed grades, including retention walls and related
devices, and erosion control measures per the approval of the City
Engineer, in accordance with the design standards and
construction specifications of Chapter 545, Subdivision of Land.
(6) Elevation drawings of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling
of existing buildings, showing finished exterior treatment, shall
also be submitted, with adequate labels provided to clearly depict
exterior materials, texture, color and overall appearance.
Perspective renderings of the proposed project and/or photos of
similar structures may be submitted, but not in lieu of adequate
drawings showing the actual intended appearance of the buildings.
(Refer to § 550-121.)
§ 550-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-145
1:1333
(7) A certified survey or plat of survey may be required by the Zoning
Administrator in instances where he determines compliance with
setback requirements may be difficult. The survey shall be
prepared by a professional land surveyor and shall depict property
lines and proposed buildings, structures and paved areas.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-24]
(8) A detailed site analysis per the following submission and review
process:
(a) Purpose. The detailed site analysis required by this section is
designed to provide the clear identification of permanently
protected green space areas on a site that is proposed for
development. The detailed survey work required to identify
these areas accurately on a map is not required prior to the
initiation of development concept plans for an area. A detailed
site analysis shall be performed in conjunction with required
land division documents or development site plans for any and
all properties containing permanently protected natural
resource areas.
(b) Description. The detailed site analysis shall be shown on a map
of the subject property that depicts the location of all protected
natural resource areas, as defined by the provisions of this
chapter. The detailed site analysis shall meet the following
requirements:
[1] Scale. A minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet shall
be used.
[2] Topography. Topographic information is not required for
any property that does not contain steep slopes (as
designated on the Official Zoning Map). For such
properties, topographic information with a minimum
contour interval of two feet is required.
[3] Specific natural resources areas. All natural resources
areas that require protection under the provisions of this
chapter shall be accurately outlined and clearly labeled.
Particular care as to clarity shall be taken in areas where
different resource types overlap with one another.
[4] Development pads.
[a] All site disruption (including selective cutting)
proposed to occur within permanently protected
natural resource areas shall be limited to development
pads. Development pads shall be depicted on the
detailed site analysis map, site plans required for
development permits, and the recorded plat of
subdivision or certified survey map.
§ 550-145 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-145
1:1334
[b] Beyond visible damage to natural resources,
vegetation, soil and drainage patterns, site disruption
activities shall not compact soil covering tree roots or
otherwise damage trees beyond the area from which
trees are to be removed. All trees with calipers
exceeding three inches whose canopies are located
adjacent to disturbed areas, which die within a period
of five years following site disruption, shall be
replaced by the owner with a three-inch caliper tree of
the same type (canopy or understory). Therefore, care
shall be taken to ensure that equipment and actions
associated with permitted site disruption activities are
limited to the area in which they are permitted. The
use of snow fences and other barriers to outline
development pads during disruption activity is
strongly recommended to limit the extent of
inadvertent compaction or other disturbance of earth
and collision damage to vegetation intended for
protection. Such barriers should be placed no closer
to protected trees than a point on the ground directly
under their outer canopy edge.
[5] Mitigation areas. All mitigation areas related to the
provisions of this chapter shall be depicted on the detailed
site map with notations provided which describe the
mitigation techniques employed.
(c) Required procedure for submission and review.
[1] Required timing of submission. The detailed site analysis
map shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for
initial review prior to, or concurrently with, the submission
of the preliminary plat of subdivision or the certified
survey map or, if the proposed development does not
involve a land division, then submittal is required as an
attachment to a required site plan. A concept plan of the
proposed development may be submitted prior to the
submission of the detailed site analysis map; however, in
no way does the acceptance and/or general approval of a
concept plan indicate the approval of natural resource
feature locations. A detailed site analysis map prepared for
the subject property that has been previously approved by
the Site Plan Review Committee may be submitted for any
subsequent development activity on the site. However,
modifications to such a previously approved map will be
required if the analysis is no longer accurate for the
subject property.
[2] Review by Site Plan Review Committee. The Site Plan
Review Committee shall review the submitted detailed site
§ 550-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-145
1:1335
analysis map for general compliance with the following
data sources:
[a] The Official Zoning Map;
[b] Applicable USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the
City of Watertown and its environs;
[c] Air photos of the subject property;
[d] USGS Quads and other sources of topographic
information;
[e] Applicable FEMA and related floodplain maps;
[f] Applicable federal and state wetland inventory maps;
[g] The City of Watertown Comprehensive Plan;
[h] The City of Watertown Height Limitations Zoning
Ordinance (see Chapter 211, Airport); and
[i] Site visits.
[3] Evaluation. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the
petitioner with a written evaluation of the submitted
detailed site analysis map, which shall indicate the
acceptance by the Site Plan Review Committee or the need
for further analysis work, discussion with the petitioner
and/or staff-recognized experts, or a joint site visit.
[4] Modification of detailed site analysis map. If necessary, as
determined by the Site Plan Review Committee, revised
detailed site analysis maps shall be prepared and
submitted for review by the Site Plan Review Committee
until a version is deemed acceptable. Committee review of
the detailed site analysis may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals as a matter of interpretation of this
chapter. (See § 550-156.)
[5] Acceptance of detailed site analysis map. Upon notification
of acceptance by the Site Plan Review Committee (or, in
case of appeal, by determination of the Zoning Board of
Appeals), the petitioner may proceed with the submittal of
necessary development documents.
(d) Integration of detailed site analysis information with required
development and/or land division. Information contained on
the detailed site analysis map relating to the boundaries of
permanently protected green space areas (including natural
resource protection areas, other permanently protected green
space areas, and required mitigation areas) shall be clearly
depicted on any and all site plans required as a precondition
§ 550-145 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-145
1:1336
for application for any development permit (such as a building
permit) and on any proposed plat of subdivision or certified
survey map.
D. Standards for evaluation. The Site Plan Review Committee shall be
governed by the following guidelines in its review of site development
plans. Because each site development proposal will present unique
characteristics, the guidelines set out in this section are to be
considered but need not all be met for the site plan to be approved by
the Committee.
(1) There is a desirable, efficient and workable interrelationship
between buildings, parking, traffic circulation, landscaping, open
space, and related activities and uses, which shall be maintained.
(2) Based on anticipated vehicular and pedestrian traffic generation
and the standards and policies of the Comprehensive Plan,
adequate rights-of-way and improvements to the streets,
pedestrian ways, bikeways and other means of access and
circulation within the boundaries of the site are provided by the
proposed development.
(3) There are adequate off-street parking and loading facilities
provided in a safe, well-designed and efficient manner.
(4) All signs and illumination meet requirements of the applicable
ordinances and are compatible with the site and the general area.
(5) The use of the subject property does not involve use of urban land
which will result in landlocked or undeveloped remnants.
(6) The structures and public facilities serving the site are designed
and constructed in accordance with appropriate codes and/or City
standards at a level which will provide adequate fire protection,
protection from crime, and avoidance of traffic accidents or
hazardous conditions.
(7) The quality, location, size and materials of walls, fences, berms,
traffic islands, screen plantings, landscaped areas and similar
items are such that they serve their intended purpose to prevent
erosion, retain smoke, dust and noxious fumes, retard noise
emissions, and separate disharmonious uses and do not adversely
affect surrounding uses.
(8) Due consideration is given in the site development plan to the
preservation and enhancement of historical or natural structures or
features.
(9) All reasonable efforts have or will be taken to minimize
construction and post-construction impact on natural vegetation,
waterways, wetlands and terrain.
§ 550-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-145
1:1337
(10) The estimated public costs of providing additional capital
improvements for streets, sewers and water mains to the area of
the site and the additional estimated annual costs of providing
other municipal services to the area of the site are reasonable in
relationship to the public benefits.
(11) Additional standards and guidelines may be adopted by the Site
Plan Review Committee or Plan Commission, only upon review and
approval of the Common Council.
E. Action by Site Plan Review Committee.
(1) The Site Plan Review Committee shall meet on at least one
occasion for preliminary review of the proposed site development
plan between the date of submission of the plan to the Zoning
Administrator or his designee and the next regular Plan
Commission meeting.
(2) The recommendations of the Site Plan Review Committee shall be
forwarded to the Plan Commission within 30 days of the filing of the
site development plan by the property owner. The Site Plan Review
Committee may recommend either to approve, to conditionally
approve with specific conditions, or to deny the site development
plan. The recommendations of the Committee shall be in writing
and shall specify the reasons for the recommendations together
with specific recommended terms and conditions, if any, to be
included in any approval. The Site Plan Review Committee shall
note instances where its comments reflect violations of City, state
or federal regulations, or commonly accepted site design practices
designed to protect the public health and safety, and distinguish
such comments from comments related to development
efficiencies, economies, conveniences, aesthetics and similar issues
not directly related to regulations nor the public health and safety.
The time period for submission of the recommendations of the Site
Plan Review Committee to the Plan Commission may be extended
for a period not to exceed 30 days, allowing for continuances,
revisions or additions to the plan, and for other just cause, by the
Plan Commission.
(3) The Site Plan Review Committee may suggest imposition of
reasonable conditions calculated to secure the purposes and
requirements of this section, including but not limited to written
guarantees, performance bonds or other comparable security,
subject to approval by the City Attorney.
(4) The property owner may submit information to the Plan
Commission in response to the report of the Site Plan Review
Committee for consideration by the Commission.
(5) The Site Plan Review Committee shall limit comments regarding
the development of municipal facilities to proposed physical
development and shall not be concerned with operational aspects,
§ 550-145 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-145
1:1338
if operations are controlled by another City-established board or
commission. Where a detailed site plan and related development
policies have been approved by the Plan Commission and Common
Council, development consistent with such plan and policies, as
determined by the Building Inspector, shall not require Site Plan
Review Committee approval. This section shall in no way restrict or
constrain the ability of City officials to enforce sound public health
and safety practices on an ongoing basis.
F. Appeal from action by the Site Plan Review Committee. An appeal from
the decision of the Site Plan Review Committee may be taken to the
Plan Commission by the property owner of the proposed site
development plan, or by 50% or more of the property owners with
property within 100 feet of the site development objecting to the
approval or rejection of such site development plan. Such appeals must
specify the grounds therefor and address the report and
recommendations of the Committee. Said appeal must be filed with the
Zoning Administrator within 10 days of the final written decision of the
Site Plan Review Committee, who shall then file such appeal with the
Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal and give public notice thereof as well as due
notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable
period of time. The action of the Site Plan Review Committee shall be
deemed just and equitable unless the Plan Commission, by a favorable
vote of 3/4 of its members, reverses or modifies the action of the Site
Plan Review Committee. Said decision of the Plan Commission shall be
in writing and shall be provided to the property owner and other parties
in interest within 10 days of the date of the hearing. The fee for an
appeal shall be returned to the applicant in cases where the Plan
Commission approves the appeal.
G. Effect of decision of Plan Commission.
(1) Upon approval of the proposed site development plan, with or
without conditions, the City Engineer or his designee shall apply a
stamp of approval to the site development plan for the property
owner containing the approved date, the Engineer's or his
designee's signature, and specifying any such conditions or terms
thereof as outlined in the written decision of the Plan Commission.
The issuance of such a permit shall indicate compliance with this
section and shall entitle the property owner to receive any other
permits or licenses necessary for the proposed site development.
(2) The denial of the application for a proposed site development plan
by the Plan Commission shall be deemed final, subject to the appeal
provisions of Subsection F, and the property owner shall not be
entitled to receive any further permits or licenses from the City or
to proceed with the site development unless and until said plan has
been has been resubmitted or changed in accordance with the
decision of the Plan Commission. Any such resubmitted plan shall
be deemed to be a new application under this section.
§ 550-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-145
1:1339
§ 550-146. Certificate of occupancy.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or tenant to occupy any structure,
building or land, or part thereof, hereafter erected, created, changed,
converted or enlarged unless a occupancy permit shall have been issued
by the Zoning Administrator after inspection. Such occupancy permit shall
show and certify that such building, structure or premises has been
constructed, altered or improved in compliance with provisions of this
chapter, the Building Code and all other applicable codes or ordinances, and
all conditions and requirements stipulated by the Plan Commission or other
proper authority.
§ 550-147. Variance review and approval procedures.
H. Initiation of land use or development activity. Except with the written
permission of the Zoning Administrator, absolutely no land use or
development activity, including site clearing, grubbing or grading, shall
occur on the subject property prior to the approval of the required site
plan. Any such activity prior to such approval shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to all applicable enforcement mechanisms
and penalties.
I. Modification of an approved site plan. Any and all variation between
development and/or land use activity on the subject property and the
approved site plan is a violation of this chapter. An approved site plan
shall be revised and approved via the procedures of Subsection B above
so as to clearly and completely depict any and all proposed
modifications to the previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation
of said modifications.
J. Sunset clause. The approval for all buildings on an approved site plan
not fully developed within two years of final Plan Commission approval
of Site Plan Review Committee minutes shall expire, and no additional
site plan development shall be permitted on undeveloped portions of
the subject property. The Plan Commission may extend this period, as
requested by the applicant, through the conditional use process
following a public hearing.
K. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 550-157.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
enable the City to hear and decide requests for permitted variation
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special factors, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done, as provided for by § 62.23(7)(e)7, Wis. Stats.
B. Initiation of request for approval of a variance. Proceedings for
approval of a requested variance shall be initiated by an application of
§ 550-145 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-147
1:1340
the owner(s) of the subject property, lease holders, or contract
purchasers.
C. Application requirements. All applications for requested variances shall
be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be certified
as complete by the Zoning Administrator. No placement of the
application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur
unless said certification has occurred. The item may be placed on any
agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the Zoning
Administrator, without an application. Upon certification, the official
notice regarding the application will be sent to the newspaper by the
Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of
all of the following:
(1) A map of the subject property, showing all lands for which the
variance is proposed and all other lands within 100 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and
addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same
appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Dodge
and/or Jefferson County (as determined by the City of Watertown).
Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject
property and its environs and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains
that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be
submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a
photocopier and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch
equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a
graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be provided;
(2) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location
of the subject property in relation to the City as a whole;
(3) A written description of the proposed variance describing the type
of specific requirements of the variance proposed for the subject
property;
(4) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development.
Said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of
§ 550-145C, as determined by the Zoning Administrator; and
(5) Written justification for the requested variance consisting of the
reasons why the applicant believes the proposed variance is
appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the
standard set out in Subsection D(3)(a) through (f) below.
D. Review by the Zoning Administrator. The requested variance shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return the application to the applicant. If the Zoning
§ 550-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-147
1:1341
Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall
so notify the applicant.
(2) Upon notifying the applicant that his application is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate and
comment on the written justification for the proposed variance
provided in the application per Subsection C(1) through (5) above.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the application to
determine whether the requested variance is in harmony with the
recommendations of the City of Watertown's Comprehensive Plan,
particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards of
Subsection D(3)(a) through (f) below:
(a) What exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or special
factors are present which apply only to the subject property?
The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the
subject property contains factors which are not present on
other properties in the same zoning district. Specifically:
[1] The hardship or difficulty shall be peculiar to the subject
property and different from that of other properties and
not one which affects all properties similarly. Such a
hardship or difficulty shall have arisen because of the
unusual shape of the original acreage parcel, unusual
topography or elevation, or because the property was
created before the passage of the current applicable
zoning regulations, and is not economically suitable for a
permitted use or will not accommodate a structure of
reasonable design for a permitted use if all area, yard,
green space and setback requirements are observed.
[2] Loss of profit or pecuniary hardship shall not, in and of
itself, be grounds for a variance.
[3] Self-imposed hardship shall not be grounds for a variance.
Reductions resulting from the sale of portions of a
property, reducing the remainder of said property below
buildable size or cutting off existing access to a public
right-of-way, or deed restrictions imposed by the owner's
predecessor in title are considered to be such self-imposed
hardships.
[4] Violations by or variances granted to neighboring
properties shall not justify a variance.
[5] The alleged hardship shall not be one that would have
existed in the absence of a zoning ordinance. (For
example, if a lot were unbuildable because of topography
in the absence of any or all setback requirements.)
§ 550-147 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-147
1:1342
(b) In what manner do the factors identified in Subsection D(3)(a)
above prohibit the development of the subject property in a
manner similar to that of other properties under the same
zoning district? The response to this question shall clearly
indicate how the requested variance is essential to make the
subject property developable so that property rights enjoyed
by the owners of similar properties can be enjoyed by the
owners of the subject property.
(c) Would the granting of the proposed variance be of substantial
detriment to adjacent properties? The response to this
question shall clearly indicate how the proposed variance will
have no substantial impact on adjacent properties.
(d) Would the granting of the proposed variance as depicted on the
required site plan [see Subsection C(4) above] result in a
substantial or undue adverse impact on the character of the
neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking,
public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other
matters affecting the public health, safety or general welfare,
either as they now exist or as they may in the future be
developed as a result of the implementation of the intent,
provisions and policies of this chapter, the Comprehensive
Plan, or any other plan, program, map or ordinance adopted or
under consideration pursuant to official notice by the City or
other governmental agency having jurisdiction to guide growth
and development? The response to this question shall clearly
indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial
impact on such long-range planning matters.
(e) Have the factors which present the reason for the proposed
variance been created by the act of the applicant or previous
property owner or their agent (for example: previous
development decisions such as building placement, floor plan
or orientation, lotting pattern, or grading) after the effective
date of this chapter (see § 550-11)? The response to this
question shall clearly indicate that such factors existed prior to
the effective date of this chapter and were not created by
action of the applicant, a previous property owner or their
agent.
(f) Does the proposed variance involve the regulations of Article
IV? The response to this question shall clearly indicate that the
requested variance does not involve the provisions of the
article.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall forward the report per Subsection
D(2) and (3) to the Zoning Board of Appeals for the Board's review
and action. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter and
§ 550-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-147
1:1343
the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
determination in the report.
E. Review and determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) Within 30 days after filing of the complete application as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the requested
variance and the public hearing shall conform to the requirements
of § 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said notice shall contain a description
of the subject property and the proposed variance per Subsection
C(1) and (3) above. In addition, at least 10 days before said public
hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall mail an identical notice to
the applicant for the proposed variance, to the clerk of any
municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion
of the subject property, and to all property owners within 200 feet
of the boundaries of the subject property as identified in Subsection
C(1) above. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional,
shall not invalidate proceedings under this section.
(2) Within 60 days after the holding of the public hearing [per
Subsection E(1) above or within an extension of said period
approved by the applicant and granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals], the Zoning Board of Appeals will make its findings per
Subsection D above and its determination regarding the
application as a whole. The Zoning Board of Appeals may request
further information and/or additional reports from the Zoning
Administrator and/or the applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may take final action on said request for approval of the requested
variance at time of its initial meeting, or said proceedings may be
continued from time to time for further consideration. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall make a written report of its findings and
determinations following its determination.
(3) If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination within
60 days after said public hearing, then the request for the variance
shall be considered approved.
(4) Said report shall include a formal finding of facts developed and
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning the
requirements of Subsection D(3)(a) through (f) above.
F. Effect of denial. No application for a variance which has been denied
(either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months
from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence
or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
G. Limited effect of a variance. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has
granted a variance, such approval shall neither change the use
classification of the building or premises nor give it any status as a
nonconforming use other than that which it has as a result of the
variance. Granting of a variance shall be considered as unique to the
§ 550-147 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-147
1:1344
§ 550-148. Interpretations.
variance granted and shall not be construed as precedent for any other
proposed variance.
H. Stay of proceedings. An application for a variance shall stay all legal
proceedings furthering enforcement of any provisions of this chapter
from which the applicant is requesting a variance, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the request
for the variance has been filed that, by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
I. Notice to the DNR. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit a copy
of each application for a variance to conservancy regulations in the
Shoreland-Wetland, Floodway, Floodplain Conservancy or Floodway
Fringe Overlay Zoning Districts, and a copy of all shoreland floodland
appeals, to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for
review and comment at least 10 days prior to any public hearings. Final
action on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR
has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all
decisions relating to variances to shoreland conservancy regulations or
to floodland regulations and a copy of all decisions on shoreland
conservancy and floodland appeals shall be transmitted to the DNR
within 10 days of the date of such decision.
J. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 550-157.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assign responsibility for the
official interpretation of the provisions of this chapter and to describe
the required procedure for securing such interpretation.
B. Initiation of request for an interpretation. Proceedings for an
interpretation may be initiated by any of the following four methods:
(1) An application of the owner(s) of the subject property, lease holders
or contract purchasers;
(2) A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or
(3) By action of the Common Council.
C. Application requirements. All applications for interpretations,
regardless of the party of their initiation per Subsection B above, shall
be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be certified
as complete by the Zoning Administrator. No placement of the
application on any agenda, as an item to be acted upon, shall occur
unless said certification has occurred. The item may be placed on any
agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the Zoning
§ 550-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-148
1:1345
Administrator, without an application. Upon certification, the official
notice regarding the application will be sent to the newspaper by the
Zoning Administrator. Said complete application shall be comprised of
all of the following:
(1) All requests for interpretations shall clearly indicate the part of the
text of this chapter for which the interpretation is requested and
the specific questions the applicant has regarding said text.
(2) If the requested interpretation relates to the application of this
chapter to a specific property, the additional following information
shall be required:
(a) A map of the subject property, showing all lands for which the
interpretation is requested and all other lands within 200 feet
of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the
names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as
the same appear on the current records of the Register of
Deeds of Dodge and/or Jefferson County as provided by the
City of Watertown. Said map shall clearly indicate the current
zoning of the subject property and its environs and the
jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all
its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is
clearly reproducible with a photocopier and shall be at a scale
not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the
subject property, a graphic scale, and a North arrow shall be
provided;
(b) A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized
location of the subject property in relation to the City as a
whole;
(c) A written description of the reason for the requested
interpretation and how the proposed interpretation relates to
type of activities, buildings and structures currently located on
and proposed for the subject property; and
(d) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for
development. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the
requirements of § 550-145C, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
(3) If the requested interpretation relates to the classification or
treatment of a particular land use under the provisions of this
chapter, a series of written responses to the following questions:
(a) How is the subject land use (in general) in harmony with the
purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the City
of Watertown's Comprehensive Plan, this chapter and any
other plan, program or ordinance adopted or under
consideration pursuant to official notice by the City?
§ 550-148 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-148
1:1346
(b) How is the subject land use in harmony with the purposes,
goals, objectives, policies and standards of the pertinent
zoning district for which the interpretation is being sought?
(c) Do the potential public benefits of the proposed interpretation
outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed
interpretation?
D. Review by Zoning Administrator.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not
complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he
shall return the application to the applicant. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall
so notify the applicant.
(2) Upon notifying the applicant that the application is complete, and
within 30 days of such filing, the Zoning Administrator shall review
the application and shall evaluate and comment on the written
justification for the proposed interpretation provided in the
application per Subsection C above. This review shall also take into
consideration the standards for review presented in Subsection E
below. The Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the application
to determine whether the requested interpretation is in harmony
with the recommendations of the City of Watertown's
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the applicant
indicating the interpretation of the Zoning Administrator. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in
conflict with the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Plan, the
Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
E. Standards for review of requested interpretations. This chapter shall be
interpreted in a manner which is consistent with the purposes intended
by the City of Watertown Common Council as noted in this chapter and
the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the standards and supporting
definitions of this chapter is to protect both individual property owners
and the general public from adverse impacts that may result from a
proposed, modified or existing land use. To this end, those called upon
to interpret this chapter shall proceed as follows:
(1) Articulate certain public purpose(s) underlying the standard(s) for
which an interpretation is required.
§ 550-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-148
1:1347
Rationale: Before any zoning interpretation is made, there must
be an explicit discussion of certain purpose(s) for which the
regulation was initially imposed. Each zoning regulation is
intended to protect the interests of both present and future
neighbors and the general public. Each standard is developed as
a regulatory response to an identifiable potential negative impact.
A sound interpretation of any standard cannot be ensured without
careful analysis of the regulation and the end toward which it is
directed. It is understood that there may be other public purposes
underlying the interpretation which are not explicitly articulated.
(2) Articulate the actual impact of various proposed interpretations,
permitting flexibility in design and prohibiting any interpretation
that lowers the protection afforded to the public.
Rationale: There is a critical distinction between an interpretation
which provides a greater degree of design freedom to achieve a
permitted land use and an interpretation which permits a new or
not previously permitted use, or which allows a use to be enlarged
or have its intensity increased beyond the degree specified in this
chapter. Design freedom is to be encouraged while a lowering of
the standards of this chapter is to be prohibited.
(3) Determine whether the proposed interpretation will ensure a just
balance between the rights of the landowner and all others who will
be affected by that person's land use proposal.
Rationale: If an interpretation would merely allow a design
solution that is slightly different from the one expressly stated or
permitted, and if it would result in a same or greater degree of
protection to any affected party (either the adjoining landowners,
the public at large, and/or a future property owner or renter), such
an interpretation may be appropriately made. Any interpretation
which would result in any identifiable loss of protection for one
group to the benefit of others is contrary to the spirit of this
chapter. Similarly, any interpretation which would either increase
the nuisance potential of any use or alter the purpose for which
the regulation was adopted shall be considered counter to the
legislative intent of this chapter. Any interpretation which will
result in any loss of protection or increase in intensity beyond
that already permitted shall only be made if the party interpreting
this chapter has the power to impose additional restrictions or
requirements.
(4) This chapter has been carefully designed by the Common Council
to combine maximum achievement of public goals and the
protection of adjoining property owners while providing flexibility
for property owners to use their land for a variety of uses consistent
with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the City
of Watertown. Great care has been taken to balance the rights of
§ 550-148 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-148
1:1348
competing groups while achieving maximum protection with
flexibility and a range of use options. Persons interpreting this
chapter should not substitute their own judgments for the
legislative acts of the Common Council.
(5) In addition to the applicant's response to the questions required by
Subsection C above, the following standards shall govern the
decision on the requested interpretation on land use interpretation
matters:
(a) No interpretation shall allow the establishment of any land use
which was previously considered and rejected by the Common
Council on an application for an amendment to this chapter,
the Official Zoning Map, or a previously applied for appeal
from a requested interpretation.
(b) No interpretation shall permit a land use listed as a use
permitted by right, a special use or a conditional use in another
zoning district if the use is not listed as permitted in the zoning
district of the subject property (see § 550-46).
(c) No interpretation shall permit a land use in a zoning district
unless evidence is presented which demonstrates that the land
use will comply with any and all regulations applicable to
development in the subject property's zoning district (see
§ 550-46 and Article IV).
(d) No interpretation shall permit a land use in a particular zoning
district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses
permitted in that same district and is more similar to such
other uses than to uses either not permitted in said district or
permitted in a more intensive district in the same zoning
district category (see §§ 550-46 and 550-130).
(e) If the proposed land use is more similar to a land use permitted
only as a conditional use in the subject property's district than
to a use permitted by right, then an interpretation permitting
such use shall be conditioned upon the approval of a
conditional use pursuant to § 550-142.
F. Effect of a favorable land use interpretation. No interpretation finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specific zoning district shall authorize either the establishment of such
use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or
moving of any building or structure. A favorable interpretation merely
authorizes the preparation, filing and processing of applications for any
permits and approvals which may be required by this chapter. These
permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, required site
plans, special use permits, conditional uses, and certificates of
occupancy.
G. Limitations on favorable land use interpretation.
§ 550-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-148
1:1349
(1) No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid
for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the
interpretation, unless a building permit is issued and development
is actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently
pursued to completion, or a occupancy permit is obtained and a use
commenced within that period.
(2) An interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be
deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular
location for which the interpretation was issued. The interpretation
shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for
which a separate interpretation has not been issued. A favorable
interpretation shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for
any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or
more.
H. Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 550-157.
I. Appeals of zoning interpretations.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide regulations
which enable the City to hear and decide requests for appeals from
the interpretations of the Zoning Administrator per this section as
provided for by § 62.23(7)(e)7, Wis. Stats.
(2) Initiation of request for review of zoning interpretation.
Proceedings for the review of an appeal may be initiated by any
person aggrieved or by any officer, department, council or bureau
of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Time limit for filing an appeal. Any appeal of an interpretation
under the provisions of this section shall be made per the
requirements of Subsection I(4) below within a period not
exceeding 45 days from the date of issuance of the interpretation
by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to initiate this appeal
procedure within this forty-day period shall constitute a final and
binding waiver of the right to appeal said interpretation.
(4) Application requirements. All applications for review of an
interpretation, regardless of the party of their initiation per
Subsection I(2) above, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning
Administrator and shall be approved as complete by the Zoning
Administrator a minimum of two weeks prior to the initiation of this
procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of said
complete application to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said
complete application shall be accompanied by all of the following:
§ 550-148 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-148
1:1350
(a) A copy of pertinent items in the file on the matter at hand
maintained by the Zoning Administrator, as identified by the
Zoning Administrator and/or the applicant.
(b) A written statement from the applicant indicating the reasons
why an appeal is justified, based upon an analysis of the Zoning
Administrator's interpretation. This statement shall be dated
and signed by the applicant.
(5) Review by the Zoning Administrator. The submitted appeal shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator in the following steps:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this
chapter. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements
of this chapter, he shall return the application to the applicant.
If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is
complete, he shall so notify the applicant.
(b) Upon notifying the applicant that the application is complete,
the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and shall
evaluate and comment on the written justification for the
appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals as submitted by the
applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the
application to determine whether the requested appeal is in
harmony with the recommendations of the City of Watertown's
Comprehensive Plan.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Zoning
Board of Appeals for review and action. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict
with the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Plan or this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
determination in the report.
(6) Review and action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) Within 45 days after the filing of the complete application as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public
hearing to consider the application. Notice of the appeal and
said public hearing shall conform to § 63.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats.
Said notice shall contain a description of the issue per
Subsection I(4)(b) above. At least 10 days before said public
hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall mail an identical
notice to the applicant, to the clerk of any municipality whose
boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the
jurisdiction of this chapter, and to any property owner within
200 feet of the subject property. Failure to mail said notice,
provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings
under this section.
§ 550-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-148
1:1351
(b) Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application as
determined by the Zoning Administrator (or within an
extension of said period requested in writing by the applicant
and granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals), the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall make its findings per Subsection I(5) above.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may request further information
and/or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator and/or
the applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final
action on the application for appeal at the time of its initial
meeting or may continue the proceedings at the applicant's
request. Said final action shall be followed by a written report,
which shall include a formal finding of facts developed and
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning the
request.
(c) If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination
within 60 days after the filing of said complete application,
then the request for the appeal shall be considered approved.
(7) Effect of denial. No application for an appeal which has been
denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of
12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds
of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the
Zoning Administrator.
(8) Limited effect of a favorable ruling on an appeal.
(a) No ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding
a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted
in a specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more
than 365 days from the date of issuance of the ruling on the
appeal, unless a building permit is issued and development is
actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently
pursued to completion, or a occupancy permit is obtained and
a use commenced within that period.
(b) A ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal, finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted
in a specified zoning district, shall be deemed to authorize only
that particular use at that particular location for which the
ruling was issued. The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize
any allegedly similar use for which a separate ruling has not
been issued. A favorable ruling shall automatically expire and
cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which
it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period
of 365 consecutive days or more.
(9) Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to § 550-157.
§ 550-148 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-149
1:1352
§ 550-149. Historic preservation regulations. [Amended 10-4-2016
by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
Historic preservation regulations are contained in Chapter 325, Historic
Preservation, of the City Code.
§ 550-150. Community Entry Corridor Overlay Zoning District.
The following requirements shall be effective upon the date of adoption of
detailed neighborhood plans and upon the date of depicting these overlay
zoning districts on the Official Zoning Map. Any new development, other
than single-family residential, in this overlay zoning district shall be
regulated as a conditional use, subject to the site design requirements of
Article VI.
A. Requirement of compatibility. Proposed site design and construction
within this district, including new structures and building additions,
shall be reviewed per § 550-145, Site plan review and approval
procedures, by the Plan Commission. The building setback, height,
mass, roof form, exterior materials, exterior surface appurtenances,
exterior colors, landscaping and lighting shall be compatible with the
following general design theme, as determined by the Plan
Commission.
B. Design standards for residential development. The general design
theme for residential development within the Community Entry
Corridor Overlay Zoning District shall be designed to accommodate
typical impacts of transportation and nearby nonresidential
development, particularly through the use of building orientation, door
and window location and design, and on-site landscaping and related
buffering structures or berms. Above and beyond such concerns,
particular attention shall be devoted to ensuring that selected
residential design components complement nearby residential styles
with high-quality building materials, in an attractive manner as
becoming an entry corridor, and as determined by the Plan
Commission. Where a detailed neighborhood plan has been adopted, it
should be used to provide additional guidance in the design review
process.
C. Design standards for nonresidential development. The general design
theme for nonresidential development within the Community Entry
Corridor Overlay Zoning District shall be characterized by high-quality
building materials, architectural design, site design and on-site
landscaping. Prominent urban design elements and architectural
details, which are decorative and functional, shall be considered as a
required component of each site within the district. Above and beyond
such concerns, particular attention shall be devoted to ensuring that
selected nonresidential design components complement nearby
nonresidential styles and reflect positively on the character of the
community, as becoming an entry corridor, and as determined by the
Plan Commission. Where a detailed neighborhood plan has been
§ 550-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-150
1:1353
§ 550-151. Community Gateway Overlay Zoning District.
The following requirements shall be effective upon the date of adoption of
detailed neighborhood plans and upon the date of depicting these overlay
zoning districts on the Official Zoning Map. Any new development, other
than single-family residential, in this overlay zoning district shall be
regulated as a conditional use, subject to the site design requirements of
Article VI.
adopted, it should be used to provide additional guidance in the design
review process.
A. Requirement of compatibility. Proposed site design and construction
within this district, including new structures and building additions,
shall be reviewed per § 550-145, Site plan review and approval
procedures, by the Plan Commission. The building setback, height,
mass, roof form, exterior materials, exterior surface appurtenances,
exterior colors, landscaping and lighting shall be compatible with the
following general design theme, as determined by the Plan
Commission.
B. Design standards for residential development. The general design
theme for residential development within the Community Gateway
Overlay Zoning District shall be designed to accommodate typical
impacts of transportation and nearby nonresidential development and
to assist in creating a sense of welcome to the City of Watertown,
particularly through the use of building orientation, door and window
location and design, and on-site landscaping and related buffering
structures or berms. Above and beyond such concerns, particular
attention shall be devoted to ensuring that selected residential design
components complement nearby residential styles with high-quality
building materials, in an attractive manner as becoming a gateway
entry to the community, as determined by the Plan Commission. Where
a detailed neighborhood plan has been adopted, it should be used to
provide additional guidance in the design review process.
C. Design standards for nonresidential development. The general design
theme for nonresidential development within the Community Gateway
Overlay Zoning District shall be characterized by high-quality building
materials, architectural design, site design and on-site landscaping.
Prominent urban design elements and architectural details, which are
decorative and functional, shall be considered as a required component
of each site within the district. Above and beyond such concerns,
particular attention shall be devoted to ensuring that selected
nonresidential design components complement nearby nonresidential
styles and reflect positively on the character of the community and
assist in creating a sense of welcome to the City of Watertown, as
becoming a gateway entry area to the community, and as determined by
the Plan Commission. Where a detailed neighborhood plan has been
adopted, it should be used to provide additional guidance in the design
review process.
§ 550-150 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-152
1:1354
§ 550-152. Planned unit development procedures.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that govern the
procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial,
of proposed planned unit developments and to provide for the
possible relaxation of certain development standards pertaining to
the underlying standard zoning district.
(2) Planned unit developments are intended to provide more incentives
for infill development and redevelopment in areas of the
community that are experiencing a lack of significant reinvestment.
Furthermore, planned unit developments are designed to forward
both the aesthetic and economic development objectives of the City
by controlling the site design and the appearance, density or
intensity of development in terms of more flexible requirements for
land uses, density, intensity, bulk, landscaping and parking
requirements. In exchange for such flexibility, the planned unit
development shall provide a much higher level of site design,
architectural control and other aspects of aesthetic and functional
excellence than normally required for other developments.
(3) Planned unit developments have the potential to create undesirable
impacts on nearby properties if allowed to develop simply under
the general requirements of this chapter. In addition to such
potential, planned unit developments also have the potential to
create undesirable impacts on nearby properties which potentially
cannot be determined except with a binding site plan, landscape
plan and architectural plan, and on a case-by-case basis. In order to
prevent this from occurring, all planned unit developments are
required to meet certain procedural requirements applicable only
to planned unit developments, in addition to the general
requirements of this chapter. A public hearing process is required
to review a request for a planned unit development. This process
shall essentially combine the process for a Zoning Map amendment
with that required for a conditional use, with several additional
requirements.
B. Provision of flexible development standards for planned unit
developments.
(1) Permitted location. Planned unit developments shall be permitted
with the approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay Zoning
District specific to the approved planned unit development.
(2) Flexible development standards. The following exemptions to the
development standards of the underlying zoning district may be
provided with the approval of a planned unit development:
§ 550-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-152
1:1355
(a) Land use requirements. All land uses listed as "residential,"
"institutional" or "commercial" may be permitted within a
planned unit development.
(b) Density and intensity requirements. All requirements listed for
residential density and nonresidential intensity may be waived
within a planned unit development.
(c) Bulk requirements. All residential and nonresidential bulk
requirements may be waived within a planned unit
development.
(d) Landscaping requirements. All landscaping requirements may
be waived within a planned unit development.
(e) Parking and loading requirements. All requirements for offstreet
parking, traffic circulation, and off-street loading may be
waived within a planned unit development.
(3) Requirements to depict all aspects of development. Only
development which is explicitly depicted on the required site plan
approved by the Common Council as part of the approved planned
unit development shall be permitted, even if such development
(including all aspects of land use, density and intensity, bulk,
landscaping, and parking and loading) is otherwise listed as
permitted. Requested exemptions from these standards shall be
made explicit by the applicant in the application and shall be
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved explicitly by
the Common Council. If not so requested and approved, such
exemptions shall not be permitted. Flexible development standards
shall be limited to density and intensity bonuses of no greater than
25% higher than otherwise permitted by the MR-10 District, unless
specifically granted by the Common Council, and shall be limited to
reductions in bulk, landscaping, parking and loading requirements
of no greater than 25% lower than otherwise permitted for the
proposed land uses, unless specifically granted by the Common
Council. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016
by Ord. No. 16-24]
C. Initiation of request for approval of a planned unit development.
Proceedings for approval of a planned unit development shall be
initiated by:
(1) An application of the owner(s) of the subject property, lease holders
or contract purchasers.
(2) A recommendation of the Plan Commission and action by the
Common Council, relative to City-owned property.
D. Application requirements. All applications for proposed planned unit
developments, regardless of the party of their initiation per Subsection
C above, shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a
§ 550-152 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-152
1:1356
minimum of two weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The
Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of said complete application
to the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer. Said application shall apply to
each of the process steps in Subsections E through H below.
E. PUD Process Step 1: Preapplication conference.
(1) The applicant shall contact the Zoning Administrator to place an
informal discussion item for the PUD on the Plan Commission
agenda.
(2) No details beyond the name of the applicant and the identification
of the discussion item as a PUD are required to be given in the
agenda.
(3) At the Plan Commission meeting, the applicant shall engage in an
informal discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the
potential PUD. Appropriate topics for discussion may include the
location of the PUD, general project themes and images, the
general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses being
considered, approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities, the general treatment of natural features, the general
relationship to nearby properties and public streets, and
relationship to the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the
process shall in no way be binding upon the applicant or the City
but should be considered as the informal nonbinding basis for
proceeding to the next step.
F. PUD Process Step 2: Concept plan.
(1) The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a draft
PUD concept plan submittal packet for a determination of
completeness prior to placing the proposed PUD on the Plan
Commission agenda for concept plan review. This submittal packet
shall contain all of the following items, prior to its acceptance by
the Zoning Administrator and placement of the item on a Plan
Commission agenda for concept plan review:
(a) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11
inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the City of
Watertown Land Use Plan Map.
(b) A general written description of the proposed PUD, including:
[1] General project themes and images;
[2] The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
[3] Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor
area ratio and impervious surface area ratio;
§ 550-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-152
1:1357
[4] The general treatment of natural features;
[5] The general relationship to nearby properties and public
streets;
[6] The general relationship of the project to the
Comprehensive Plan; and
[7] An initial draft list of zoning standards which will not be
met by the proposed PUD and the location(s) in which they
apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be
more than met by the proposed PUD and the location(s) in
which they apply shall be identified. Essentially, the
purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan
Commission with information necessary to determine the
relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit
versus public benefit and in regard to the mitigation of
potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
(c) A written description of potentially requested exemptions from
the requirements of the underlying zoning district, in the
following order:
[1] Land use exemptions.
[2] Density and intensity exemptions.
[3] Bulk exemptions.
[4] Landscaping exceptions.
[5] Parking and loading requirements exceptions.
(d) A conceptual plan drawing (at 11 inches by 17 inches) of the
general land use layout and the general location of major
public streets and/or private drives. The applicant may submit
copies of a larger version of the "bubble plan" in addition to the
11 inches by 17 inches reduction.
(2) Within 10 working days of receiving the draft PUD concept plan
submittal packet, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
whether the submittal is complete. Once the Zoning Administrator
has received a complete packet, the proposed PUD concept plan
shall be placed on the Plan Commission agenda.
(3) At the Plan Commission meeting, the applicant shall engage in an
informal discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the
conceptual PUD. Appropriate topics for discussion may include the
any of the information provided in the PUD concept plan submittal
packet or other items as determined by the Plan Commission.
(4) Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the
process shall in no way be binding upon the applicant or the City
§ 550-152 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-152
1:1358
but should be considered as the informal nonbinding basis for
proceeding to the next step. The preferred procedure is for one or
more iterations of Plan Commission review of the concept plan to
occur prior to introduction of the formal petition for rezoning which
accompanies the general development plan (GDP) application.
(5) Each application for review shall be accompanied by a check
payable to the City of Watertown or cash as stated in § 550-157.
[Amended by Ord. No. 08-19]
G. PUD Process Step 3: General development plan (GDP).
(1) The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a draft
GDP plan submittal packet for a determination of completeness
prior to placing the proposed GDP on the Plan Commission agenda
for GDP review. This submittal packet shall contain all of the
following items prior to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator
and placement of the item on a Plan Commission agenda for GDP
review:
(a) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11
inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the City of
Watertown Land Use Plan Map.
(b) A map of the subject property, showing all lands for which the
planned infill development is proposed and all other lands
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
together with the names and addresses of the owners of all
lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of
the Register of Deeds of Dodge and/or Jefferson County (as
provided by the City of Watertown). Said map shall clearly
indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its
environs and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control.
Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted
in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier and
shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800
feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale,
and a North arrow shall be provided.
(c) A general written description of proposed PUD, including:
[1] General project themes and images.
[2] The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses.
[3] Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor
area ratio and impervious surface area ratio.
[4] The general treatment of natural features.
[5] The general relationship to nearby properties and public
streets.
§ 550-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-152
1:1359
[6] The general relationship of the project to the
Comprehensive Plan.
[7] A statement of rationale as to why PUD zoning is proposed.
This shall identify barriers that the applicant perceives in
the form of requirements of standard zoning districts and
opportunities for community betterment that the applicant
suggests are available through the proposed PUD zoning.
[8] A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met
by the proposed PUD and the location(s) in which they
apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be
more than met by the proposed PUD and the location(s) in
which they apply shall be identified. Essentially, the
purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan
Commission with information necessary to determine the
relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit
versus public benefit and in regard to the mitigation of
potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility.
[9] A written description of potentially requested exemptions
from the requirements of the underlying zoning district, in
the following order:
[a] Land use exemptions.
[b] Density and intensity exemptions.
[c] Bulk exemptions.
[d] Landscaping exceptions.
[e] Parking and loading requirements exceptions.
(d) A general development plan drawing at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 100 feet (reduction of 11 inches by 17 inches) of
the proposed project shall also be provided by the applicant),
showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to
make an evaluation against criteria for approval:
[1] A conceptual plan drawing (at 11 inches by 17 inches) of
the general land use layout and the general location of
major public streets and/or private drives. The applicant
may submit copies of a larger version of the "bubble plan"
in addition to the reduction of 11 inches by 17 inches;
[2] Location of recreational and open space areas and
facilities, and specifically describing those that are to be
reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and use;
[3] Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development,
the approximate areas of large development lots and pads,
density/intensity of various parts of the development, floor
§ 550-152 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-152
1:1360
area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape
surface area ratio of various land uses, expected staging,
and any other plans required by the Plan Commission or
Common Council; and
[4] Notations relating the written information provided in
Subsection G(1)(c)[1] to [6] above to specific areas on the
GDP drawing.
(e) A general conceptual landscaping plan for subject property,
noting approximate locations of foundation, street, yard and
paving, landscaping and the compliance of development with
all landscaping requirements of this chapter (except as noted
in the listing of exceptions), and the use of extra landscaping
and bufferyards.
(f) A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs and concepts for public fixtures and signs
(such as streetlight fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces
and/or poles) which are proposed to vary from City standards
or common practices.
(g) Written justification for the proposed planned unit
development. (The applicant is advised to use the
requirements of the Zoning Map amendment procedure to
develop said written justification.)
(h) Written demonstration of financial capability to complete all
public and private improvements associated with the proposed
PUD.
(2) The process and fees for review and approval of the GDP shall be
identical to that for Zoning Map amendments per this chapter and
(if land is to be divided) to that for preliminary and final plats of
subdivision per the City Code.
(3) All portions of an approved PUD/GDP not fully developed within
three years of final Common Council approval shall expire, and no
additional PUD-based development shall be permitted. The
Common Council may extend this three-year period by up to five
additional years via a majority vote following a public hearing.
H. PUD Process Step 4: Precise implementation plan (PIP).
(1) After the effective date of the rezoning to PUD/GDP, the applicant
may file an application for a proposed precise implementation plan
(PIP) with the Plan Commission. This submittal packet shall contain
all of the following items, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning
Administrator and placement of the item on a Plan Commission
agenda for PUD review:
§ 550-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-152
1:1361
(a) A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11
inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the City of
Watertown Land Use Plan Map.
(b) A map of the subject property, showing all lands for which the
planned infill development is proposed and all other lands
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
together with the names and addresses of the owners of all
lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of
the Register of Deeds of Dodge and/or Jefferson County (as
provided by the City of Watertown). Said map shall clearly
indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its
environs and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control.
Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted
in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier and
shall be at a scale not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot
dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a
North arrow shall be provided.
(c) A general written description of the proposed PIP, including:
[1] Specific project themes and images.
[2] The specific mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses.
[3] Specific residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor
area ratio and impervious surface area ratio.
[4] The specific treatment of natural features.
[5] The specific relationship to nearby properties and public
streets.
[6] A statement of rationale as to why PUD zoning is proposed.
This shall identify barriers that the applicant perceives in
the form of requirements of standard zoning districts and
opportunities for community betterment the applicant
suggests are available through the proposed PUD zoning.
[7] A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met
by the proposed PIP and the location(s) in which they
apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be
more than met by the proposed PIP and the location(s) in
which they apply shall be identified. The purpose of this
listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with
information necessary to determine the relative merits of
the project in regard to private benefit versus public
benefit and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse
impacts created by design flexibility.
§ 550-152 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-152
1:1362
(d) A precise implementation plan drawing at a minimum scale of
one inch equals 100 feet (reduction of 11 inches by 17 inches)
of the proposed project shall also be provided by the applicant,
showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to
make an evaluation against criteria for approval:
[1] A PIP site plan conforming to any and all the requirements
of the site plan review and approval procedures. If the
proposed planned unit development is a cluster
development or a group development, a proposed
preliminary plat or conceptual plat shall be provided in
addition to the required site plan;
[2] Location of recreational and open space areas and
facilities and specifically describing those that are to be
reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and use;
[3] Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development,
the precise areas of all development lots and pads, density/
intensity of various parts of the development, floor area
ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface
area ratio of various land uses, expected staging, and any
other plans required by the Plan Commission or Common
Council; and
[4] Notations relating the written information provided in
Subsection G(1)(c)[1] to [6] above to specific areas on the
GDP drawing.
(e) A landscaping plan for the subject property, specifying the
location, species and installed size of all trees and shrubs. This
plan shall also include a chart, which provides a cumulative
total for each species, type and required location (foundation,
yard, street, paved area or bufferyard) of all trees and shrubs.
(f) A series of building elevations for the entire exterior of all
buildings in the planned unit development, including detailed
notes as to the materials and colors proposed.
(g) A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs, concepts for public fixtures and signs
(such as streetlight fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces
and/or poles), and group development signage themes which
are proposed to vary from City standards or common practices.
(h) A general outline of the intended organizational structure for a
property owners' association, if any; deed restrictions and
provisions for private provision of common services, if any.
(i) A written description which demonstrates the full consistency
of the proposed PIP with the approved GDP.
§ 550-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-152
1:1363
§ 550-153. Purpose of administrative regulations.
The purpose of §§ 550-154 to 550-158 is to establish the administrative and
enforcement framework for the application of this chapter.
§ 550-154. Zoning Administrator.
(j) Any and all variations between the requirements of the
applicable PUD/GDP zoning district and the proposed PIP
development.
(2) The applicant shall submit proof of financial capability pertaining
to construction and maintenance and operation of all public and
private improvements associated with the proposed PUD.
(3) The area included in a precise implementation plan may be only a
portion of the area included in a previously approved general
implementation plan.
(4) The precise implementation plan (PIP) submission may include site
plan and design information, allowing the Plan Commission to
combine design review and review of the PIP. Design review may, at
the choice of the applicant, be deferred until a later time when
specific site and building developments will be brought forth.
(5) The Plan Commission or Common Council may specify other plans,
documents or schedules that must be submitted prior to
consideration or approval of the PIP, as such may be relevant to
review.
(6) The process and fees for review and approval of the PUD shall be
identical to that for Zoning Map amendments per this chapter and
(if land is to be divided) to that for preliminary and final plats of
subdivision per the City Code.
(7) All portions of an approved PUD/PIP not fully developed within
three years of final Common Council approval shall expire, and no
additional PUD-based development shall be permitted. The
Common Council may extend this three-year period by up to five
additional years via a majority vote following a public hearing.
(8) Approved PUDs which have not been initiated within the time limits
established by Subsection H(7) above shall revert to the
preexisting zoning designation.
A. Designation. The Building Inspector or a designee of the Building
Inspector is hereby designated as the administrative and enforcement
officer for the provisions of this chapter and is also herein referred to as
the Zoning Administrator. The duty of the Zoning Administrator is to
interpret and administer this chapter and to issue, after on-site
inspection, all permits required by this chapter.
§ 550-152 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-154
1:1364
B. Duties. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the Zoning Administrator or a designee, who in addition
thereto and in furtherance of said authority shall:
(1) Determine that all detailed site analyses, building permits,
certificates of occupancy, sign permits and site plans (and their
constituent plans) comply with all provisions of this chapter.
(2) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters and land to
determine compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(3) Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable
hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him to
ensure compliance with this chapter. If, however, he is refused
entry after presentation of his identification, he may procure a
special inspection warrant in accordance with § 66.0119, Wis.
Stats.
(4) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including
but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional uses,
temporary uses, sign permits, site plans, occupancy permits,
variances, appeals, interpretations, and applications therefor.
(5) Record the first-floor and lowest-floor (basement or crawlway)
elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered or improved in
the floodland districts.
(6) Receive, file and forward all applications for all procedures
governed by this chapter to the designated official bodies.
(7) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of
structures and the use of structures, lands and waters; give notice
of all violations of this chapter to the owner, resident, agent or
occupant of the premises; and report uncorrected violations to the
City Attorney in a manner specified by him.
(8) Institute, in the name of the City of Watertown, any appropriate
actions or proceedings against a violator of this chapter as
provided by law.
(9) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he
has inspected and approved such use or erection.
(10) Where useful, the Zoning Administrator or his agent may set marks
on bridges or buildings or other markers which show the depth of
the regional flood or may set marks delineating the boundaries of
wetlands.
(11) Request assistance and cooperation from the City Police
Department and City Attorney as deemed necessary.
(12) Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all
reports and documents concerning the City's Comprehensive Plan
§ 550-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-154
1:1365
§ 550-155. Plan Commission.
§ 550-156. Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and duty to review and
determine all matters relating to requested variances from the provisions of
this chapter (see § 550-147) or appeals regarding an interpretation of the
Zoning Administrator of the provisions of this chapter (see § 550-148).
and ordinances. In addition, information in the form of reports,
bulletins, maps and engineering data shall be readily available and
widely distributed. The Common Council may set fees necessary to
recover the cost of providing information to the public.
(13) The Public Works Director may be designated the Deputy Zoning
Administrator by the Zoning Administrator.
(14) Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this chapter per
§ 550-148.
A. The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall
make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and
development of the City to the Common Council, other public officials
and other interested organizations and citizens. The Commission, its
members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter
upon any land and make examinations and surveys.
B. In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal
planning. Under this chapter, its functions are primarily
recommendatory to the Common Council pursuant to guidelines set
forth in this chapter as to various matters, and always being mindful of
the intent and purposes of this chapter. Recommendations shall be in
writing. A recording thereof in the Commission's minutes shall
constitute the required written recommendation. The Commission may,
in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion and of its own volition,
conduct its own public hearing.
A. Establishment and membership. A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
established. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consists of five members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common
Council, for three years, except that, of those first appointed, one shall
serve for one year and two for two years. The members shall serve
without compensation and shall be removable by the Mayor for cause
upon written charges and after public hearing. The Mayor shall
designate one of the members Chairperson. The Mayor shall appoint,
subject to confirmation of the Council for staggered terms of three
years, two alternate members of such Board in addition to the five
members above provided for. Annually, the Mayor shall designate one of
the alternate members as first alternate and the other as second
alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a
§ 550-154 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-156
1:1366
member of the Board refuses or declines to vote, is disqualified because
of interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so
act when the first alternate so refuses or declines to vote, is disqualified
because of interest or is absent, or when more than one member so
refuses or declines, is disqualified or is absent. Other provisions herein
appearing, with regard to removal and filling of vacancies, shall apply
to such alternates. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of
members whose terms become vacant. Appointments shall be made at
the organizational meeting the third Tuesday in April. Terms of office
shall commence the first day of May. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall
serve as Secretary of the Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
employ other employees.
B. Organization.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for its government
and procedure. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
held at the call of the Secretary and at such other times as the
Zoning Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairperson, or in his
absence an elected Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and
subpoena the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open
to the public.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board of Appeals, which is the
City Clerk/Treasurer's office, and shall be a public record.
C. Powers.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(a) To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Administrator.
(b) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
chapter upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to
pass.
(c) To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from
the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, when owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done.
(d) Permit in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general
§ 550-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-156
1:1367
purpose and intent of this chapter, a building or premises to be
erected or used for such public utility purposes in any location
which is reasonably necessary for the public convenience and
welfare.
(2) In exercising the above-listed powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify any order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and shall
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its
opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall
have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken. If a quorum
is present, the Zoning Board of Appeals may take action by a
majority vote of the members present to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from or to decide
in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to
pass or to effect any variation in the requirements of this chapter.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-24]
(3) In addition to the foregoing powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall have the following specific powers:
(a) To interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown on the
Zoning Map accompanying and made a part of this chapter,
where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the
street layout on the aforesaid map.
(b) To call on any other City department for assistance in the
performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such other
departments to render such assistance as may be reasonably
required.
(4) Except as specifically provided, no action of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have the effect of permitting in any district uses
prohibited in such districts.
D. Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the
City of Watertown affected by any decision of the administrative
officers. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as
provided by the rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals, by filing with the
officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of
Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, together
with payment of a filing fee as may be established by the Common
Council. The officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all papers constituting the
record of appeals upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
§ 550-156 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-156
1:1368
appeals and give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the
parties in interest and shall decide the same within a reasonable time.
E. Notice of hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable
time and place for the hearing, cause notice thereof to be published in
the official newspaper not less than seven days prior thereto, and cause
notice to be given to the appellant or applicant and the administrative
officer(s) appealed from by regular mail or by personal service not less
than five days prior to the date of hearing. In every case involving a
variance, notice shall also be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the
hearing to the fee owners of record of all land within 200 feet of any
part of the subject building or premises involved in the appeal.
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24]
F. Hearings. Hearings on appeals shall be public and shall be conducted
according to the rules of procedure adopted by the Board. At the
hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent or
by attorney. Decisions of the Board following public hearing may be
made either in public or closed session, as the Board shall determine.
G. Findings.
(1) Findings of fact and reasons for all actions taken shall be reduced
by the Board to writing in the minutes of the proceedings.
(2) In the case of appeal based on variance, for the same to be granted
the findings shall affirmatively show the following, together with
the fact and the grounds therefor:
(a) A literal enforcement of the terms of this chapter would result
in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship to the appellant.
(b) The variance is not contrary to the public interest and will not
endanger public safety.
(c) The variance is in accord with the spirit of this chapter.
(d) The variance will cause substantial justice to be done.
(3) Further to be considered by the Board in case of appeal based on
variance in arriving at its reasons and grounds for the aboverequired
findings are the following:
(a) Preservation of intent. No variance shall be granted that is not
consistent with the purpose and intent of the regulations for
the district in which the development is located. No variance
shall have the effect of permitting a use in any district that is
not a stated permitted use, accessory use or conditional use in
that particular district.
(b) Exceptional circumstances. There may be exceptional,
extraordinary or unusual circumstances or conditions applying
§ 550-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-156
1:1369
to the lot or parcel, structure, use or intended use that do
not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same
district, and the granting of the variance would not be of so
general recurrent nature as to suggest that the chapter should
be changed.
(c) Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship not grounds for
variance. No variance shall be granted solely on the basis of
economic gain or loss. Self-imposed hardships shall not be
considered as grounds for the granting of a variance.
(d) Preservation of property rights. Such variance may be
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial
property rights possessed by other properties in the same
district and same vicinity.
(e) Absence of detriment. Such variance should not create
substantial detriment to adjacent property and shall not
materially impair or be contrary to the purpose and spirit of
this chapter or the public interest.
(4) Refer to City Code Chapter 532, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning, for additional requirements in floodland districts.
H. Wetland and floodland mapping disputes. Refer to City Code Chapter
532, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning.
I. Decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and
applications within 60 days after the public hearing and shall transmit a
signed copy of the Board's decision to the appellant or applicant,
Zoning Administrator and City Plan Commission. [Amended
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
(1) Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or
authorized by this Board.
(2) Variances, substitutions, or use permits granted by the Board shall
expire within six months, unless substantial work has commenced
pursuant to such grant.
(3) Applicants receiving variances in floodlands shall be notified, in
writing, by the Zoning Board of Appeals that increased flood
insurance premiums and risk to life or property may result from the
granting of the variance. The Board shall keep a record of the
notification in its files.
J. Review by court of record. Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals may present to a court of record a petition,
duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying
the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the
court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the offices of the
Board.
§ 550-156 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-157
1:1370
§ 550-157. Fees.
§ 550-158. Violations and penalties.
A. Fees for procedures requested by a private party. [Amended by Ord.
No. 04-18; 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18]
(1) The fees for the procedures and permits established by this chapter
shall be set by resolution of the Common Council of the City of
Watertown and provided under separate fee schedule. The
following fees shall be utilized for the procedures listed below and
shall take precedence over any other fee charges contained in this
chapter.
(2) Additional meetings for procedures shall be billed at a rate per
meeting established by Common Council, unless waived by the Plan
Commission based on special circumstances. Legal notices for
these additional meetings shall be billed at cost. All fees under this
subsection may be modified by Subsection D below.
B. Fees for procedures requested by the City of Watertown. There shall be
no fee in the case of applications filed in the public interest by the
Common Council or the Plan Commission, other agency or official of the
City of Watertown.
C. Payment of fees. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed
with the appropriate officer of the City (per the requirements of this
chapter) and are not refundable.
D. Reimbursable costs. The City may retain the services of professional
consultants (including but not limited to engineers, landscape
architects, architects, attorneys, environmental specialists, recreation
specialists and other experts) to assist the City's review of a proposal
coming before the Site Plan Review Committee, Plan Commission or
Common Council. The City may apply the charges for the services to the
applicant but shall first inform the applicant that the services will be
retained and the estimated costs. The applicant shall have the right to
withdraw the application if the additional costs are not acceptable. The
City may delay acceptance of the application as complete or may delay
final approval of the proposal until such fees are paid by the applicant.
Fees which are applied to an applicant, but which are not paid, may be
assigned by the City as a special assessment to the subject property.
A. Violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any
land, engage in any development activity (including disruption of
protected vegetation) or construct or use any structure, land or water
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or otherwise neglect,
refuse or fail to comply with this chapter's requirements. Any person
who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in
Subsection B below and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses,
§ 550-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-158
1:1371
including actual reasonable attorneys' and other fees involved in the
case. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who or which fails to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or any order of the Zoning
Administrator shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500
and costs of prosecution for each violation and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation exists
or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) City promulgated correction of violation. In addition to any other
penalty imposed by this section for a violation of the provisions of
this chapter, the City reserves and maintains the continued right to
abate violations of this chapter.
(2) Hazardous condition caused by violation of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this chapter
exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation
poses a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety,
peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the
violation to be immediately abated. Costs associated with said
abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which
said violation has occurred per Subsection B(4) below. The Zoning
Administrator is hereby authorized to abate a violation of this
chapter.
(3) Nonhazardous condition caused by violation of this chapter. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this chapter
exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation is
not such as to pose great and immediate danger to the public
health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator
shall serve written notice by registered mail on the current owner
of the property (as indicated by current City of Watertown tax
records) on which said violation is occurring to remove said
violation within 10 working days. If such violation is not removed
within such 10 working days, the Zoning Administrator shall cause
the violation to be abated per Subsection B(1) above. Costs
associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of
the property on which said violation has occurred per Subsection
B(4) below.
(4) Cost of abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this
section for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the cost of
abating a violation of this chapter per Subsection B(2) and/or (3)
above shall be collected as a debt from the owner of the property
on which said violation has occurred. An account of the expenses
incurred by the City to abate the violation shall be kept, and such
expenses shall be charged to and paid by the property owner.
Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation shall be mailed to
§ 550-158 WATERTOWN CODE § 550-158
1:1372
the last known address of said property owner by registered mail
and shall be payable within 30 calendar days from the receipt
thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred
and remain unpaid, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall enter such
charges onto the tax roll as a special charge as provided by
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-18;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-24]
§ 550-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-158
1:1373
Appendix

ZONING
550 Attachment 2
City of Watertown
Appendix B
Land Use Regulations
(Requirements per Articles II through VI)
How to Use the Land Use Table:
(1) The land uses listed in this appendix are specifically designated and refer to the detailed
listing of land uses contained in Article IV (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and
Regulations).
(2) Land Uses Permitted by Right:
Land uses listed as permitted by right (designated as a "P") are permitted per the general
land use requirement of this chapter (§ 550-47); per the general requirements of the specific
zoning district in which they are located; per any additional requirements imposed by
applicable overlay zoning districts as designated on the Official Zoning Map; per the
general requirements of this chapter, including § 550-145; and per any and all other
applicable City, county, state and federal regulations.
(3) Land Uses Permitted as a Conditional Use:
Land uses listed as permitted as a conditional use (designated as a "C") are permitted
subject to all the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection
(2) above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular land use as
contained in Article IV (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations), including any
additional requirements imposed as part of the conditional use process. Each application
for, and instance of, a conditional use shall be considered a unique situation and shall not be
construed as precedence for similar requests. (See also § 550-142 for conditional use
procedures.)
(4) Land Uses Permitted as an Accessory Use:
Land uses permitted as an accessory use are permitted subject to all the requirements
applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection (2) above, plus any additional
requirements applicable to that particular land use as contained in Article IV (Detailed
Land Use Descriptions and Regulations).
(5) Land Uses Permitted as a Temporary Use:
Land uses listed as permitted as a temporary use (designated as a "T") are permitted subject
to all the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection (2)
above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular land use as contained
in § 550-57 (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations). (See also Article IV.)
550 Attachment 2:1 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
(6) Land uses for which a blank space is shown for a specific zoning district are not permitted
in such zoning district, except as legal nonconforming uses (per Article V).
(7) Although a land use may be indicated as permitted by right or permitted as a conditional
use in a particular district, it does not follow that such a land use is permitted or permissible
on every parcel in such district. No land use is permitted or permissible on a parcel unless it
can be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards and regulations of this
chapter which are applicable to the specific land use and parcel in question, or unless an
appropriate variance has been granted pursuant to § 550-147.
550 Attachment 2:2 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Table of Land Uses
KEY:
P = Permitted by right in a conventional development (see § 550-49A)
C = Permitted by a conditional use (see § 550-47)
I = Permitted as a conditional use in an institutional residential development (see § 550-49B)
M = Permitted as a conditional use within a mobile home development or park (see § 550-49C or D)
Type of Land Use R
ural Holding (R
H)
Cou
ntryside Residential (C
R-10a)
Exurban
Residential (E
R-1)
Single-Family Residential (SR-4)
T
wo-Family Residential (T
R-6)
M
ultifamily (M
R-8)
M
ultifamily (M
R-10)
Senior Residential (SN
R)
Neigh
borhood
Office (N
O)
Plan
ned
Office (P
O)
Neigh
borhood
B
usiness (N
B)
Plan
ned
B
usiness (P
B)
General B
usiness (G
B)
Central B
usiness (C
B)
Plan
ned In
d
ustrial (PI)
General In
d
ustrial (GI)
Heavy In
d
ustrial (HI)
Dwelling Unit Types (See § 550-49)
Single-family detached 35 acre lot P P P P P P P P P P
Single-family detached 10 acre lot C* P P P P P P P P P
Single-family detached 1 acre lot C* C* P P P P P P P P
Single-family detached 8,000 sf lot P P P P P P P
Twin House/Duplex 4,500 sf per du P P P P C C
Two-flat 9,000 sf lot C P P P C C
Townhouse 5,445 sf lot P P P C C
Multiplex 5,445 sf per du P P P C C
Apartment 3-4 4,350 sf per du C P P C C
Apartment 5-24 4,350 sf per du C C C C
Institutional Residential 8,000 sf lot I I I I I I I I I
Mobile Home 8,000 sf lot M
NOTE:
* These lots may be permitted, but the zoning district maximum density must be adhered to.
550 Attachment 2:3 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Table of Land Uses
KEY:
P = Permitted by right (§ 550-45A)
C = Permitted as a conditional use (§ 550-45B)
Type of Land Use R
ural Holding (R
H)
Cou
ntryside Residential (C
R-10a)
Exurban
Residential (E
R-1)
Single-Family Residential (SR-4)
T
wo-Family Residential (T
R-6)
M
ultifamily (M
R-8)
M
ultifamily (M
R-10)
Senior Residential (SN
R)
Neigh
borhood
Office (N
O)
Plan
ned
Office (P
O)
Neigh
borhood
B
usiness (N
B)
Plan
ned
B
usiness (P
B)
General B
usiness (G
B)
Central B
usiness (C
B)
Plan
ned In
d
ustrial (PI)
General In
d
ustrial (GI)
Heavy In
d
ustrial (HI)
Nonresidential Land Uses
Agricultural Uses (§ 550-50)
A. Cultivation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
B. Husbandry C
C. Intensive Agriculture C
D. Agricultural Services C C
E. On-Site Agricultural Retail P
F. Selective Cutting P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
G. Clear-Cutting C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Institutional Uses (§ 550-51)
A. Passive Outdoor Public Recreational P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
B. Active Outdoor Public Recreational P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
C. Indoor Institutional C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
D. Outdoor Institutional C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
E. Public Services and Utilities P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
F. Institutional Residential C C C C C C C C C
G. Community Living Arrangement (1-8 res.) P P P P P P P P C C
H. Community Living Arrangement (9-15) C C P P P C C C C
I. Community Living Arrangement (16+) C C C C C C
550 Attachment 2:4 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Table of Land Uses
KEY:
P = Permitted by right (§ 550-45A)
C = Permitted as a conditional use (§ 550-45B)
Type of Land Use R
ural Holding (R
H)
Cou
ntryside Residential (C
R-10a)
Exurban
Residential (E
R-1)
Single-Family Residential (SR-4)
T
wo-Family Residential (T
R-6)
M
ultifamily (M
R-8)
M
ultifamily (M
R-10)
Senior Residential (SN
R)
Neigh
borhood
Office (N
O)
Plan
ned
Office (P
O)
Neigh
borhood
B
usiness (N
B)
Plan
ned
B
usiness (P
B)
General B
usiness (G
B)
Central B
usiness (C
B)
Plan
ned In
d
ustrial (PI)
General In
d
ustrial (GI)
Heavy In
d
ustrial (HI)
Commercial Uses (§ 550-52)
A. Office P P P P P P P P P
B. Personal or Professional Service P P P P P P P
C. Indoor Sales or Service C C P P P P C
D. Outdoor Display C C
E. Indoor Maintenance Service P P P P P P P
F. Outdoor Maintenance Service C
G. Indoor Commercial Entertainment C C C C C C C
H. Outdoor Commercial Entertainment C C C
I. Commercial Animal Boarding C C C
J. Commercial Indoor Lodging C C C C
K. Bed-and-Breakfast Establishments C C C C C C C C C C C C C
L. Group Day-Care Center (9+ children) C C C C C C C C C C C C
M. Campground C
N. Boardinghouse C C C C C C C
O. Sexually Oriented Land Use C C C C C
P. Vehicle Repair and Maintenance C C C C
Q. Convenient Cash Business C C C
550 Attachment 2:5 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Table of Land Uses
KEY:
P = Permitted by right (§ 550-45A)
C = Permitted as a conditional use (§ 550-45B)
Type of Land Use R
ural Holding (R
H)
Cou
ntryside Residential (C
R-10a)
Exurban
Residential (E
R-1)
Single-Family Residential (SR-4)
T
wo-Family Residential (T
R-6)
M
ultifamily (M
R-8)
M
ultifamily (M
R-10)
Senior Residential (SN
R)
Neigh
borhood
Office (N
O)
Plan
ned
Office (P
O)
Neigh
borhood
B
usiness (N
B)
Plan
ned
B
usiness (P
B)
General B
usiness (G
B)
Central B
usiness (C
B)
Plan
ned In
d
ustrial (PI)
General In
d
ustrial (GI)
Heavy In
d
ustrial (HI)
Storage/Disposal (§ 550-53)
A. Indoor Storage or Wholesaling P P P
B. Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling C P
C. Personal Storage Facility C C C
D. Junkyard or Salvage Yard C C
E. Waste Disposal Facility C C
F. Composting Operation C C
Transportation Uses (§ 550-54)
A. Off-Site Parking Lot P P P P
B. Airport/Heliport C C C C C
C. Freight Terminal C C
D. Distribution Center C P P
Industrial Uses (§ 550-55)
A. Light Industrial P P P
B. Heavy Industrial P
C. Communication Tower C C C C
D. Extraction Use C
550 Attachment 2:6 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Table of Land Uses
KEY:
P = Permitted by right (§ 550-45A)
C = Permitted as a conditional use (§ 550-45B)
Type of Land Use R
ural Holding (R
H)
Cou
ntryside Residential (C
R-10a)
Exurban
Residential (E
R-1)
Single-Family Residential (SR-4)
T
wo-Family Residential (T
R-6)
M
ultifamily (M
R-8)
M
ultifamily (M
R-10)
Senior Residential (SN
R)
Neigh
borhood
Office (N
O)
Plan
ned
Office (P
O)
Neigh
borhood
B
usiness (N
B)
Plan
ned
B
usiness (P
B)
General B
usiness (G
B)
Central B
usiness (C
B)
Plan
ned In
d
ustrial (PI)
General In
d
ustrial (GI)
Heavy In
d
ustrial (HI)
Accessory Uses (§ 550-56)
A. Commercial Apartment C C C P
B. Farm Residence P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
C. Private Residential Garage or Shed P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
D. Company Cafeteria P P P P P P P P P
E. Company-Provided On-Site Recreation P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C
F. Outdoor Display Incidental C C C
G. In-Vehicle Sales and Service C C C C C C C C
H. Indoor Sales Incident to Light Industrial Use P P P
I. Light Industrial Incident to Indoor Sales C C C C
J. Home Occupation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
K. Family Day-Care Home (4-8 children) P P P P P P P P
L. Intermediate Day-Care Home (9-15 children) C C C C C C C C
M. Migrant Labor Camp C C
N. On-Site Parking Lot P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
O. Private Residential Recreational Facility P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P. Private Residential Kennel C C C
Q. Private Residential Stable C C
R. Drainage Structure P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
550 Attachment 2:7 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Type of Land Use R
ural Holding (R
H)
Cou
ntryside Residential (C
R-10a)
Exurban
Residential (E
R-1)
Single-Family Residential (SR-4)
T
wo-Family Residential (T
R-6)
M
ultifamily (M
R-8)
M
ultifamily (M
R-10)
Senior Residential (SN
R)
Neigh
borhood
Office (N
O)
Plan
ned
Office (P
O)
Neigh
borhood
B
usiness (N
B)
Plan
ned
B
usiness (P
B)
General B
usiness (G
B)
Central B
usiness (C
B)
Plan
ned In
d
ustrial (PI)
General In
d
ustrial (GI)
Heavy In
d
ustrial (HI)
S. Filling P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
T. Lawn Care of Subject Property P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
U. Septic Systems C C C
V. Exterior Communication Devices P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
W. Caretaker's Residence C C
550 Attachment 2:8 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Table of Land Uses
KEY:
T = Permitted as a temporary use (§ 550-45D)
Type of Land Use R
ural Holding (R
H)
Cou
ntryside Residential (C
R-10a)
Exurban
Residential (E
R-1)
Single-Family Residential (SR-4)
T
wo-Family Residential (T
R-6)
M
ultifamily (M
R-8)
M
ultifamily (M
R-10)
Senior Residential (SN
R)
Neigh
borhood
Office (N
O)
Plan
ned
Office (P
O)
Neigh
borhood
B
usiness (N
B)
Plan
ned
B
usiness (P
B)
General B
usiness (G
B)
Central B
usiness (C
B)
Plan
ned In
d
ustrial (PI)
General In
d
ustrial (GI)
Heavy In
d
ustrial (HI)
Temporary Uses (§ 550-57)
A. General Temporary Outdoor Sales T T T T
B. Outdoor Assembly T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
C. Contractor's Project Office T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
D. Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
E. Relocatable Building T T T T T T T T T
F. On-Site Real Estate Sales Office T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
G. Outdoor Sales of Farm Products T T T T T T T
550 Attachment 2:9 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Land Use Permitted in Permanently Protected Green Space Areas
KEY:
C = Permitted as a conditional use per § 550-58.
T = Permitted as a temporary use per § 550-58.
Land Use
Permanently Protected Green Space Areas
Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning District
Other
Permanently
Protected
Green Space
Conservancy Drainageway Lakeshore Woodland Steep Slope
A. Cultivation C
B. Passive outdoor recreational P P P P P P
C. Active outdoor recreational P
D. Outdoor Industrial P
E. Lawn Care (mow-feed-seed-weed) C C C C C P
F. Golf Course C C C C C P
G. Any Permitted Temporary Use P,T
H. Drainage Structure C C C C C C
I. Filling C C C C C C
J. Septic System C
K. Road, Bridge
L. Utility Lines and Related Facilities C C C C C C
M. Piers and Wharfs C C C C C C
550 Attachment 2:10 08 - 01 - 2016

ZONING
550 Attachment 3
City of Watertown
Appendix C
Density and Intensity Standards
(Requirements per Articles II and VII)
Key to City of Watertown Residential Density Standards
Zoning District: Regulates the type of uses permitted on the site. Article II describes each
zoning district. Section 550-47 and Article IV provide detailed regulations applying to specific
land uses. Zoning districts are depicted on the Official Zoning Map (see § 550-18).
Development Option: Describes the maximum level of clustering and the minimum proportion
of permanently protected green space area permitted on the site. (Refer to Article IV for a full
description of each development type and specific regulations which apply to its use.)
Maximum Gross Density: Is the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on one acre of
gross site area in the specific zoning district and development option. Gross site area is
calculated in § 550-73C.
Minimum Lot Area: Is the minimum size lot permitted within the specified zoning district.
This also limits the type of dwelling unit permitted. Specific dwelling unit regulations are given
in § 550-15.
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio: Is the minimum permitted percentage of the gross site
area (GSA) which must be preserved as permanently protected landscaped area. LSR is
calculated by dividing the total landscaped area of a site by the GSA. GSA is calculated in
§ 550-73C. "Landscaped area" is defined in § 550-15.
550 Attachment 3:1 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
City of Watertown Residential Density Standards
Zoning District
Development
Option
Maximum
Gross
Density
(MGD)
Minimum
Lot Area
(MLA)
Minimum
Zoning District
Area
Minimum
Landscape
Surface
Ratio
(LSR)
Rural Holding Conventional 0.03 35 acres 35 acres 90%
Countryside
Residential-10 ac Conventional 0.10 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 80%
Exurban
Residential-1 Conventional 1.00 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 60%
Single-Family
Residential-4 Conventional 4.00 8,000 sf 8,000 sf 50%
Two-Family
Residential-61
Conventional 6.00 9,000 sf 9,000 sf 50%
Mobile Home 5.00 9,000 sf 10 acres 50%
Multifamily
Residential-81, 2
Conventional/
Institutional 8.00 5,445 sf per du 16,500 sf 50%
Multifamily
Residential-101, 2
Conventional/
Institutional 10.00 4,350 sf per du 13,100 sf 50%
Senior
Residential1, 2 Institutional 40.00 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 50%
Neighborhood
Office
Conventional Varies1, 2, 3 9,000 sf 50%
Institutional Varies5
9,000 sf 50%
Planned Office Institutional 40.00 40,000 sf6
40,000 sf 50%
Neighborhood
Business
Conventional Varies5
9,000 sf 50%
Institutional Varies5
9,000 sf 50%
Planned Business Institutional Varies5
20,000 sf 40,000 sf 50%
General Business Institutional Varies5
9,000 sf 18,000 sf 50%
Central Business Institutional Varies5
9,000 sf 9,000 sf 0%
NOTES:
1 For single-family, see Single-Family Residential-4 District.
2 For two-family, see Two-Family Residential-6 District.
3 For townhouse, multiplex, apartment and institutional residential development, see Multifamily
Residential-8 District.
4 Up to 10 du/acre per the limits of the conditional use permit.
5 Up to 50 du/acre per the limits of the conditional use permit.
6
20,000 square feet per the limits of the conditional use permit.
550 Attachment 3:2 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Key to City of Watertown Nonresidential Intensity Standards
Zoning District: Regulates the type of uses permitted on the site. Section 550-47 describes a
detailed listing of all uses permitted in each zoning district. Section 550-47 and Article IV
provide detailed regulations applying to specific land uses. Zoning districts are depicted on the
Official Zoning Map (see § 550-18).
Maximum Number of Floors: Is the maximum number of full floors a building is permitted
to contain.
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio: Is the minimum permitted percentage of the gross site
area (GSA) which must be preserved as permanently protected landscaped area. LSR is
calculated by dividing the total landscaped area of a site by the GSA. GSA is calculated in
§ 550-73C. "Landscaped area" is defined in § 550-15.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: Is the maximum permitted ratio calculated by dividing the total
gross floor area of all buildings on a site by the gross site area (GSA). Gross floor area is
calculated in § 550-73C.
Minimum Lot Area: Is the minimum size lot permitted in the specified zoning district for a
building with the listed number of floors.
Maximum Building Size: Is the maximum total gross floor area which a building is permitted
to contain. Gross floor area is calculated in § 550-73C.
550 Attachment 3:3 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
City of Watertown Nonresidential Intensity Standards
Zoning District
Maximum
Number of
Floors
(F)
Minimum
Landscape
Surface
Ratio
(LSR)
Maximum
Floor Area
Ratio
(FAR)
Minimum Lot
Area
(MLA)
Maximum
Building
Size
(MBS)
Rural Holding** 2 90% 0.100 40,000 sf* na
Countryside
Residential** 2 80% 0.100 40,000 sf* na
Exurban
Residential** 2 60% 0.100 40,000 sf* na
Single-Family
Res-4 2 50% 0.150 14,000 sf na
Two-Family Res6
2 30% 0.220 14,000 sf na
Multifamily Res8
2 25% 0.275 14,000 sf na
Multifamily Res10 2 25% 0.275 14,000 sf na
Senior
Residential 2 25% 0.275 14,000 sf na
Neighborhood
Office 2 40% 0.275 7,200 sf 10,000
Planned Office 4 25% 0.300 40,000 sf* na
Neighborhood
Business 2 40% 0.275 7,200 sf 10,000
Planned Business 4 25% 0.300 20,000 sf na
General Business 4 15% 0.400 7,200 sf na
Central Business 4 0% 3.00 2,000 sf na
Planned
Industrial 4 25% 0.600 40,000 sf* na
General
Industrial 4 15% 1.000 9,000 sf na
Heavy Industrial 2+ 15% 1.000 9,000 sf na
NOTES:
* Reduction in lot area from 40,000 square feet to 20,000 square feet is permitted as a conditional use
per § 550-142 with site plan for end use of the property demonstrating full compliance with all of the
requirements of the City Code.
** For permitted nonresidential uses in residential districts, such as churches and schools.
550 Attachment 3:4 08 - 01 - 2016

ZONING
550 Attachment 4
City of Watertown
Appendix D
Bulk Regulations
(Requirements per Articles II and VIII)
Residential Bulk Standards
Zoning District
Minimum1
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum Setbacks
(feet)
Minimum
Dwelling
Separation
(feet)
Maximum
Building Height
(feet)
Front/
Street2
Side to Home3
Rear to
Home3
Rear/Side
to
Accessory
Building4 Pavement5
Least
Side
Sum of
Sides Home
Accessory
Building
Rural Holding 35 acres 150 35/40 50 100 100 50 5/10 100 35 15
Countryside Res10
40,000 150 35/40 50 100 50 5/10 100 35 15
Exurban Res-1 40,000 150 25/40 30 60 25 3/5 5/10 60 35 15
Single-Family
Res-4
8,000 75 25/40 8 16 25 3/5 5/10 12 35 15
Two-Family Res6
10
9,000 85 25/40 0/98
0/188
25 3/5 5/10 0/128
35 15
Multifamily Res8
11
5,335/du 1009
25/40 0/108
0/208
30 3/5 5/10 0/208
359
18
Multifamily Res1012
4,350/du 1009
25/40 0/258
0/508
25 3/5 5/10 0/208
359
18
Institutional
Residential13
40,0006
1009
25/40 0/208
0/408
25 3/5 5/10 0/208
259
18
550 Attachment 4:1 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Zoning District
Minimum1
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum Setbacks
(feet)
Minimum
Dwelling
Separation
(feet)
Maximum
Building Height
(feet)
Front/
Street2
Side to Home3
Rear to
Home3
Rear/Side
to
Accessory
Building4
Pavement5
Least
Side
Sum of
Sides Home
Accessory
Building
Neighborhood
Office13
— — — — — — — — — — —
Planned Office14 — — — — — — — — — — —
Neighborhood
Business13
— — — — — — — — — — —
Planned
Business14
— — — — — — — — — — —
General
Business14
— — — — — — — — — — —
Central
Business14
— — — — — — — — — — —
NOTES:
1 Measured from existing or officially mapped right-of-way line, whichever is farthest from the center line of the street.
2 For street with said right-of-way equal to or greater than 100 feet, 40 feet of setback is required.
3 Additional setbacks may be required along zoning district boundaries. See § 550-99.
4 Accessory buildings shall be three feet from the property line, five feet from an alley.
5 Minimum of five feet from a side or rear yard (or additional per § 550-99), minimum of 10 feet from a public street.
6 May be reduced to 20,000 square feet with a conditional use permit.
7
Institutional residential buildings in excess of two stories are allowed with a conditional use permit.
8 Zero feet where property line divides attached buildings.
9 Twenty feet for townhouse on interior of row; 30 feet for townhouse on end of row.
10 For single-family homes, see the Single-Family-4 District.
11 For single-family and two-family homes, see the Two-Family-6 District.
12 For single-family homes, two-family homes, and three to four dwelling unit buildings, see the Multifamily-8 District.
13 For single-family homes, two-family homes, and three or more dwelling unit buildings, see the Multifamily-10 District.
14 For institutional residential development, see the IR District.
550 Attachment 4:2 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
550 Attachment 4:3 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Nonresidential Bulk Standards
Zoning District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum Setbacks
(feet)
Minimum
Building
Separation
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Front/
Street
Side From
Rear
Side/Rear
from
Res Accessory Pavement
NonRes
Rural Holding1
40,0002
200 35/40 50 50 50 50 5/106
30 35
Countryside Res-10ac1
40,0002
100 25/40 30 30 30 3/55
5/106
60 35
Exurban Res-11
40,0002
100 25/40 30 30 30 3/55
5/106
60 35
Single-Family Res-41
14,000 100 25/40 12 12 40 3/55
5/106
12 35
Two-Family Res-61
14,000 100 25/40 12 12 40 3/55
5/106
12 35
Multifamily Res-81
14,000 100 25/40 12 12 40 3/55
5/106
20 35
Multifamily Res-101
14,000 100 25/40 12 12 40 3/55
5/106
20 35
Institutional
Residential1 14,000 100 25/40 12 12 40 3/55
5/106
20 25
Neighborhood Office 7,200 75 25/40 8 8 25 3/55
5/106
12 35
Planned Office 40,0002
75 25/40 8 0/84
25 3/55
5/106
0/204
45
Neighborhood
Business 7,200 60 25/40 12 12 25 3/55
5/106
12 35
Planned Business 40,0002
75 25/40 10 0/104
30 3/55
5/106
0/204
45
General Business 7,200 60 25/40 12 0/124
25 3/55
5/106
0/244
40
Central Business 2,000 10
Maximum setback of 0 feet
or block average, except per
Plan Commission as a
component of site design;
side yard is 10 feet from
residential
0/107
3/55
0
6
Maximum is
0, except per
Plan
Commission
50; minimum
is 20, except
per Plan
Commission
Planned Industrial 40,0002
2003
25/40 30 15 30 3/55
5/106
30 35
General Industrial 9,000 75 25/40 50 20 30 3/55
5/106
40 35
550 Attachment 4:4 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Heavy Industrial 9,000 100 25/40 50 20 40 3/55
5/106
40 45
NOTES:
1 Bulk requirements for institutional uses, such as churches and schools, in agricultural and residential districts.
2 May be reduced to 20,000 square feet with a conditional use permit.
3 May be reduced to 100 feet with a conditional use permit.
4 Zero feet where property line divides attached buildings.
5 Accessory buildings shall be three feet from the property line, five feet from an alley.
6 Five feet from side and rear lot lines, except where modified along district boundary by required bufferyard; see § 550-99; 10 feet from front or street
line.
7 Ten feet from residential districts.
550 Attachment 4:5 08 - 01 - 2016

ZONING
550 Attachment 6
City of Watertown
Appendix F
Detailed Classification of Plant Species
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Climax Trees
(75 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Acer saccharumRF
Sugar Maple S Round
Rich soil; salt-sensitive; oval
when young; yellow, orange or
scarlet fall color
"Green Mountain" Scorch-resistant; leathery leaves
*Carya ovataRF Shagbark Hickory
S
Native and very adaptable, saltsensitive, fruit-nut, lawn tree
Ginkgo bilboa Ginkgo Pyramidal
Very urban, dioecious, females
produce smelly fruits, golden
yellow fall color
"Fastigiata" Sentry Ginkgo Columnar Seedless
Juglans nigraRF
Walnut
Eastern Walnut
Black Walnut
F
Best in public open spaces or
lawns; not to be used as a street
tree; poisonous to other plants
within the drip zone; susceptible
to caterpillars and leaf spot
disease
*Quercus albaRF White Oak S Round
Extremely sensitive to soil
compaction; tolerant of urban
conditions; dry soil; subject to
iron chlorosis; red fall color; very
difficult to transplant; excellent
lawn or shade tree
*Quercus bicolorRF Swamp White Oak S Round
Very tolerant of urban conditions;
moist to wet, intolerant of alkaline
soil; tolerates poor drainage;
difficult to transplant; yellow fall
color
*Quercus macrocarpaRF Bur Oak
Mossycup Oak S Round
Sensitive to soil compaction;
tolerant of urban conditions; dry
to wet soil; no fall color; very
difficult to transplant
550 Attachment 6:1 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Quercus palustris Pin Oak M Pyramidal
Sensitive to soil compaction;
tolerant of urban conditions;
moist, acid soil; pendulous lower
branches; red fall color; iron
chlorosis on alkaline soil; lawn
tree; cultivar "Sovereign" best for
streets
*Quercus rubraRF
(also known as
Quercus Borealis)
Northern Red Oak
Red Oak M Round
Sensitive to soil compaction;
tolerant of urban conditions;
pyramidal when young; red fall
color; well-drained soil; fast
growing for oaks; excellent lawn,
shade and street tree
550 Attachment 6:2 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Tall Deciduous Trees
(30 landscaping points)
KEY:
*Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
Acer nigrum Black Maple M Oval
Does well in poor, dry soils; red
to bright gold fall color; excellent
for lawn, shade or street
Acer platanoides Norway Maple M Round Shallow root system; not to be
used along streets
"Cleveland" F Oval-upright Uniform, dense foliage
"Columnare" Columnar Indistinct central leader
"Crimson King"
Keeps deep purple leaf color
throughout summer; susceptible
to sun scald, bark-splitting and
transplant shock
"Drummondii" Harlequin Norway
Maple S Round Variegated, cream-edged leaves
"Emerald Queen" F Oval Vigorous; crisp foliage
"Globosum" Globe Norway
Maple S Globe Useful on a standard under utility
wires; 20-foot height
"Greenlace" Round Deeply divided, fine-textured
leaves
"Royal Red" S Round Best for purple summer foliage
"Shwedleri" Round New foliage reddish; bronze by
summer
"Summershade" F
Rapidly growing cultivar; deep
green, large, leathery leaves
*Acer rubrumRF
Red Maple
Scarlet Maple
Swamp Maple
F
Round
Moist, acid soil; tolerates poor
drainage; smooth gray bark;
yellow, orange or red fall color;
salt-sensitive
"Armstrong" Fastigiate No fall color; light gray bark
"Autumn Flame" Early scarlet fall color
"Bowhall" Oval Orange fall color
"Red Sunset" Late scarlet fall color
"Schlesingeri" Red-orange fall color
550 Attachment 6:3 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Acer saccharinumRF
Silver Maple
Soft Maple
White Maple
River Maple
F Vase
Hearty and fast-growing; most
soil; tolerates poor drainage; finetextured; weak-wooded (develops
heart rots after 50 years, limbs
may fall); yellowish or no fall
color
"Blair" Very
Fast
Strong branch structure; stormresistant
"Pyramidale" Upright Silver
Maple Pyramidal Improved branch structure
"Silver Queen" Seedless Sugar
Maple Round Seedless
"Wieri" Cutleaf Sugar
Maple
Shredded leaves; pendulous
branches
Aesculus hippocas
tanum
Horsechestnut M Round
Urban; course; showy, white May
flowers; litter problem; no fall
color; difficult to transplant; pest
or disease problems may limit use
Alnus glutinosa European Alder
Black Alder F Oval Rich or wet soils; produces
catkins; possible winterkill
Betula luteaRF Yellow Birch M Round
Drooping branches; moist welldrained soils; yellow-orange bark;
rusty yellow fall color
Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa F Oval
Poor, dry soil; showy, white June
flowers; coarse; litter problem; no
fall color
*Celtis occidentalisRF Common
Hackberry M Vase
Tolerates alkaline soils; "pebbled"
bark; yellowish fall color; pest or
disease problem may limit use
*Fagus grandifoliaRF American Beech S Oval
Moist, rich soil; smooth gray
bark; yellow-bronze fall color;
difficult to transplant; saltsensitive; sensitive to soil
compaction
Fagus sylvatica European Beech S Round
Moist, rich soil; less difficult to
transplant than American Beech;
several cultivars available;
excellent lawn tree
*Fraxinus americanaRF
White Ash M
Round
Moist soil; tolerates poor
drainage; dioecious; orange to
purple fall color; tolerates urban
conditions
"Autumn Purple" Round Seedless; superior fall color
"Rosehill" Oval Seedless; superior fall color
Fraxinus excelsior European Ash F Round Jet-black buds; no fall color
"Aurea" Golden
European Ash M Round Golden, young foliage, twigs and
fall color; green summer foliage
550 Attachment 6:4 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
"Hesseri" Hesse
European Ash Round Simple leaves
Fraxinus nigraRF Black Ash M Irregular
Deep, rich, moist soils; tolerates
wet soils; yellow fall color; scaly
bark
Fraxinus
pennsylvanicaRF
Green Ash Red Ash F
Oval;
irregular
Dry to wet soils; tolerates poor
drainage; salt-tolerant; twiggy and
weak-wooded; yellow fall color;
pest or disease problem may limit
use; tolerates urban conditions
"Marshall's
Seedless" Oval Seedless; glossy, dark green
foliage; improved habit of growth
"Summit" Upright Finer textured foliage
*Gleditsia triancanthos
inermius
Thornless
Honeylocust
F
Vase
Tolerates poor drainage;
thornless, as are all of the
following; pest or disease
problem may limit use; salttolerant; yellow fall color
"Imperial" Round
Podless; low-growing; flattopped; pest or disease problem
may limit use
"Shademaster" Irregular Podless; vase shape in age; pest or
disease problem may limit use
"Skyline" Upright
Podless; tends to form central
leader; good golden fall color;
pest or disease problem may limit
use
"Sunburst" Irregular
Podless; yellow new foliage; poor
branch structure; pest or disease
problem may limit use
*Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky
Coffeetree M Upright
Moist, rich soil; coarse and
rugged; dioecious; yellowish fall
color
Juglans cinereaRF Butternut S
Needs good soil and consistent
moisture; fairly good shade tree;
susceptible to butternut decline
Larix decidua
European Larch
F Pyramidal
Full sun; graceful, fine-textured;
transplant in spring before buds
open; yellow fall color
"Pendula" Interesting weeping branches
Larix kaempferi Japanese Larch F
WidePyramidal
Similar to European Larch, more
picturesque
Larix laricinaRF American Larch
Tamarack M
NarrowPyramidal
Hardy; drought-tolerant; used in
shelterbelts
Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree F Upright
Rich, moist soil; unique leaves
and interesting June flowers;
yellow fall color; purchase from
northern source
550 Attachment 6:5 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Platanus occidentalis
Sycamore
American
Planetree
F Pryamidal
Moist soil; tolerates poor
drainage; mottled bark; coarse
maple-like leaves; no fall color;
pest or disease problem may limit
use
Populus alba
"Pyramidalis" White Poplar F Fastigate
Moist soil; tolerates poor
drainage; mottled bark; coarse
maple-like leaves; no fall color;
pest or disease problem may limit
use
Populus deltoidesRF
Eastern Poplar Very fast
Fastigiate
Hardy, fast growing; golden
yellow fall color; tolerates
drought; brittle; may produce
"cotton"; too large for homes
"Robusta" Upright Seedless
"Siouxland" Larger greener leaves; seedless;
uniform in shape; hardy
"Cottonless" Seedless; many similar species
available
Populus
grandidentataRF Bigtooth Aspen F Narrow Moist, sandy, gravelly soils; not
shade tolerant; yellow fall color
*Prunus serotinaRF Black Cherry M Oval
Dry soil; white flowers and black
fruits in drooping racemes; orange
fall color; pest or disease problem
may limit use
Taxodium distichum Baldcypress F Pyramidal
Moist, intolerant of alkaline soil;
tolerates poor drainage; sun;
bronze fall color; fine texture;
purchase from northern source
*Tilia americanaRF
American
Linden
Basswood
Linden Tree
Linn Tree
M Round Sensitive to soil compaction; saltsensitive; coarse, rich soils
Tilia cordata
Littleleaf Linden S
Pyramidal
Urban; moist soil; fragrant
flowers; poor branch structure,
needs training while young;
yellow fall color
"Chancellor" Uniform, upright habit
"Greenspire" Improved branching habit
Tilia x euchlora
"Redmond" Redmond Linden M Pyramidal Urban; dark green foliage
550 Attachment 6:6 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Medium Deciduous Trees
(15 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
Aesculus x carnea
"Briotii"
Ruby
Horsechestnut S Round Rich, moist soil; red flowers
Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye S Round Rich, moist soil; yellow-green
flowers; orange fall color
Alnus glutinosa European Alder F Oval Wet; tolerates poor drainage;
catkins; cone fruits; no fall color
*Betula nigraRF River Birch M Vase
Wet to dry, intolerant of alkaline
soils; tolerates poor drainage;
pinkish, peeling bark
*Betula papyiferaRF Paper Birch M Oval
Cool moist soil; white peeling
bark; golden yellow fall color;
pest or disease problems
Betula pendula
"Gracilis"
Cutleaf European
Birch M Weeping
Cool, moist soil; dissected leaves;
yellow fall color; pests and
disease
Betula platyphylla
japonica
Japanese White
Birch M Pyramidal White bark; some resistance to
bronze birch borer
Cercidiphyllum
japonicum Katsuratree M Columnar
Moist soil; dioecious; form
controlled by pruning, wide
spreading if multitrunked; yellow
to red fall color
Cladrastis lutea American
Yellowwood S Round
Moist rich soil; smooth light gray
bark; fragrant, white June flowers
in large clusters; yellow fall color
Magnolia acuminata Cucumbertree F Pyramidal
Inconspicuous greenish flowers;
pink to red fruits; coarse foliage;
no fall color
*Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum S Pyramidal
Moist soil; tolerates poor
drainage; dense habit; dioecious;
orange to scarlet fall color;
difficult to transplant
Phellodendron
amurense
Amur Corktree M Round
Urban; dry soil; dioecious;
compound leaves; corky bark;
yellow fall color
Prunus maackii Amur Chokecherry M Round Amber exfoliating bark; does well
in containers
Prunus padus
commutata
Harbinger
European Bird
Cherry
S Round Sun; early to leaf out in spring;
pest or disease problem
550 Attachment 6:7 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Prunus
pennsylvanicaRF Pin Cherry M Upright
Poor dry soil; sun; graceful; shortlived; suckering; red fruits;
orange to red fall color
Prunus sargentii Sargent Cherry M Upright Sun, well-drained soil; early pink
flowers; red fall color
Salix alba tristis Golden Weeping
Willow F Weeping
Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage;
bright yellow twigs; fine-textured;
litter problem
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm M Vase Disease resistant; exfoliating bark
550 Attachment 6:8 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Low Deciduous Trees
(10 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
Acer ginnala Amur Maple M Round Sun, shade; red fruit; red fall
color
*Alnus rugosa Speckled Alder F Round Wet soil; tolerates poor soil;
lenticeled bark
*Amelanchier
arboreaRF
Downy
Serviceberry S Upright
Dry soil; shade; gray bark; white
flowers; yellow to red fall color;
edible fruits
Amelanchier x
grandiflora Apple Serviceberry S Spreading Semi-shade; large white flowers,
edible fruits
*Amelanchier laevis Allegany
Serviceberry S Upright
Moist soil; shade; white flowers;
orange to red fall color, edible
fruits
*Carpinus
carolinianaRF
American
Hornbeam S Spreading
Moist soil; shade; smooth gray
muscle-like trunks; orange fall
color
Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud M Spreading
Sun or shade; purplish-pink
flowers; yellow fall color;
purchase form northern source
*Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood M Spreading
Cool moist soil; shade; blue-black
berries on red stalks; early
maroon fall color
*Crataegus crus-galli
"Inermis"
Thornless Cockspur
Hawthorn Spreading
Urban; sun; persistent, brick red
fruits; orange to red fall color; no
thorns
Crataegus laevigata
"Paulii"
Paul's Scarlet
Hawthorn
S Upright
Heavy soil; sun; double scarlet
flowers in late May; no fall color;
pest or disease problem
"Superba" Crimson Cloud
Hawthorn
Single scarlet flowers; resistant to
leaf spot
Crataegus x lavallei Lavalle Hawthorn S Upright Urban; sun; glossy foliage;
bronzy-red fall color
*Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorn S Upright
Sun; large, red, early-ripening
fruit; yellow fall color; pest or
disease problem
Crataegus
phaenopyrum
Washington
Hawthorn M Upright
Urban; sun; latest blooming;
small persistent orange-red fruits
in clusters; orange fall color
550 Attachment 6:9 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Crataegus punctata Dotted Hawthorn S Spreading
Moist heavy soil; sun;
picturesque; pest or disease
problem may limit use
Crataegus x "Toba" Toba Hawthorn S
Sun; double pink fragrant flowers;
glossy leaves; red fruits; dwarf-15
Elaeagnus angustifolia Russianolive F Round
Dry alkaline soil; sun; fragrant
inconspicuous flowers; silvergray foliage; no fall color; pest or
disease problem may limit use
Magnolia x loebneri
"Merrill"
Dr. Merrill
Magnolia M Pyramidal
Rich soil; sun; white manypetaled flowers; difficult to
transplant
Magnolia x
soulangiana Saucer Magnolia S Round Rich soil; sun; large pink flowers;
difficult to transplant
Malus species and
cultivars
Flowering
Crabapples
All require sun and well-drained
soil. They all possess a high
degree of resistance to the apple
scab disease
Malus "Adams" Adams Flowering
Crabtree M Spreading
Slightly susceptible to fire blight;
rose-red flowers; 5/8-inch
diameter, persistent, deep red
fruits
Malus baccata jackii Jack Flowering
Crabtree M
Upright
spreading
Slightly susceptible to fire blight;
white flowers; tiny 1/3- to 1/2-
inch diameter, dark red fruits
Malus "Bob White" Bob White
Flowering Crabtree M Rounded
Moderately susceptible to fire
blight; white flowers; 5/8-inch
diameter, persistent yellow fruits
Malus "Candied
Apple"
Weeping Candied
Apple Flowering
Crabtree
Weeping
Slightly susceptible to scab; pink
flowers; 5/8-inch diameter,
persistent cherry-red fruits;
foliage tinged with red
Malus "Centurian" Centurian
Flowering Crabtree
NarrowUpright
Disease resistant; rose-red
flowers; 5/8-inch diameter,
persistent cherry-red fruits
Malus "David" David Flowering
Crabapple M Rounded
Slightly susceptible to fire blight
and scab; white glowers; ¼- to 1
½-inch diameter, reddish fruits in
alternate years
Malus "Dolgo" Dolgo Flowering
Crabtree M
UprightSpreading
Slightly susceptible to fire blight
and scab; white flowers; 1 1/4- to
1 ½-inch diameter, persistent red
fruits
Malus "Donald
Wyman"
Donald Wyman
Flowering Crabtree M Rounded
Disease-resistant; white flowers;
3/8-inch diameter; persistent red
fruits
Malus "Dorothea" Dorothea Flowering
Crabtree S Horizontal
Moderately susceptible to scab;
clear pink semi-double flowers;
½-inch diameter, yellow fruits
550 Attachment 6:10 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
Malus "Gibb's Golden
Gage"
Gibb's Golden
Gage Flowering
Crabtree
Rounded
Disease-resistant; white flowers;
1-inch diameter, persistent,
yellow fruits
Malus "Indian
Summer"
Indian Summer
Flowering Crabtree Rounded
Disease-resistant; rose-red
flowers; 5/8- to ¾-inch diameter,
red fruits
Malus "Mary Potter" Mary Potter
Flowering Crabtree S Horizontal
Moderately susceptible to fire
blight and scab; white flowers; ½-
inch diameter, red fruits; 10-foot
height
Malus "Ormiston Roy" Ormiston Roy
Flowering Crabtree M Rounded
Slightly susceptible to fire blight;
white flowers, 3/8-inch diameter,
persistent, yellow fruits
Malus "Profusion" Profusion
Flowering Crabtree M
RoundedSpreading
Slightly susceptible to fire blight;
rose-red flowers; ½-inch
diameter, deep red fruits; bronzegreen foliage
Malus "Red Jewel" Red Jewel
Flowering Crabtree Horizontal
Moderately susceptible to scab;
white flowers; ½-inch diameter,
persistent, bright red fruits
Malus "Robinson" Robinson
Flowering Crabtree
UprightSpreading
Disease resistant; rose-red
flowers; 3/8-inch diameter
persistent bright red fruits;
bronze-green foliage
Malus "Sentinel" Sentinel Flowering
Crabtree
Narrowupright
Slightly susceptible to fire blight
and scab; pale pink flowers; ½-
inch diameter persistent bright red
fruits
Malus "White
Cascade"
White Cascade
Flowering Crabtree S Weeping Disease-resistant; white flowers,
½-inch diameter, yellowish fruits
*Ostrya virginianaRF Hophornbeam S Pyramidal Dry soil; shade; catkins; elm-like
leaves; yellow fall color
*Prunus americanaRF American Plum F Horizontal
Dry soil; sun; suckering habit;
white flowers; yellow to orange
fall color
Prunus cerasifera
"Newportii" Newport Plum M Round Sun; reddish-purple summer
foliage
*Prunus virginianaRF Chokecherry M Upright
Dry, infertile soil; suckering
habit; white flowers; yellow to
orange fall color
"Canada Red" or
"Shubert"
Shubert
Chokecherry
Sun; foliage changes from green
to purple in early summer
Pyrus calleryana and
cultivars Callery Pear M Oval Sun; early white flowers; late red
fall color
Saliz matsudana
"Tortuosa"
Corkscrew or
Contorted Willow F Upright
Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage;
sun; twisted branches; pest or
disease problem may limit use
550 Attachment 6:11 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
Saliz pentandra Laurel Willow M Round Wet soil; sun; foliage, glossy,
dark green; dense habit
Sorbus alnifolia Korean
Mountainash S Oval
Cool soil; simple leaves; small
flowers and fruits; orange to red
fall color; pest or disease problem
Sorbus aucuparia and
cultivars
European
Mountainash M Oval Cool soil; orange fruits; pest or
disease problem
*Sorbus decora Showy
Mountainash S Upright Cool soil; large, reddish fruits;
pest or disease problem
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac S Horizontal Sun; large pyramidal cream-white
flower clusters in June; tan fruits
550 Attachment 6:12 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Tall Evergreen Trees
(40 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Height Adaptation and Remarks
Abies concolor White Fur M 70' Dry soil; heat; gray-green foliage
Picea abies Norway Spruce F 75' Deep soil; dark green foliage;
long cones; pendulous branchlets
*Picea glaucaRF White Spruce M 50' Moist soil; sun; light green
needles
Picea omorika Serbian Spruce S 50' Sun; narrow habit; pendulous
branchlets
Picea pungens glauca Blue Colorado
Spruce S 60' Sun; urban; blue needles; stiff,
formal habit
Pinus cembra Swiss Stone Pine S 50' Sun; narrow habit
Pinus nigra Austrian pine M 50' Sun; urban; stout, dark green
needles; pest or disease problem
*Pinus resinosaRF Red Pine F 50' Dry soil; sun; reddish bark;
yellow-green winter color
*Pinus strobusRF Eastern White Pine M 75'
Moist soil; sun; picturesque; soft,
green foliage; pest or disease
problem
Pinus sylvestris Scots Pine F 50' Dry soil; sun; orange bark; bluish
needles
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas Fir M 70' Half-shade; flat, dark green
needles
*Tsuga CanadensisRF Canada Hemlock M 75' Moist soil; soft, feathery foliage
550 Attachment 6:13 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Medium Evergreen Trees
(20 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Height Adaptation and Remarks
*Thuja occidentalisRF American
Arborvitae M 40' Wet soil; half-shade; light green
soft scale-like foliage
550 Attachment 6:14 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Low Evergreen Trees
(12 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Height Adaptation and Remarks
Juniperus chinnensis
"Keteleeri" Keteleer Juniper S 20 feet Dry soil; sun; green foliage; large
fruits
Juniperus chinnensis
"Mountbatten
Mountbatten
Juniper S 20 feet Dry soil; sun; narrow, columnar
form; large fruits
*Juniperus virginianaRF Eastern Red Cedar
S 20 feet
Dry soil; sun; brownish winter
color
"Burkii" Burke Eastern Red
Cedar Fine-textured gray-green foliage
"Canaertii" Canaert Eastern
Red Cedar Dark green tufted foliage
"Glauca" Silver Eastern Red
Cedar Silver-gray foliage; informal habit
"Hillii" Hill Dundee
Eastern Red Cedar
Gray-green foliage turns purple in
winter; no fruits
*Picea glaucaRF
"Densata" Black Hills Spruce S 20 feet Dry soil; sun; narrow, dense habit
Taxus cuspidata Japanese Yew S 20 feet
Shade; urban, deep green needles;
often sold as Taxus cuspidata
"Capitata"
*Thuja occidentalisRF
"Fastigiata"
Pyramidal
Arborvitae M 25 feet Narrow columnar form
*Thuja occidentalisRF
"Techny" Techny Arborvitae S 20 feet Deep green foliage, year-round
550 Attachment 6:15 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Tall Deciduous Shrubs
(5 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Amelanchier sp. (See
also low trees) Serviceberry Upright
Shade; alkaline soil; white flowers;
edible purple fruits; smooth, gray
bark; yellow to orange fall color;
fireblight a problem
Caragana arborescens Siberian Peashrub Erect, Oval Dry, alkaline soils; yellow flowers;
green twig
Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree Spreading Moist soil; shade; white flowers;
blue fruits; coarse
*Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood Spreading
Moist soil; shade; white flowers;
blue fruits; horizontal branches;
early maroon fall color
Cornus mas Corneliancherry Dogwood Oval
Shade; urban; yellow flowers in
April; flower buds may be injured or
killed during some winters; edible
red fruits
*Cornus racemosa Gray Dogwood Erect
Dry or wet soils; shade; white
flowers; white fruits; purple fall
color
Cornus sericea Redosier Dogwood Spreading
Wet, moist soils; tolerates poor
drainage; white flowers; white
fruits; red twigs; often sold as C.
stolonifera
Cornus sericea baileyi Bailey Redosier Dogwood Erect
Cotoneaster multiflora Manyflowered Cotoneaster Mounded
Sun; well-drained soil; white
flowers; red fruits; very widespreading; pests/diseases
Elaeagnus umbellata Autumnolive Spreading Poor, dry soil; sun; fragrant flowers;
edible, red fruits; twiggy
Euonymus alata Winged Euonymus Spreading
Sun or shade; well-drained soil;
corky, winged twigs; pink to rose
fall color
*Euonymus
atropurpurea
Eastern Wahoo Tree-like Moist soil; shade; tiny purplish
flowers; orange to purple fall color
Euonymus europaea Spindletree of European
Euonymus Tree-like
Dry soil; urban; striped bark;
persistent pink fruit; orange to
purple fall color
"Aldenhamensis" Aldenham European
Euonymus Bright pink fruit; shrubby form
"Redcap" Redcap European
Euonymus Bright red fruit
Exochorda racemosa Pearlbush Leggy Sun; pearl-like flower buds; tan fruit
capsules
550 Attachment 6:16 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
*Hamamelis virginiana Common Witchhazel Spreading Shade; yellow October flowers
Hydrangea paniculata
"Grandiflora" Peegee Hydrangea Upright
Moist soil; white to pink flowers in
August; persistent tan flower
clusters
Kolkwitzia amabilis Beautybush Upright Alkaline soil; sun; pink flowers in
June; shredded bark; leggy
Ligustrum amurense Amur Privet Erect Dry soil; white flowers; black fruits;
hedge plant
Ligustrum vulgare
"Cheyenne" Cheyenne Privet Erect Dry soil; urban; white flowers;
black fruits; hedge plant
Lonicera x bella
"Candida" White Belle Honeysuckle Uprightmounded
Dry soil; white flowers; red fruits;
may become weedy, pest problem
Lonicera tatarica
zabelii Zabel Honeysuckle Rounded
Dry soil; urban; red flowers; dense
red fruits; may become weedy; pest
or disease problem; may be sold as
L. korolkowii zabelii
Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia Rounded Rich soil; white flowers; orange
fruits; finest textured magnolia
*Physocarpus
opulifolius Eastern Ninebark Vase
Dry soil; semi-shade; white flowers;
red, capsular fruit; shredded bark;
course
Prunus tomentosa Manchu Cherry Rounded Dry soil; sun; white flowers; edible,
red fruits
Prunus triloba Double Flowering Plum Rounded Sun; double pink flowers; no fruit
Rhamnus frangula
"Columnaris"
Tallhedge Glossy
Buckthorn Columnar Moist soil; shade; red to black fruits;
holds leaves late
*Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac Suckering Dry soil; sun; persistent red fruits;
smooth stems; scarlet fall color
Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac Suckering Dry soil; sun; persistent red fruits;
felty stems; orange to red fall color
Rhus typhina
"Dissecta" Shredleaf Staghorn Sumac Picturesque Dry soil; sun; red fruits; dissected
leaves, orange to red in fall
Salix caprea Goat Willow or French
Pussy Willow Oval Wet or dry soil; sun; large silver
catkins in early spring
Shepherdiai argentea Buffaloberry Irregular
Dry soil; sun; yellowish flowers;
dioecious; edible red fruits; silvery
foliage
*Staphylea trifolia American Bladdernut Upright
Moist soil; shade; whitish flowers;
green to brown bladder-like fruits;
white-striped bark
Syringa x chinensis Chinese Lilac Vase Dry, alkaline soil; purple-lilac
flowers; fine texture
Syringa x
hyacinthiflora cvs. Hyacinth Lilacs Upright Sun; white, pink, lilac, purple
flowers; early blooming
Syringa x prestoniae
cvs.
Preston Lilacs Rounded Sun; pink to purple flowers; late
blooming; coarse textured
550 Attachment 6:17 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac Tree-like
Sun; white flowers in June; tan
fruits; cherry-like bark; often sold as
S. amurensis japonica
Syringa vulgaris cvs Common Lilac Upright
Well-drained soil; sun; white, pink,
lilac, purple fragrant flowers; pest or
disease problem may limit use
Tamarix ramosissima Tamarisk Irregular
Dry soil; sun; tiny pink flowers;
very fine texture; often sold as T.
pentandra
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood Viburnum Vase Moist soil; shade; white flowers in
June; blue fruits; maroon fall color
Viburnum lantana Wayfaringtree Viburnum Upright Dry soil; shade; white flowers; red
to black fruits; late maroon fall color
*Viburnum lentago Nannyberry Viburnum Upright
Moist or dry soil; sun or shade;
white flowers; black fruits; leggy;
maroon fall color; pest or disease
problem
*Viburnum
prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum Spreading
Dry soil; shade; white flowers;
black fruits; single- or multitrunked; maroon fall color
Viburnum sieboldii Siebold Vibernum Tree-like Rich soil; white flowers; red to
black fruits; large, coarse leaves
Vibernum trilobum American Cranberrybush
Vibernum Upright Moist soil; shade; lacy white
flowers; persistent edible fruits
550 Attachment 6:18 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Medium Deciduous Shrubs
(3 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry Erect
Wet soil; shade; tolerates poor
drainage; white flowers; red fruits;
red fall color
Cornus alba
"Argenteomarginata" Creamedge Dogwood Mounded Moist soil; white flowers; white
fruit; variegated foliage
*Corylus Americana American Filbert or
Hazelnut Rounded Dry soil; shade; catkins in March;
orange fall color
Cotoneaster divaricatus Spreading Cotoneaster Mounded
Dry alkaline soil; red fruits; fine
texture; late maroon fall color; not
fully hardy in zone indicated —
needs a special site or ideal
conditions
Cotoneaster lucidus Hedge Cotoneaster Upright
Dry soil; shade; black fruits; orange
to maroon fall color; good hedge
plant; C. acutifolius is similar
Euonymus alatus
"Compacta" Dwarf Winged Euonymus Spreading Sun or shade; pink and orange
fruits; red fall color
Forsynthia x
intermedia cvs. Border Forsythia Vase
Sun; urban; large, pale to yellow
flowers; flower buds may be injured
or killed at temperatures lower than
-14° F.
Forsythia ovata Early Forsythia Mounded
Sun; urban; smaller, earlier yellow
flowers; flower buds may be injured
or killed at temperatures lower than
-25° F.
Forsythia suspensa Weeping Forsythia Mounded
Sun; urban; yellow flowers; slender,
drooping twigs; flower buds may be
injured or killed at temperatures
lower than -15° F
*llex verticillata Winterberry Upright Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor
drainage; dioecious; red fruits
Ligustrum
obtusifolium
regelianum
Regel's Border Privet Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers; blueblack fruits; late, purple fall color
Malus sargentii "Tina" Sargent Crabapple Spreading Disease resistant; 5-foot mature
height
Myrica pensylvanica Bayberry Upright
Dry soil; sun; gray, fragrant fruits;
dioecious; semi-evergreen;
suckering
Philadelphus x
virginalis "Glacier" Glacier Mockorange Rounded Sun; double white fragrant flowers
Prunus x cistena Purple-leaved Sand Cherry Rounded Dry soil; sun; white flowers; purple
foliage all season
550 Attachment 6:19 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Rhodotypos scandens Jetbead Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers;
sparse red fruits; fine texture
Rosa hugonis Father Hugo Rose Vase Poor soil; sun; yellow flowers;
sparse red fruits; fine texture
Rosa rugosa cvs. Rugosa Rose Rounded
Dry soil; sun; white, yellow, pink or
red flowers; large edible red fruits;
fall color; wrinkled leaves; tolerant
of salt
*Rosa setigera Prairie Rose Sprawling -
mounded
Sun; pink flowers in July; red fruits;
orange fall color; can be used as a
climber
Spiraea prunifolia Bridalwreath Spirea Upright Sun; double white flowers; orange
to red fall color
Spiraea thunbergii Thunberg Spirea Vase Sun; white flowers; yellow to
orange fall color; fine-textured
Spiraea x vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea Vase Sun; white flowers; arching
branches
Syringa meyeri
"Palibin" Palibin Lilac Rounded
Sun; purple flowers; dense; finetextured; good informal hedge plant
often sold as S. palibiniana
Viburnum carlesii Koreanspice Viburnum Rounded
Shade; urban; pink to white fragrant
flowers; blue-black fruits; red fall
color
*Viburnum cassinoides Witherod Viburnum Rounded
Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor
drainage; white flowers; pink to red
to blue fruits; red fall color
Weigela florida Old-fashioned Weigela Spreading Well-drained soil; pink, funnelshaped flowers
Weigela x 'Vanicekii' Vanicek Weigela Spreading Well-drained soil; red flowers
550 Attachment 6:20 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Low Deciduous Shrubs
(1 landscaping point)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Acanthopanax
sieboldianus Fiveleaf Aralia Upright Dry soil; shade; urban; leaves
palmately compound; thorny
*Amelanchier
stolonifera Running Serviceberry Suckering Dry soil; shade; white flowers;
edible fruits; orange fall color
*Aronia melanocarpa Black Chokeberry Suckering Wet soil; shade; white flowers;
black fruits; red fall color
Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry Mounded Dry soil; shade; red fruits; orange
fall color; thorns; good hedge plant
"Atropurpurea" Redleaf Japanese Barberry Sun; red summer foliage
"Crimson Pygmy" Crimson Japanese
Barberry Low-mound Sun; red summer foliage; 2-foot tall
Buxus microphylla
koreana Korean Littleaf Box Rounded Shade; broadleaf evergreen; good
hedge plant
Chaenomeles japonica
alpina
Dwarf Japanese
Floweringquince Spreading
Dry soil; urban; orange flowers;
yellow edible fruits; dense; 1-foot
tall; flower buds may be injured or
killed during some winters
Cotoneaster apiculatus Cranberry Cotoneaster Mounded Dry soil; red fruits; red fall color
Deutzia x lemoinei
"Compacta" Compact Lemoine Deutzia Rounded Well-drained soil; white flowers
*Diervilla lonicera Dwarf Bushhoneysuckle Mounded Dry soil; shade; yellow flowers;
good bank cover
Forsythia viridissima
"Bronxensis" Bronx Forsythia Low-mound Sun; small yellow flowers; fine
texture; purple fall color
Hydrangea arborescens
"Annabelle" Annabelle Hydrangea Mounded
Moist soil; shade; white, clustered
flowers; dense; blooms on new
wood
Hydrangea arborescens
"Grandiflora" Snowhill Hydrangea Mounded
Smaller flower clusters and less
dense than Hydrangea arborescens
"Annabelle"
*Hypericum
kalmianum Kalm's St. Johnswort Rounded Dry soil; sun; yellow flowers; shiny
brown twigs
Lonicera x
xylosteoides "Clavey's
Dwarf"
Clavey's Dwarf
Honeysuckle Rounded Dense growth; good hedge or
screening plant
Lonicera xylosteum
"Nanum"
Emerald Mound
Honeysuckle Mounded Lower growing than preceding; 2-
foot to 3-foot
Mahonia aquifolium
"Mayhan" Mayhan Oregongrape Suckering
Shade; urban; yellow flowers; blue
fruits; holly-like evergreen foliage;
not fully hardy in zone - need
special site or ideal conditions
550 Attachment 6:21 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks
Philadelphus
coronarius "Aureus" Golden Mockorange Rounded Sun; white flowers; yellow summer
foliage
Philadelphus x
lemoinei "Mont Blanc" Mont Blanc Mockorange Mounded Sun; single; white, fragrant flowers;
dense
Physocarpus
opulifolius "Nanus" Dwarf Common Ninebark Rounded
Dry soil; shade; creamy-white
flowers; red capsular fruits;
shredded bark
*Potentilla fruticosa
cvs.
Bush Cinquefoil Mounded Dry soil; sun; yellow and white
flowers; blooms all summer
Prunus glandulosa
"Sinensis"
Pink Dwarf
Floweringalmond Rounded Sun; light soil; double pink flowers;
no fruits; narrow leaves
Rhododendron x
kosteranum Mollis Hybrid Azaleas Spreading Moist, acid soil; pink flowers; red
fall color
Rhododendron x "PJM
Hybrid"
PJM Hybrid
Rhododendron Rounded
Moist, acid soil; shade; lavender
flowers; evergreen leaves turn
purple in autumn
*Rhus aromatica Fragrant Sumac Mounded Dry soil; sun; red fruits; fragrant
foliage; turns orange-maroon in fall
"Gro-Low" Gro-low Fragrant Sumac Uniform 2 ½-foot height; glossy
leaves
Ribes alpinum Alpine Currant Rounded Shade; urban; good hedge plant
Rosa virginiana Virginia Rose Suckering Dry soil; pink flowers; red fruits;
red stems; good bank cover
Salix repens argentea Silver Creeping Willow Spreading Moist soil; sun; silvery foliage
Spiraea x arguta
"Compacta" Compact Garland Spirea Mounded Sun; white flowers; fine texture
Spiraea x billiardii Billiard Spirea Upright Sun; pink flowers in July and
August
Spiraea x bumalda
"Anthony Waterer" Anthony Waterer Spirea Rounded Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers;
unattractive fruits
Spiraea x bumalda
"Froebelii" Froebel Spirea Rounded Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers;
orange to maroon fall color
Spiraea japonica alpina Daphne Spirea Low-mound Sun; pale pink flowers in July; 10-
inch height
Spiraea nipponica
"Snowmound" Snowmound Spirea Mounded Sun; white flowers; blue-green
foliage; possible disease problem
Symphoricarpos
rivularis Snowberry Vase
Dry soil; shade; tiny pink flowers;
showy white fruits; often sold as S.
albus laevigatus
Symphoricarpos
orbiculatus Indiancurrant Coralberry Suckering Dry soil; shade; pink fruits; good
bank cover
Viburnum opulus
"Compactum"
Compact European
Cranberrybush Rounded Shade; white flowers; persistent red
fruit; dense habit
Viburnum opulus
"Nanum"
Dwarf European
Cranberrybush Viburnum Globe Shade; no flowers or fruits; twiggy
550 Attachment 6:22 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Tall to Medium Evergreen Shrubs
(5 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
Botanical Name Common Name Height Form Adaptation and Remarks
Juniperus chinensis
"Ames" Ames Juniper 9 feet Broad
pyramid Sun; bluish green foliage
"Blaauw" Blaauw Juniper 4 feet Upright-vase Sun; grayish blue foliage
"Herzii" Herz Blue Juniper 15 feet Ascendingspreading Sun; silvery blue foliage
"Maney" Maney Juniper 6 feet Upright,
bushy Sun; bluish green foliage
"Old Gold" Old Gold Juniper 4 feet Spreading Sun; green with gold tips
"Pfitzerana" Pfitzer Juniper 6 feet Widespreading Sun; green foliage; no fruits
"Pfitzerana Glauca" Blue Pfitzer Juniper 5 feet Spreading Sun; blue-gray foliage
*Juniperus communis
depressa
Oldfield Common
Juniper 4 feet Spreading Dry soil; sun; light green;
brownish in winter
Juniperus sabina "Von
Ehren"
Von Ehren Savin
Juniper 4 feet Spreading Dry soil; sun; light green;
brownish in winter
Juniperus squamata
"Meyeri"
Meyer Singleseed
Juniper 5 feet Picturesque Sun; blue foliage
Picea glaucaRF
"Conica"
Dwarf Alberta
Spruce 7 feet Pyramidal Shelter from winter sun; light
green foliage
Pinus mugo Mugo Pine 4 feet Mounded Dry soil; sun; green foliage
Taxus cuspidata
"Expansa"
Spreading Japanese
Yew 6 feet Spreading Shade; urban; dark green foliage;
needs ideal conditions
Taxus cuspidata
"Nana" Dwarf Japanese Yew 4 feet Mounded Shade; urban very dark green
foliage; needs ideal conditions
Taxus x hunnewelliana Hunnewell Yew 6 feet Spreading Shade; green
Taxus x media cvs. Anglojapanese Yew 1-10
feet
Round or
upright
Shade; very dark green; needs
ideal conditions
Thuja occidentalisRF
"Robusta"
Ware American
Arborvitae 8 feet Broad
Pyramid
Wet soil; half-shade; dark green
foliage. Often sold as T.o.
"Wareana"
Thuja occidentalisRF
"Woodwardii"
Woodward Globe
American Arborvitae 6 feet Globe Wet soil; half-shade; bright green
550 Attachment 6:23 08 - 01 - 2016
WATERTOWN CODE
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Low Evergreen Shrubs
(3 landscaping points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
Botanical Name Common Name Height Form Adaptation and Remarks
Juniperus chinensis
procumbens
Japanese Garden
Juniper 2 feet Creeping Sun; blue-green, year-round
foliage
Juniperus chinensis
sargentii Sargent Juniper 1 feet Creeping Sun; green; or blue-green in cv.
"Glauca"
*Juniperus horizontalis Creeping Juniper 1 feet Creeping Dry soil; sun; variable colorbrown in winter
"Bar Harbor" Bar Harbor Juniper 8 inches Creeping Dry soil; sun; bluish-green
foliage; slaty in winter
"Douglasii" Waukegan Juniper 18 inches Creeping Dry soil; sun; steel blue; purplish
in winter
"Plumosa" Andorra Juniper 18 inches Radialcreeping
Dry soil; sun; gray-green;
purplish in winter
"Prince of Wales" Prince of Wales
Juniper
4 to 6
inches Prostrate Dry soil; sun; bright green;
bronzed in winter
"Wiltonii" Blue Rug Juniper 4 to 6
inches Flat-trailing Dry soil; sun; silvery blue
"Youngstown" Youngstown
Juniper 18 inches Radialcreeping
Dry soil; sun; gray-green;
purplish in winter
Juniperus sabina
"Arcadia" Arcadia Savin
Juniper 18 inches Lowspreading Sun; green
"Broadmoor" Broadmoor Savin
Juniper 2 feet Mounded Sun; soft grayish green; fine
textured
"Skandia" Skandia Savin
Juniper 12 inches Lowspreading Sun; grayish blue
"Tamariscifolia" Tamarix Savin
Juniper 2 feet Dense,
spreading
Sun; bluish green; pest or disease
problem
550 Attachment 6:24 08 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Non-Contributing Species
(0 points)
KEY:
* Wisconsin native
S = Slow
M = Medium
F = Fast
Botanical Name Common Name
Growth
Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks
Acer negundo Boxelder Weed tree
Buckthorn Invasive
Crown Vetch Invasive ground cover; aggressive
Crataegus crus-galli Cockspur Hawthorn S Spreading
Urban; sun; persistent, brick red
fruits; orange to red fall color;
evil thorns
* Gleditsia
triacanthosRF
Common
Honeylocust F Vase
Urban; tolerates poor drainage;
salt-tolerant; dioecious, females
produce pods; fine-textured
foliage; wicked thorns; yellow fall
color; pest or disease problems
may limit use
Lonicera x bella Belle Honeysuckle Dry soil, white flowers; red fruits;
may become weedy; pest problem
Lonicera tatarica Tatarian
Honeysuckle
Dry soil; urban, pink to white
flowers; dense red fruits; may
become weedy; pest or disease
problem
Lonicera morrowi Morrow
Honeysuckle
Urban; dense white flowers; pest
and disease problem; weedy
Purple Loosestrife Perennial, common marsh plant,
may choke out native plants
Rhamnus cathartica Common
Buckthorn Becomes weak
Rhamnus frangula Glossy Buckthorn Becomes weak
NOTES:
RF Refers to reforestation. Marked species are native to Wisconsin and recommended for reforestation efforts
by the Wisconsin DNR. (See § 550-98.)
The following sources were used in compiling the preceding lists of plant species:
? Department of Natural Resources. Forest Trees of Wisconsin: How to Know Them. Madison,
Wisconsin:
? Department of Natural Resources, 1987.
? Hasselkus, E.R. A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin: College
of Agricultural and Life Sciences University of Wisconsin - Extension, Cooperative Extension
Programs, 1982.
? Hightshoe, Gary L. Native Trees, Shrubs, and Vines for Urban and Rural America: A Planting
Design Manual for Environmental Designers. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988.
? Iowa State University. Landscape Plants for Iowa. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Cooperative
Extension Service, May 1984.
550 Attachment 6:25 08 - 01 - 2016


Chapter A600
CHARTER ORDINANCES
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of Former Code to 2016 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title in Former Code Location in 2016 Code
Ch. 1, The Common Council Ch. 114
Ch. 2, Officials, Boards and Commissions
§ 2.01, Elected officials
(1) Mayor Ch. 114
(2) City Council Ch. 114
(3) Municipal Judge REP; see now Ch. 38
(4) Term limits imposed Ch. 114
(5) Term limits waived Ch. 114
(6) Primary election Ch. 52, Art. III
§ 2.02, Appointed officials Ch. 136, Art. I
§ 2.025 Repealed by Ord. No.
13-42
§ 2.03, Administrative organization Ch. 7
§ 2.04, Department of Finance
(1) Assessing Division Ch. 136, Art. III
(2) Clerk-Treasurer Ch. 136, Art. II
(3) Board of Review Ch. 24, Art. III
(4) Election officials Ch. 52, Art. II
§ 2.05, Department of Public Works
First paragraph (Public Works
Commission)
Ch. 24, Art. IV
§ 550-158 WATERTOWN CODE § DT-1
1:1374
Chapter/Title in Former Code Location in 2016 Code
(1) Engineering Ch. 60
(2) Streets and storm sewers Ch. 174
(3) Water Department Ch. 193
(4) Airport Ch. 24, Art. VI
(5) Wastewater treatment and sanitary
sewers
Ch. 24, Art. IV
(6) City planning Ch. 24, Art. I
(7) Park, recreation and forestry Ch. 24, Art. V
§ 2.06, Department of Public Safety
(1) Police and Fire Commission Ch. 24, Art. II
(2) Humane Officer Ch. 136, Art. V
(3) Department of Public Health Ch. 152
(4) Inspection Department Ch. 97
(5) Licensing Board Ch. 24, Art. VIII
(6) Transit Commission Ch. 24, Art. VII
§ 2.07, City Attorney, Municipal Judge and
Municipal Court
(1) City Attorney Ch. 136, Art. IV
(2) to (6) (Municipal Judge and Court) Ch. 38
Ch. 3, Finance
§§ 3.01 to 3.04, 3.06 to 3.09, 3.13, 3.15 and
3.19
Ch. 76, Art. I
§ 3.05 Repealed by Ord. No.
92-77
§§ 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12 Repealed by Ord. No.
90-115A
§ 3.14, Destruction of public records Superseded by Ord. No.
02-37
§ 3.16 Repealed by Ord. No.
92-78
§ 3.17, Room tax Ch. 76, Art. II
§ 3.18, Public construction performed by
City
Repealed 3-1-1993
§ 3.19, Aviation fuel flowage fee Ch. 211, § 211-11
§ 3.20, Solid waste collection Repealed by Ord. No.
11-01
§ 3.21, Spilled hazardous materials removal
responsibility
Ch. 319, Art. IV
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1375
Chapter/Title in Former Code Location in 2016 Code
Ch. 4, Personnel Repealed by Ord. No.
11-31
Ch. 5, Police and Fire Departments
§ 5.01, Police Department Ch. 147
§ 5.02 Repealed by Ord. No.
89-70
§ 5.03, Fire Department Ch. 80
§ 5.04 Repealed by Ord. No.
79-58
Ch. 6, Emergency Government Ch. 56
Ch. 7, Traffic Code
§§ 7.01 to 7.14 and 7.20 to 7.22 Ch. 500
§ 7.15, Bicycles Ch. 240
§ 7.16, Boating regulations Ch. 247
§ 7.17 Repealed by Ord. No.
97-59
§§ 7.18 and 7.19 (snowmobiles) Ch. 442
Ch. 8, Streets and Sidewalks
§§ 8.001 to 8.15, 8.17 and 8.18 Ch. 457
§ 8.16, Planting, care and protection of trees Ch. 484
Ch. 9, Licenses and Permits
§ 9.01, Beverages Ch. 220, Art. I
§ 9.02, Farmers market Ch. 428, Art. III
§ 9.03, Transient merchants Ch. 480
§ 9.04, Pawnbrokers and secondhand article
and jewelry dealers
Ch. 403
§ 9.05, Park event permits Ch. 398, Art. II
§ 9.06, Reservation permits in parks Ch. 398, Art. II
§ 9.07, Concession permits in parks Ch. 398, Art. II
§ 9.08, Cigarette and tobacco products
retailer license
Ch. 266
§ 9.09, Natural landscape management
permit
Ch. 356, Art. I
§ 9.10, Music in public places Ch. 428, Art. I
§ 9.11, Outside sales event license Ch. 220, Art. II
§ 9.12 Repealed by Ord. No.
82-16
§ 9.13, Amusement license Ch. 224
§ DT-1 WATERTOWN CODE § DT-1
1:1376
Chapter/Title in Former Code Location in 2016 Code
§ 9.14, Cats Ch. 228, Art. IV
§ 9.15, Tree trimmers Repealed by Ord. No.
06-28
§ 9.16, Dogs Ch. 228, Art. I
§ 9.17, Taxicabs Ch. 468
§ 9.18, Special events license Ch. 428, Art. II
§ 9.19, Regulation of alarm systems Ch. 216
§ 9.20, Penalty Ch. 216; Ch. 220, Art. I;
Ch. 224; Ch. 228, Arts. I
and IV; Ch. 266; Ch. 356,
Art. I; Ch. 398, Art. II; Ch.
428, Arts. I, II and III; Ch.
468; Ch. 480
§ 9.21, Tattoo and body-piercing licenses Superseded by Ord. No.
02-03
§ 9.22, Adult entertainment establishments Ch. 205
Ch. 10, Health and Sanitation
§ 10.01, Department of Public Health Ch. 152
§ 10.02, Powers and duties Ch. 152
§§ 10.03 to 10.09, 10.16, 10.17 and 10.20 Repealed by Ord. No.
95-25
§ 10.10, Keeping of domestic animals Ch. 228, Art. III
§ 10.11, Littering Ch. 362
§ 10.12, Compulsory connection to sewer
and water
Ch. 319, Art. I
§ 10.13, Garbage and refuse disposal Repealed by Ord. No.
13-24
§ 10.14, Control of weeds, grasses and brush Repealed by Ord. No.
13-26
§ 10.15, Solid waste collection Repealed by Ord. No.
13-23
§§ 10.18 and 10.19 (numbers not used) Omitted
§ 10.21 Repealed by Ord. No.
90-79
§ 10.22 Repealed by Ord. No.
97-59
§ 10.23, Environmental sanitation Ch. 319, Art. II
§ 10.24, Communicable disease Ch. 319, Art. III
Ch. 11, Orderly Conduct
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1377
Chapter/Title in Former Code Location in 2016 Code
A. General Provisions Ch. 410, Art. I
B. Bodily Security Ch. 410, Art. II
C. Public Health and Safety Vehicles Ch. 410, Art. III
D. Property Ch. 410, Art. IV
E. Government and Law Enforcement Ch. 410, Art. V
F. Public Peace, Order and Other Interests;
Noise
§ 11.115, Annual Riverfest Celebration
Ch. 410, Art. VI and VII
Ch. 428, Art. IV
G. Park Regulations Ch. 398, Art. I
Ch. 12, Public Nuisances
§§ 12.01 to 12.04 Ch. 390, Art. I
§ 12.05, Junked or abandoned vehicles Ch. 497
§ 12.055, Contract for towing and storage of
vehicles
Ch. 476
§ 12.06, Penalty Ch. 390, Art. I; Ch. 476
§ 12.07, Rabid or vicious animals Ch. 228, Art. II
§ 12.08, Chronic nuisance premises Ch. 390, Art. II
Ch. 13, Building Code Ch. 253
Ch. 14, Electrical Code Ch. 282
Ch. 15, Plumbing Code Ch. 419
Ch. 16, Fire Prevention and Protection Code Ch. 303
Ch. 17, Municipal Utilities
§ 17.01, Water Utility Commission Ch. 24, Art. IV
§§ 17.02 to 17.08 Ch. 512
§ 17.09, Impact Fees Ch. 341, Art. I
Ch. 18, Zoning Code Ch. 550
Ch. 19, Airport Zoning Ch. 211
Ch. 20, Subdivision Regulations
§§ 20.01 to 20.15 Ch. 545
§ 20.16, Construction Site Erosion Control Ch. 288, Art. I
§ 20.17, Post-Construction Stormwater
Management
Ch. 288, Art. II
Ch. 21, Housing Code Ch. 332
Ch. 21, Subchapter 2, Commercial Property
Maintenance
Ch. 424
Ch. 22, Floodplain and Shoreland/Wetland
Zoning
Ch. 532
§ DT-1 WATERTOWN CODE § DT-1
1:1378
Chapter/Title in Former Code Location in 2016 Code
Ch. 23, Aldermanic Districts Ch. 52, Art. I
Ch. 24, Administrative Review Procedure Ch. 10
Ch. 25, General Provisions
§§ 25.01, 25.02(1), 25.03 and 25.04 Ch. 1, Art. I
§§ 25.02(2), 25.05, 25.06, 25.07 and 25.08 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
§ 25.09, Uniform municipal citation Ch. 33
§ 25.10, Fair and open housing Ch. 295
§ 25.11, Restitution Ch. 1, Art. I
§ 25.12, Public records Ch. 160
§ 25.13, Official notice for public meetings Ch. 125
§ 25.14, Special charges for current services Ch. 76, Art. III
§ 25.15, Collection of special assessments Ch. 76, Art. IV
Ch. 26, Wastewater Facilities Ch. 508
Ch. 27, Cable TV NI
Ch. 28, Recycling Ch. 446
Ch. 29, Historic Preservation Ch. 325
Ch. 30, Ethics Code Ch. 65
Ch. 31, Comprehensive Planning Superseded by Ord. No.
09-47; see Ch. 525
Ch. 32, Nonmetallic Mining Ch. 377
Ch. 33, Storm Water Management Ch. 453
Charter Ordinances Ch. A600
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-1 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
14-2 2-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
14-3 2-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
14-4 2-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
14-5 2-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1379
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-6 2-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-7 3-18-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
14-8 3-18-2014 Solid waste amendment Ch. 446
14-9 3-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-10 3-31-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
14-11 3-31-2014 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 282
14-12 3-31-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-13 3-31-2014 Pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 403
14-14 4-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-15 5-20-2014 Officers and employees:
appointed officials
amendment
Ch. 136, Art. I
14-16 5-6-2014 Floodplain and shorelandwetland
zoning
Ch. 532
14-17 7-1-2014 Alcohol beverages: licensing
and general regulations
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
14-18 7-1-2014 Zoning Map amendment
(approving planned unit
development)
Ch. 550
14-19 7-1-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-20 9-2-2014 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 410
14-21 9-2-2014 Parks and recreation: park
regulations amendment
Ch. 398, Art. I
14-22 9-2-2014 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 410
14-23 9-16-2014 Finance and taxation: room
tax amendment
Ch. 76, Art. II
14-24 10-7-2014 Officers and employees:
appointed officials
amendment
Ch. 136, Art. I
§ DL-1 WATERTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:1380
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-25 Not adopted
14-26 10-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-27 10-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-28 Bond schedule amendment NCM
14-29 11-18-2014 Health and sanitation:
contagious disease
Ch. 319, Art. III
14-30 11-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-31 Not adopted
14-32 Not adopted
14-33 1-6-2015 Floodplain and shorelandwetland
zoning amendment
Ch. 532
14-34 1-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
14-35 1-6-2015 Parks and recreations: park
regulations amendment
Ch. 398, Art. I
14-36 1-6-2015 Boards, commission and
committees: Park,
Recreation and Forestry
Commission amendment
Ch. 24, Art. V
15-1 1-20-2015 Health and sanitation:
hazardous materials
Ch. 319, Art. IV
15-2 Not adopted
15-3 2-15-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 545
15-4 4-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-5 4-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-6 4-6-2015 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 216
15-7 4-6-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
15-8 5-5-2015 Parks and recreation: park
regulations amendment
Ch. 398, Art. I
15-9 5-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-10 5-5-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
15-11 5-5-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1381
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-12 5-5-2015 Building construction
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 253; Ch. 550,
Art. XII
15-13 5-19-2015 Annexation NCM
15-14 6-2-2015 Health and sanitation:
environmental sanitation
amendment
Ch. 319, Art. II
15-15 6-2-2015 Wastewater facilities
amendment
Ch. 508
15-16 6-2-2015 Transient merchants
amendment
Ch. 480
15-17 6-2-2015 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 253 (Art. VII)
15-18 6-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
15-19 6-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
15-20 6-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-21 6-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-22 7-21-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
15-23 7-21-2015 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 332
15-24 7-21-2015 Annexation NCM
15-25 7-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-26 7-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-27 8-18-2015 Commercial property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 424
15-28 8-18-2015 Commercial property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 424
15-29 8-18-2015 Commercial property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 424
15-30 8-18-2015 Commercial property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 424
15-31 9-1-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
15-32 9-1-2015 Official Map amendment
(annexation)
NCM
15-33 10-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
§ DL-1 WATERTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:1382
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-34 10-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
15-35 10-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
15-36 10-20-2015 Animals: keeping of domestic
animals amendment
Ch. 228, Art. III
15-37 11-3-2015 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 38
15-38 11-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-39 11-17-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
15-40 1-19-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 457
15-41 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-42 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-43 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-44 12-15-2015 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 453
15-45 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
15-46 12-15-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
NI; see Ch. 525
15-47 12-15-2015 Finance and taxation:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
16-1 1-5-2016 Wastewater facilities
amendment
Ch. 508
16-2 1-19-2016 Parks and recreations: park
regulations amendment
Ch. 398, Art. I
16-3 2-1-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
16-4 1-19-2016 Boards, commissions and
committees: Tourism
Commission; Officers and
employees: appointed
officials amendment
Ch. 24, Art. IX;
Ch. 136, Art. I
16-5 3-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-6 4-4-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
NI; see Ch. 525
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1383
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-7 6-21-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-8 7-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
16-9 7-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-10 8-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-11 7-19-2016 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 410
16-12 8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-13 9-20-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
16-14 9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-15 9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-16 9-20-2016 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 512
16-17 9-20-2016 Wastewater facilities
amendment
Ch. 508
16-18 10-4-2016 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
16-19 10-18-2016 Erosion and sediment
control: erosion control and
stormwater runoff
amendment
Ch. 288, Art. I
16-20 10-18-2016 Erosion and sediment
control: control of postconstruction
stormwater
management amendment
Ch. 288, Art. II
16-21 12-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-22 12-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
16-23 12-20-2016 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 545
16-24 12-20-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
17-1 2-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
17-2 2-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
§ DL-1 WATERTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:1384
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-3 2-7-2017 Abandoned and junked
vehicles amendment
Ch. 497
17-4 2-7-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
17-5 2-21-2017 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 303
17-6 4-3-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
17-7 4-3-2017 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 512
17-8 4-3-2017 Administrative organization
amendment; boards,
commissions and
committees: Redevelopment
Authority; boards,
commissions and
committees: Housing
Authority; officers and
employees: appointed
officials amendment
Ch. 7; Ch. 24, Art.
X; Ch. 24, Art. XI;
Ch. 136, Art. I
17-9 4-3-2017 Alcohol beverages and other
beverages: licensing and
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
17-10 4-3-2017 Boards, commissions and
committees: Licensing Board
amendment
Ch. 24, Art. VIII
17-11 5-2-2017 Floodplain and shorelandwetland
zoning amendment;
subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 532; Ch. 545
17-12 6-6-2017 Alcohol beverages and other
beverages: licensing and
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
17-13 6-6-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
17-14 6-6-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
See Ch. 525
17-15 6-6-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
17-16 6-6-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
17-17 6-20-2017 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 545
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1385
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-18 7-5-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
17-19 7-5-2017 Citations amendment Ch. 33
17-20 7-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
17-21 7-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
17-22 9-5-2017 Health and sanitation:
Practice of certain trades
and professions requiring
state licensing, registration
or credentials
Ch. 319, Art. V
17-23 Not adopted
17-24 10-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
17-25 Not adopted
17-26 Not adopted
17-27 12-5-2017 Public Health Department
amendment
Ch. 152
17-28 12-5-2017 Real estate attachment NCM
17-29 12-5-2017 Real estate attachment NCM
17-30 12-5-2017 Real estate attachment NCM
17-31 12-19-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
See Ch. 525
17-32 12-19-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
17-33 12-19-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 550
17-34 1-2-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
17-35 1-2-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
17-36 1-2-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
18-1 2-20-2018 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 457
18-2 4-17-2018 Court, Municipal
Amendment
Ch. 38
18-3 5-15-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 550
18-4 6-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
18-5 6-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
18-6 7-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
§ DL-1 WATERTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:1386
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-7 8-21-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500
18-8 9-4-2018 Fires and Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 303
18-9 9-18-2018 Finance and Taxation: Room
Tax Amendment
Ch. 76, Art. II
18-10 9-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
18-11 10-2-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
18-12 10-2-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
18-13 11-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500
18-14 11-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500
18-15 12-18-2018 General Development Plan NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
19-1 3-5-2019 Alcohol Beverages
and Other
Beverages:
Licensing and
General Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 220, Art.
I
5
19-2 3-19-2019 Floodplain and
Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 532 5
19-3 5-21-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 525 5
19-4 5-21-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 550 5
19-5 6-4-2019 Fires and Fire
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 303 5
19-6 6-4-2019 Fires and Fire
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 303 5
19-7 6-4-2019 Fires and Fire
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 303 5
19-8 6-4-2019 Citations
Amendment
Ch. 33 5
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1387
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
19-9 6-4-2019 Property
Maintenance,
Commercial
Amendment
Ch. 424 5
19-10 6-4-2019 Alcohol Beverages
and Other
Beverages:
Licensing and
General Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 220, Art.
I
5
19-11 7-2-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 550 5
19-12 7-16-2019 Peace and Good
Order Amendment
Ch. 410 5
19-13 7-16-2019 Peace and Good
Order Amendment
Ch. 410 5
19-14 9-3-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 457 5
19-15 9-3-2019 Plumbing
Amendment
Ch. 419 5
19-16 9-3-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 457 5
19-17 9-3-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 457 5
19-18 9-17-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 550 5
19-19 9-17-2019 Finance and
Taxation: Special
Charges for Current
Services
Amendment
Ch. 76, Art.
III
5
19-20 12-4-2019 Public Events:
Special Events
License Amendment
Ch. 428, Art.
II
5
19-21 10-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500 5
19-22 10-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500 5
§ DL-1 WATERTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:1388
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
19-23 10-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500 5
19-24 11-19-2019 Mayor and Council
Amendment
Ch. 114 5
19-25 11-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500 5
19-26 11-19-2019 Elections: Election
Officials Amendment
Ch. 52, Art. II 5
19-27 11-19-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550 5
19-28 12-17-2019 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 525 5
19-29 12-17-2019 Boards,
Commissions and
Committees: Public
Works Commission
Amendment
Ch. 24, Art.
IV
5
20-1 1-21-2020 Health and
Sanitation:
Environmental
Sanitation
Amendment
Ch. 319, Art.
II
5
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1389