CHARTER AND CODE of BECKLEY, WEST VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Adopted: February 11, 1986 
Effective: February 11, 1986 
____________ 
Published in 1985 by Order of the Common Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF BECKLEY 
(2018) 
____________ 
Robert R. Rappold Mayor Gary R. Sutphin Recorder-Treasurer William H. File III City Attorney Manuel M. Cartelle Director of Housing and Community Development Elmer H. Day, Jr. Director of Human Rights Commission Robert R. Robinson Director of Board of Public Works/Street Commissioner Luke Richmond General Manager of Sanitary Board Renda Morris Director of Exhibition Mine Kevin W. Taylor Fire Chief Timothy P. Deems Police Chief William E. Kelly Director of IT Department Robert L. Cannon Chief Code Enforcement and Zoning Officer  
____________ 
COMMON COUNCIL MEMBERS 
Tom Sopher Ward I Ann W. Worley Ward II Frank Williams Ward III Kevin Price Ward IV Janine Bullock Ward V Tim R. Berry At-Large Sherrie A. Hunter At-Large  
____________ 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1971 Code, as supplemented through April 26, 1983, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1971 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 9 is numbered 9-1 and the fifth section of Chapter 11 is 11-5. Sections in articles subsequent to I are numbered with the hundred number corresponding to the article number. Section 5 in Article II of Chapter 9 would be section 9-204. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 2-404 and 2-405 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 2-404.1, 2-404.2, and 2-404.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 4 and 5, it will be designated as Chapter 4.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices of the Code have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still other in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of A. Lawton Langford, President, and B. Meade White, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. James A. Swart, City Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Beckley; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein: Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Common Council of the City of Beckley, West Virginia: 
    Section 1.  The Code of the City of Beckley, West Virginia, consisting of Chapters 1 to 19, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of the Ordinances, City of Beckley, West Virginia," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before October 23, 1984, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2.  All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after February 11, 1986, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City adopted on final passage on or before the date specified in section 1, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of the Code. 
    Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of such Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, as provided in section 1-8 of such Code. 
    Section 5.  Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6.  In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 7.  All ordinances adopted after the date specified in Section 2, which amend or refer to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
    Section 8.  This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby shall become effective February 11, 1986. 
Adopted by roll call vote as follows: 
Ayes: 7       Nayes: 0       Absent and not voting: 0 
_____
Mayor 
Passed: February 11, 1986 
Approved: February 11, 1986 
Published: February 5, 1986 
Attest: 
   City Recorder-Treasurer    
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Date Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 25  6-28-11 Include 25  5-28-13 Include 25  6-11-13 Include 25  9-10-13 Include 25 Supp. No. 26  6-12-90 Include 26 Supp. No. 27  4-14-15 Include 27  4-28-15 Omit 27  5-26-15 Include 27 11-10-15(1) Omit 27 11-10-15(2) Omit 27 12- 8-15(1) Include 27 12- 8-15(2) Include 27 12- 8-15(3) Omit 27 12- 8-15(4) Omit 27 12- 8-15(5) Omit 27 12- 8-15(6) Omit 27  1-26-16 Omit 27  3- 8-16 Omit 27  5-24-16(1) Omit 27  5-24-16(2) Omit 27  6-14-16 Omit 27  6-28-16(1) Include 27  6-28-16(2) Include 27  6-28-16(3) Include 27  6-28-16(4) Omit 27  7-26-16 Include 27  8-23-16 Omit 27  8-23-16 Include 27  9-13-16 Omit 27  9-27-16(1) Omit 27  9-27-16(2) Omit 27 11-22-16(1) Omit 27 11-22-16(2) Include 27 Supp. No. 28  1-10-17 Include 28  1-24-17 Omit 28  4-11-17 Omit 28  5- 9-17 Omit 28  6-27-17 Omit 28  7-25-17 Omit 28  8- 8-17 Include 28  8-22-17 Include 28  9-26-17 Include 28 10-24-17(1) Omit 28 10-24-17(2) Omit 28 11-14-17(1) Omit 28 11-14-17(2) Omit 28 11-14-17(3) Omit 28  2-27-18 Omit 28  
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The charter here set out is as contained in the book of the 1971 Code of the city; except that the term "recorder" has been changed to "recorder-treasurer", the term "county court" has been changed to "county commission", and the term "justice of the peace", has been changed to "magistrate". This charter was enacted by the state legislature on April 26, 1927; amendments are indicated by historical citations following the amended sections. Some of the section catchlines had been changed by the editor for purposes of amplification or clarification. 
State Law reference- For state law as to effect of the Municipal Code of West Virginia (W. Va. Code, Ch. 8) on legislative charters, see W. Va. Code, § 8-1-6. 
Annotation- For a case in which the state Supreme Court of Appeals took judicial notice of the Beckley City Charter, see State v. Mills, 150 S.E. 142. 

CHAPTER 18 - (House Bill No. 598-Mr. Heaberlin.) 
AN ACT creating the municipal corporation of the City of Beckley, in the County of Raleigh, and annulling the charter granted to the said City of Beckley by Chapter one, Acts of Legislature of West Virginia, extra session, one thousand nine hundred and eight, passed on the fourteenth day of February, one thousand nine hundred and eight. 
(Passed April 26, 1927. In effect ninety days from passage. Became a law without the approval of the Governor.) 

Sec. 1. - City of Beckley to be body corporate. 
    That the inhabitants of that portion of Raleigh County, in the State of West Virginia, included within the boundary described in section two of this act, now a municipal corporation, existing and known as the "City of Beckley," shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name, and as such shall have perpetual succession; may use a corporate seal; may use and be sued; plead and be impleaded; contract and be contracted with; purchase, sell, lease and hold real estate and personal property, necessary to the purpose of said corporation. 
Sec. 2. - Corporate limits. 
    The corporate limits of the City of Beckley are bounded as follows: Beginning at a corner monument set in the northern right of way boundary line of the Piney River and Paint Creek Branch of The Chesapeake and Ohio Railway Company and in the southern boundary line of Central Avenue at or near the southern end of Wilkes Avenue, the said beginning point being a common corner of the City of Beckley and the Town of Mabscott; thence following the common boundary line between the City of Beckley and the Town of Mabscott as established by survey in 1951 by Paul W. Feigley, N. 24 degrees 23 minutes E. 320.00 feet to a corner monument; thence N. 58 degrees 37 minutes W. 1848 feet to a corner monument; thence N. 76 degrees 34 minutes W. 1813.65 feet to a steel rail in Wickham Avenue of the Town of Mabscott which is the road leading from Mabscott to Mt. Tabor; thence leaving the boundary line of the Town of Mabscott and following the said road leading from Mabscott to Mt. Tabor, for a distance of approximately 900 feet to the point where said road crosses Laurel Branch; thence leaving the said road and up said Lauren Branch following the meanderings thereof approximately 3900 feet to the point where said Branch crosses the southeastern boundary line of the McLean Addition; thence leaving the middle of said Laurel Branch and following the boundary lines of the McLean Addition, S. 52 degrees 13 minutes W. 2500 feet, more or less, to a stake in a chestnut stump, the southernwest corner of the McLean Addition; thence N. 47 degrees 28 minutes W. 449.75 feet to the westernmost corner of the McLean Addition; thence following the northeast boundary line of the McLean Addition and the boundary line between Otho Hall and the John W. Ball estate approximately S. 66 degrees 00 minutes E. 1800 feet to a property corner of said Otho Hall and the John W. Ball estate on the west side of West Virginia Highway No. 3; thence crossing said highway 90 feet to a set stone, a corner of the Ewart Heights Addition and the New River Company; thence with the boundary line between the Ewart Heights Addition and the New River Company 1800 feet to northeast corner of the Ewart Heights Addition; thence with C. & O. right of way line N. 60 degrees 27 minutes E. 489.46 feet to a C. & O. concrete marker; thence N. 49 degrees 56 minutes E. 97.14 feet; N. 53 degrees 33 minutes E. 99.37 feet; N. 59 degrees 26 minutes E. 146.74 feet; N. 71 degrees 36 minutes E. 25.15 feet to the intersection of said right of way line, west line of Sprague Road; thence with said road line S. 17 degrees 32 minutes E. 92.93 feet; S. 17 degrees 12 minutes E. 54.92 feet; S. 53 degrees 19 minutes E. 68.76 feet; S. 87 degrees 45 minutes E. 219.50 feet; S. 71 degrees 36 minutes E. 54.28 feet; S. 43 degrees 50 minutes E. 28.08 feet; thence crossing Sprague Road 30 feet; thence S. 63 degrees 04 minutes E. 151.94 feet; S. 23 degrees 39 minutes E. 200 feet; thence N. 80 degrees 00 minutes E. 1066.03 feet to a set stone in western right of way line of the Piney River and Paint Creek Branch of the C. & O. Railway Company marked "City of Beckley"; thence following the said western right of way boundary line of said railway in a northeasterly direction to the point where said right of way boundary line crosses Little Whitestick; thence leaving the said right of way boundary line and down the middle of Little Whitestick Creek following the meanderings thereof to the point where Little Whitestick Creek crosses the eastern right of way boundary line of U. S. Highway No. 19-21 By-Pass; thence with the said eastern right of way boundary line of said U. S. Highway No. 19-21 By-Pass, to the intersection with the southern right of way boundary line of South Kanawha Street (Business Route 19-21); thence leaving the said eastern right of way boundary line of U.S. Highway No. 19-21 By-Pass, and following the southern right of way boundary line of South Kanawha Street, Business Route No. 19-21, in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with the southwestern boundary line of MacArthur Street; thence with the southwestern right of way boundary line of said MacArthur Street along the golf course fence in a northwesterly direction to a point in the western boundary line of the Glen Morgan Addition of the Raleigh Coal and Coke Company about 75 feet south of South Kanawha Street; thence with the said western boundary line of Glen Morgan Addition, S. 27 degrees 19 minutes W. 1100 feet, more or less, to a point of the division line between Lots 17 and 18 of Section 10 of said Glen Morgan Addition; thence S. 18 degrees 54 minutes E. 1420 feet, more or less to a white oak, a corner of the Beckley Court Addition and a point in the southern boundary line of Terrill Street; thence with the southern boundary line of Terrill Street which is also the southern boundary line of The Beckley Court Addition, S. 14 degrees 26 minutes W. 494.00 feet to a maple; thence S. 73 degrees 46 minutes W. 1403.33 feet to a white oak; thence No. 76 degrees 32 minutes W. 1339.97 feet to a stake; thence N. 34 degrees 04 minutes W. 1281.56 feet to a corner of the Beckley Court Addition; thence N. 34 degrees 04 minutes W. 735.00 feet to a corner of the Lilly Land Company Addition No. 2; thence with the boundary line of said Lilly Land Company No. 2, S. 85 degrees 06 minutes W. 131.96 feet to a point in the south line of Thirteenth Street; thence S. 34 degrees 55 minutes E. 168.30 feet to a corner of the Phipps Addition; thence S. 9 degrees 21 minutes E. 547.85 feet to the southeast corner of the Phipps Addition; thence S. 80 degrees 45 minutes W. 125.00 feet to the point where the Happy Hollow Branch crosses the southern boundary line of the Phipps Addition; thence down said Happy Hollow Branch following the meanderings thereof 450.00 feet, more or less, to the mouth of said branch; thence continuing the same general direction 100.00 feet; more or less, to a point in the northern right of way boundary line of the Piney Creek Branch of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway Company; thence following the northern right of way boundary line of said railway in a westerly direction for a distance of 5830.00 feet to a point opposite Beckley Junction near the intersection of Cova Street; thence crossing the right of way of Piney Creek Branch of said railway, in a southwesterly direction about 90.00 feet to a point in the southern right of way boundary line; thence following the said southern right of way boundary line of said Piney Creek Branch and the western and northern right of way boundary line of the Piney River and Paint Creek Branch of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway Company to the point of beginning. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Editor's note- See official city map in office of recorder-treasurer for subsequent additions to city by annexation election, minor boundary adjustment and annexation by petition upon order of the common council. 
Sec. 3. - City may be divided into wards. 
    Immediately upon the adoption of this provision as provided by law, the common council of said city shall appoint a nonpartisan committee whose duty it shall be to divide the city into at least five (5) but not more than nine (9) wards, the number to be determined by the said common council, having due regard to the precincts already established, the density of the population of the territory embraced in each ward and the equalization of the population of the several wards. The division into wards shall be completed not less than ninety (90) days before the first municipal primary election held hereafter. 
    The number of the wards within the above limits and the boundaries of the same may be changed from time to time by a similar committee appointed by the common council; provided, however, that no wards shall be created or changes made in the boundaries within sixty (60) days next preceding any municipal primary election. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Editor's note- For designation and boundaries of city wards, see official city map which is on file in the office of the recorder-treasurer. 
Sec. 4. - City officers. 
    The municipal authorities of said city shall be a mayor, recorder-treasurer, police judge, and five (5) councilmen until the city shall be divided into wards as provided by section 3 of this act. Then the municipal authorities of said city shall be a mayor, recorder-treasurer, police judge; and one (1) councilman from each ward who shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters therein; and two (2) councilmen who shall be nominated and elected at large by all of the qualified voters of the city. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 5. - Common council to exercise corporate powers. 
    All the corporate powers and functions pertaining to said city shall be exercised by its council, or under its authority, in the corporate name of said city, unless otherwise provided by state law or municipal ordinance. 
Editor's note- The legislative body of the city is referred to in the 1927 charter and the 1954 amendments thereto as the "common council", the "city council", and simply as the "council". But see § 31 of the charter, which provides that the council of the city shall be officially known as and called the "Common Council of the City of Beckley". 
Sec. 6. - Elective and appointive officers; procedure for appointment. 
    The mayor and councilmen shall be elected by the qualified voters of the said city. All other officers except a city manager of said city shall be nominated by the mayor, and he shall, by and with advice of the council (a majority of all the councilmen elected concurring by yeas and nays), appoint all officers whose offices are established by this act. No persons, after being rejected by the council shall be nominated for the same office, unless at the request of council. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 7. - List of appointive officers; salaries; term of office; removal of fire department members. 
    The mayor shall nominate a recorder-treasurer, a city engineer, a police judge, a city solicitor, a chief of police, a building inspector and all other officers except a city manager, whose offices may be established by ordinance of the city council or by this act, and such officers shall hold the respective offices to which they are appointed during the will and pleasure of council, except members of the fire department who may be removed at will by the mayor or any other officer so empowered by the council, or for incompetence, misfeasance or neglect of duty, or other good cause by the council, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. The several offices, or any two (2) or more may be held by the same person, provided the mayor and councilmen shall not be eligible to any of the appointive offices, and such officers shall receive such compensation as the council may prescribe, by ordinance or order, unless said compensation be fixed by this act. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 7a. - Authority to appoint city manager; effect of appointment. 
    The city council in its discretion may appoint a city manager to serve at the pleasure of the council. At the time of such appointment an ordinance shall be adopted by the council delegating to such officer such powers and duties as in the opinion of the council he shall exercise, and the council may from time to time make such amendments and changes in said ordinance as it may desire. 
    When such an appointment has been made and such an ordinance shall have been adopted, this shall constitute an election by the council to operate under a city manager form of government, and such action shall not be rescinded thereafter except a change in this charter. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 8. - Qualifications of mayor and councilmen. 
    No person shall be eligible to the office of mayor or councilman unless at the time of his election he is legally entitled to vote in the city election for member of the common council; and he was for the preceding year assessed with taxes upon real or personal property within the said city of the assessed aggregate value of at least three hundred dollars ($300.00) and shall actually have paid the taxes so assessed; provided, that when the city shall have been laid off into wards, no person shall be elected a councilman from any ward unless he shall have been, for at least sixty (60) days next preceding the election a bona fide resident of the ward for which he is elected, and the removal of a councilman from the ward from which he is elected shall vacate his office. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 9. - Who may vote in city elections. 
    Every male and female person residing in said city shall be entitled to vote for all officers elected under this Act, except any person who is a minor, or of unsound mind, or a pauper, or who is under conviction of treason or bribery in an election, or who has not been a resident of this state for one year and of said city for six (6) months next preceding the election at which he desires to vote; provided, that when said city shall have been laid off into wards no person therein shall be entitled to vote for a councilman for his ward unless he shall have been a bona fide resident of such ward for at least sixty (60) days next preceding the municipal election. 
Sec. 10. - Conduct of primary and general elections; when held; filing fee; state laws applicable. 
    All candidates for the city offices of mayor, council members at-large, and ward council members shall sign up for the respective office the candidate is running for not less than sixty (60) days before the city's general election, and it shall be the duty of the said recorder-treasurer to certify each candidate's application prior to the candidate being placed on the ballot, and no candidate is eligible to be voted upon for office in said city whose candidate application has not been so certified by the tecorder-treasurer. 
    The first city general election hereunder shall be held on the second Tuesday in May, 2011, the next city general election shall be held on the second Tuesday in May, 2016, and other elections hereunder shall be held on the second Tuesday in May every four (4) years thereafter, and the term of office shall begin on the first day of July after each such election. 
    The city general election for the city offices of mayor, council members at-large, and ward council members shall be non-partisan with no political party affiliation appearing on the ballot with the candidate's name. 
    Each election shall be conducted under, and by the direction of, the council of the said city. The mode of voting shall be by secret ballot. The election in said city shall be held and conducted, and the result thereof certified, returned, and finally determined under the laws in force in this state relating to general elections, except that the persons conducting said election shall, on the day the election is held deliver the ballots, tally sheets, and poll books to the recorder-treasurer for safe keeping; and thereafter, the council of said city shall meet within five (5) days (Sunday excepted) after said election and canvass the returns of said election and declare the results thereof, and in all respects comply with the requirements of the statutes of the state relating to elections. The corporate authorities of said city shall perform all duties in relation to such election as the corresponding county officers carrying out similar duties for the county and, in general, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be governed by the election laws prescribed in the Code of West Virginia. 
(a)  The city has been laid off into wards and each ward shall contain such number of voting precincts as the council shall deem advisable to place therin, but no precinct or part thereof shall lie in more than one ward. 
(b)  The common council shall fix a filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each common council position and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the office of mayor. 
    All of the provisions of Chapter Three of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, and the amendments thereof, relating to elections are hereby adopted, so far as applicable, subject to the modifications contained herein. 
(Election of 8-3-54; Election of 8-28-10) 
State Law reference- For state law as to conduct of general elections, see W. Va. Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6; as to conduct of primary elections, see W. Va. Code, Ch. 3, Art. 5; see also § 8-5-14. 
Sec. 11. - How tie vote decided. 
    Whenever two (2) or more persons receive an equal number of votes for mayor, recorder or councilman, such tie shall be decided by the council in existence at the time the election is held. 
Editor's note- This section, which mentions the recorder, is as enacted by the legislature in 1927; § 6 of the charter, as enacted in 1927, provided that the recorder be elected, but § 6 as amended by the voters on Aug. 3, 1954, now provides that only the mayor and councilmen be elected, and § 11 (this section) was not amended to conform to § 6 as amended. 
Sec. 12. - Contested elections. 
    All contested elections shall be heard and determined by the council in existence at the time the election is held, and the contest shall be made and conducted in the manner as provided for in contests for county and district officers, and the council by their proceedings in such cases shall, as nearly as practicable, conform with like proceedings of the county commission in such cases. 
State Law reference- See Art. 9, § 9, W. Va. Constitution; name changed November 5, 1974, to "county commission" for state law as to proceedings of county courts in election contests, see W. Va. Code, §§ 3-7-6, 3-7-7. 
Sec. 13. - Vacancies in appointive offices. 
    Whenever a vacancy from any cause shall occur in any appointive office, such vacancy shall be filled as provided by section six of this act; and, in case of vacancy in the office of councilman, recorder-treasurer or mayor, the remaining members of the council shall fill said vacancy. 
Editor's note- This section is as enacted by the legislature in 1927; § 6, as amended by the electorate on Aug. 3, 1954, now provides that the recorder-treasurer be appointed. This section has not been amended to conform to § 6, as amended. 
Sec. 14. - Oath of office. 
    The mayor, recorder-treasurer and councilmen, and all other officers provided for in this act, shall each, before entering upon the duties of their offices, and within fifteen (15) days after being elected or appointed, take and subscribe an oath to support the constitution of the United States, the constitution of the State of West Virginia, and to faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office to the best of his skill and judgment, and to account for and pay over, as required by law, all moneys which may come into his hands by virtue of his office. 
Sec. 15. - Which officers to be bonded; terms, conditions, etc., of official bonds. 
    The recorder-treasurer of said city shall be required to give bond before entering upon the discharge of his duties in such sum as the council may require, but not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The police judge shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, give bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). All members of the police force shall give bond before entering upon the discharge of their duties in the sum of not less than three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00). The council may, in its discretion, require bond of any other officer of the city in such amount as it may prescribe. 
    All bonds, obligations or other writings taken in pursuance of any provisions of this act or under the provisions of any order of said council, shall be made payable to the City of Beckley. Official bonds shall be conditioned to faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of such official's office and to account for and pay over, as required by law, all moneys coming into his hands by virtue of his office. All other bonds shall be conditioned as the council may prescribe. 
    The obligors in all bonds, their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns bound thereby, shall be subject to the same proceedings on such bonds, obligations or writings for enforcing the conditions or the terms thereof, by motion or otherwise, before any court of record having jurisdiction thereof, held or acting in or for said Raleigh County as the sheriff of said county, his deputies and their sureties. 
    Such officials as are herein required to give bonds shall give corporate surety bonds. The premium on the bond required of the recorder-treasurer and police judge shall be paid out of the city treasury. 
Sec. 16. - Term of office. 
    The mayor, recorder-treasurer and councilmen shall enter upon the duties of their offices upon the first day of July next after their election and their terms of office shall be for a period of four (4) years. All appointive officers shall enter upon their duties as soon as they have qualified, and shall remain in office during the will and pleasure of the council, or mayor, as hereinbefore provided. The term of office for those elected mayor, council member at-large, and ward council members in the May, 2011 city municipal election shall commence July 1, 2011 and end June 30, 2016, and thereafter the terms of office for the elected city officers shall be four (4) years. 
(Election of 8-3-54; Election of 8-28-10) 
Editor's note- The office of the recorder is no longer an elective office under the provisions of § 6, as amended by the electorate on Aug. 3, 1954. This section was also amended on that date, but was not made wholly to conform to § 6, as amended, by deletion of reference herein to the recorder. 
Sec. 17. - Powers and duties of mayor, and of city manager if and when appointed; who acts in absence of mayor. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of said city and shall have and exercise all the rights, powers and duties of mayor conferred by the terms of this Act and it shall be his duty to see that the laws and ordinances of the city and the resolutions and orders of the council are enforced; that peace and good order of the city are preserved, and that the person and property therein are protected. In vacation of the council, the mayor may appoint special police officers whenever he deems it necessary. He shall, from time to time, recommend to the council such measures as he may deem needful for the welfare of the city. 
    In the event the council shall appoint a city manager, the council may delegate to him each of the above powers as in the council's opinion it is advisable or necessary to do. 
    The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council. In his absence, the council shall select one of their own number to preside in the mayor's stead, and such councilman so selected shall, during the absence of the mayor, be clothed with all the power and authority of the mayor, limited to the same restrictions, and charged with the performance of the same duties as are vested in and incumbent upon the mayor under this act. The mayor shall only vote in council meetings in case of a tie. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 18. - Powers and duties of recorder-treasurer; entry of ayes and nays in journal; office space for and hours of recorder-treasurer. 
    It shall be the duty of the recorder-treasurer to attend all council meetings and record in a journal an accurate record of all its proceedings, acts, orders, resolutions and ordinances, which shall be indexed and kept open during all reasonable hours for the inspection of the citizens of the city. The proceedings of the last meeting shall be read to the council, corrected when necessary, and signed by the person presiding for the time being, and the recorder. Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays on any question shall be recorded in the journal. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall also be the custodian of all city records, money, bonds, notes and certificates, together with all valuable papers of every kind and character which may come into his hands under and by virtue of his said office, and he shall be chargeable with and it shall be his duty to collect the city taxes, levies, assessments, fines and penalties under such regulations as the council of said city may, by ordinance, prescribe; and such recorder-treasurer shall have the same powers and authority to distrain and sell property for delinquent taxes, levies, assessments, fines and penalties in like manner and to the same extent and effect as authorized and prescribed by the laws of the State of West Virginia for and respecting the collection of state and county taxes and levies. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall furnish the council upon its request with a statement showing all collections made since the last statement, and all disbursements during that time, as well as any other facts relating to the finances of the city as the council may require. He shall, in addition to the enumerated duties required of him under this act, do and perform such other matters and things as the council may, from time to time, prescribe or require of him. 
    All moneys coming into the hands of said recorder-treasurer shall be forthwith deposited by him in the name of the City of Beckley, in such of the local banks as the council shall designate as city depositories. The council may require indemnity bonds of such depositories if it deems it advisable so to do. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the council to provide the recorder-treasurer with suitable and proper office space in which to transact the main duties of his office, and if practical so to do, such office shall be located in the city hall for the convenience of the citizens of said city; and when such office is so provided, it is hereby made the duty of such recorder-treasurer to keep regular office hours each day, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
State Law reference- For state law as to distraint and sale of property for delinquent taxes, see W. Va. Code, §§ 8-13-15 and 11A-2-3 et seq. 
Sec. 19. - Police court and its jurisdiction. 
    The judicial power of the city shall be vested in a police court. Said court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of all criminal proceedings for the violation of any ordinance, and concurrent jurisdiction with magistrates and other courts of all civil actions and proceedings arising out of a violation of said ordinance, and for the collection of any license, assessment or tax imposed by ordinance; and of the following offenses committed within the city (except when prosecuted by indictment or information): Petty larceny, assault and battery, breaches of the peace, rioting, committing wilful injury to property, and all misdemeanors punishable by fine or imprisonment in the county jail, or both; proceeding respecting vagrancy, lewd or disorderly persons; and exclusive jurisdiction of all offenses not properly falling under the jurisdiction of other courts. No jury shall be summoned to try any case in said court. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 19a. - City prosecutor. 
    When in the opinion of the mayor of the city it is necessary or advisable to do so, the mayor may nominate a city prosecutor, subject to the approval of the council as provided in section 6, who shall hold office during the will and pleasure of the council. The salary of such prosecutor shall be fixed by the council. The city prosecutor shall have the same qualifications as those set forth in section 22 for the city solicitor. 
    His duties shall be to represent the city in all criminal matters originating in the police court for the violation of any city ordinance and on appeal from said court to any other court from proceedings so originating. He also shall, upon request, advise members of the police department and other officials of the city on any criminal matters arising out of the violation of any city ordinance. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 20. - Qualifications, powers and duties of police judge; commitment of prisoners; appeals from police court; recorder-treasurer to collect fines and costs. 
    The police court shall be presided over by a police judge who shall be a practicing attorney of the Raleigh County bar, in good standing, and a citizen of the City of Beckley. The police judge shall within the city have, possess, and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties vested by law in a magistrate, except that he shall have no jurisdiction in civil cases or causes of action arising outside of the corporate limits of the city. He shall have the same power to issue attachments in civil suits as a magistrate of the county has, though the causes of action arose outside of the city, but if the cause of action arose outside of the city, said attachment shall be returnable to and be heard before some magistrate of the county. Any warrant or other process issued by him may be executed at any place in the county. He shall have the power to issue executions for all fines, penalties and costs imposed by him, or he may require the immediate payment thereof, and in default of such payment he may commit the party in default to the jail of the county or the city until the fine or penalty and costs shall be paid, but the term of imprisonment in such cases shall not exceed thirty (30) days. The police judge shall also be vested with the same powers to issue capias pro fine, as are vested in courts of record with prosecuting attorney and circuit clerks, by virtue of the Code of West Virginia, but no bond shall be made payable more than ninety (90) days from the date thereof, and the city shall have all the rights to enforce the collection of such bonds as are authorized by said code. The common council of the city may authorize the acceptance by the police judge, city recorder-treasurer or his deputies, of cash appearance bonds in lieu of bonds secured by property. The expense of maintaining any person committed to the county jail by him, shall be borne by the city and taxed as costs, except it be to answer an indictment. 
    He shall not receive any money belonging to the state or individuals unless he gives such bond and security as is required of a magistrate, and all provisions of the said Code of West Virginia relating to moneys received by magistrates shall apply as to like moneys received by the police judge. 
    Appeals shall lie from the judgment of the police court to the Criminal Court or Circuit Court of Raleigh County, as the case may be, in accordance with law. 
    The police judge shall tax as costs in each case the same fees as are permitted to be taxed by magistrates in like cases. He shall keep an accurate record of all of his proceedings in a book to be called "Police Docket," and all fines and costs collected by him shall be promptly turned over to the recorder-treasurer, who shall thereupon receipt the same, and such docket together with an itemized statement of all fines and costs collected shall be kept as a permanent record by the city recorder-treasurer. 
    The police judge shall have the same powers to fine and imprison for contempt as are now vested in magistrates under the statutes. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
State Law reference- Power of magistrate court to issue attachments in civil cases, W. Va. Code, § 50-6-3. 
Sec. 21. - General powers of common council. 
    The council of said city shall have the general powers enumerated in the subdivisions of this section, as follows: 
(1)  To lay off, open, close, vacate or maintain public grounds, parks, public places, name and re-name the same, to have control and supervision thereover, to protect the same from damage or other injury by persons or property, to fix fines and punishments for any injury thereto in violation of any of the orders of said council, and to maintain good order and prevent violations of the ordinances of said city therein or thereon. 
(2)  To protect divine worship within the limits of said city, and to fix fines and punishment for disturbance of any assemblage of people, then and there, met for the worship of God, to prohibit any interference with or disturbance of divine worship or an assemblage or people met together for the worship of God by any person or persons loitering about the premises or places where such worship is being had or such assemblage is met, or from loitering in the public streets or public places adjacent thereto in such manner as to interrupt such worship. 
(3)  To acquire either by purchase, condemnation or any other modes provided by general law, ground within said city for such streets and alleys as the council may deem proper to locate, lay off, vacate, close, open, alter, grade, straighten, widen or narrow, pave or repave, construct and keep in good repair, the roads, streets, alleys, pavements, sidewalks, crosswalks, drains, viaducts and gutters therein, for the use of the public or of any of the citizens thereof, and to improve and light the same and to keep the same clean and free from obstruction of every kind; that where said city shall be required to respond in damages by reason of injury to persons or property occasioned by the failure of any abutting owner to so provide or keep in repair any sidewalk along such property, after being notified by the council so to do, that such property owner shall be liable to the city for any sum of money, costs and counsel fees which it has been required to pay by reason thereof. 
(4)  To regulate the width of sidewalks and the streets and the width and the care of the public grounds or grass plots abutting thereon, and to order the sidewalks, footways, crossways, drains and gutters to be curbed, paved, or repaved and kept in good order, free and clean, and to provide for the removal of snow and ice therefrom, and for sprinkling the same by the owners or occupants of the real property next adjacent thereto, and to provide and enforce punishments for obstructing, injuring or preventing the free and proper use thereof, and to provide and enforce fines and penalties for throwing therein or thereon any paper, glass, rubbish, decaying substances or other things that would make said streets, sidewalks, grass plots, crosswalks, drains, or gutters unsightly or unhealthy. 
(5)  To regulate the use of the walks, highways, bridges, streets, alleys and gutters, and the rate of speed of travel thereon, and to prevent and punish for fast riding or driving thereon of any horse, bicycle, wheeled vehicle, wagon, steam or electric or traction engine, motor car or automobile, and to prevent injury to such streets, alleys, roads and highways from overloaded or improperly loaded vehicles where the council deems the public safety requires such regulation. 
(6)  To regulate the planting, trimming and preservation of shade trees, by persons and by corporations, in streets, alleys, roads, public grounds and places, and to require the owners of adjacent property to trim or remove any shade tree or ornamental shrubbery or other tree that in the opinion of the council is an obstruction to the streets, alleys or sidewalks, or a menace to public safety. 
(7)  The council shall have the right to require the owner or occupier of any property in the city to keep his premises clean and free from all matters that would endanger the health of the city, and may require the removal of any waste paper or waste material of any kind or character upon the private property of any citizen or property owner that would cause the spread of fire or when the council deems the same should be removed; and may require the removal or straightening of any fence, wire, palings, or other material enclosing any lot, when, in the opinion of the council, the same is dangerous or obstructs or encroaches upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks; provided, that in all such cases, if the owner or occupier of such property fails to do any of the things enumerated in this section required by the council, after notice by the council, the council may take such action as may be necessary to perform such acts and the expense thereof shall be charged to the property owner and collected as taxes are collected. 
(8)  To regulate the making of division fences of an unsightly nature and party walls by the owners of adjoining and adjacent premises and lots, in so far as the same shall not be in conflict with general law. 
(9)  To regulate or require drainage by the owner or occupier of any lot or other real estate, by proper drains, ditches, and sewers, and to require the owner or occupier of any lot to fill the same, at his own expense, so that water will not collect in a body thereon, or so the same will not become a menace to public health. 
(10)  To regulate or prohibit street carnivals, or street fairs, or street parades, advertising exhibitions, or other exhibitions thereon, or the exhibition of goods, wares, merchandise, material or artificial curiosities upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public place of said city. 
(11)  To regulate or prohibit the ringing of bells, blowing of steam whistles, or use of hand-organs, or other instruments of any annoying character, or other music of itinerant performers in the streets, or public speaking and preaching in the streets, roads, parks, or public places of the municipality. 
(12)  To license, regulate or prohibit auctioneering. 
(13)  To license, regulate or prohibit the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, drugs or medicine on the streets or other public places. 
(14)  To prevent the illegal sale of tobacco, cigars, snuff, or cigarettes, within said municipality, and to prevent the smoking by any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, of any cigarette, in any public building, or upon any public grounds, street, alley, sidewalk or public place within the said city and to fix fines and punishments for violations thereof. 
(15)  To regulate control, or prohibit runners for hotels, boardinghouses and eating houses, and to regulate draymen or persons hauling or transporting for hire at and about the railroad depots and stations and other public places and in an assemblage of people within the said city. 
(16)  To regulate, assess and collect a license fee for the said city for the doing of anything or business on which a state license is required, under Chapter 8 of the Code of West Virginia, and as said chapter may be hereafter amended or added to, subject to the exceptions provided by general law. 
(17)  To establish, when the council may deem proper, locate and keep in repair market places and market houses, and regulate markets and prescribe the time for holding the same; to authorize the seizure thereat and destruction of any and all such foods and drink products as shall be found unwholesome, dangerous or offensive, and without recourse against the municipality for its cost or value. 
(18)  To regulate the sale of food and drink products, milk, fresh meats, fish and vegetables, and to provide penalties for the sale of any such that are unwholesome or unfit for use. 
(19)  To regulate and provide for the weighing of hay, coal and other articles for sale in the markets, or to residents of said city. 
(20)  To require the merchants and other persons selling goods, foods or materials that must be weighed, to keep correct scales, and to seize and destroy such as are found to be incorrect, and not corrected after due and proper notice to the owner or person using the same, without damage or expense to the municipality of the value thereof. 
(21)  To prevent injury or annoyance to the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome. 
(22)  To regulate the keeping, handling and transportation of explosives and dangerous combustibles within the municipality; and to regulate or prohibit the use of firecrackers, sky rockets, toy pistols, air rifles or guns within the said municipality. 
(23)  For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the city and community, the council is hereby empowered to establish building lines, regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes. 
(24)  For any or all of said purposes the council may divide the city into districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purpose of this act, and within such districts it may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures, or land. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
Annotation- For a 1949 case holding that subdivisions (23) and (24) of this section [21] authorized common council, subsequent to enactment of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, to adopt a zoning ordinance without holding a referendum as provided in W. Va. Code, § 8-24-48, see Baer v. City of Beckley, 133 W. Va. 459. 
(25)  Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan, and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the over-crowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(26)  To regulate or prohibit the use of walls or walks for signs; to regulate or prevent the distribution or posting of any sign, bill or other paper that, in the opinion of the council or mayor, is indecent or immoral. 
(27)  To define by ordinance what shall constitute a nuisance, and to abate all nuisances whether defined or not, and to require the removal or abatement of any building, obnoxious business, sign board, bill board, signs, or other thing, which in the opinion of the council is a nuisance. 
(28)  To regulate or prohibit the distribution of hand bills, circulars and other advertisements of like kind, on the streets, roads, alleys, and public places, or the placing of same in private yards, buildings or other structures, without having first procured the consent of the owner or occupier of such property. 
(29)  To regulate or prohibit within the municipality or within one (1) mile of its corporate limits, the erection or maintenance of any slaughter house, soap factory, glue factory, lamp black factory, tannery or other house, shop or factory of like kind or character. 
(30)  To regulate or establish within said municipality public drinking fountains and water troughs; and to regulate the time and place and manner of bathing in pools, streams and public waters within the police jurisdiction of said municipal corporation. 
(31)  To prevent hogs, cattle, sheep, horses, and other animals and fowl of all kinds, from going at large in the municipality; and to establish and maintain places for their detention, make regulations respecting the same, appoint a pound master and define his duties and provide for the sale of such property impounded. 
(32)  To arrest, convict and punish any person for committing adultery or fornication, or for any lewd or lascivious cohabitation within said city, and for keeping an assignation house, house of ill fame, or for leasing or letting to any other person any house or other building to be kept or used as such, or for knowingly permitting any house, under the control of or owned by any person, to be used as an assignation house or house of ill fame; and to convict and punish for frequenting, entering or loitering in any assignation house or house of ill fame within said municipality. 
(33)  To arrest, convict and punish any person for importing, printing, publishing, selling, giving away, exhibiting, or distributing any book, picture or device, or other thing containing any obscene picture or language, or making any indecent representation. 
(34)  To restrain, convict and punish vagrants, mendicants, beggars, tramps, common prostitutes, and their associates, and drunken or disorderly persons within the municipality, and to provide for their arrest and manner of punishment. 
(35)  To prevent and prohibit the use of indecent or profane language within the corporate limits, and to provide and fix punishment therefor. 
(36)  To prevent and prohibit any tumult, riot, quarrel, angry contention, or abusive language, and to prevent the use of insulting epithets, assaults, assault and battery, and fix fines and punishments therefor. 
Annotation- For a case holding that § 21, subdivision (36) granted power to common council to enact ordinance making assault and battery an offense against the city, see State v. Mills, 150 S. E. 142. 
(37)  To prevent and prohibit trespass upon private property or the doing of anything which would annoy the owner or occupier of any premises, and to fix and provide fines and punishments therefor. 
(38)  To provide against danger or damages by fire, and to that end, to require, when the council may think necessary, an inspection of all the properties within the said city, and to require the owner or occupier of any property in which a defective or dangerous chimney or flue is found, to immediately repair the same, and to prevent the use thereof until repaired as required. 
(39)  To prohibit and prevent intoxication or drunkenness, and the drinking of intoxicants in any public place, store, streets, or alley, and to fix fines and penalties therefor. 
(40)  To prohibit, prevent and punish for anything that is against the good morals and common decency, or that would tend to corruption, vice or crime. 
(41)  To prohibit and punish for larceny where the amount stolen is less than twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(42)  To protect the public schools in said city, and to prohibit and prevent any disturbance thereof in and about the buildings or upon the grounds, and to prevent injury, destruction or defacement of any school property or building. 
(43)  To establish a board of health and vest it with the necessary power to maintain its object, and to fix fines and penalties for any violation of its lawful orders. 
(44)  To establish quarantine, and to erect and maintain pest houses and places of detention, and to make and enforce necessary orders for controlling or preventing the spread of infections and contagious diseases, and for abating pestilences. 
(45)  To prohibit the bringing into the corporate limits by railroads, carriers, persons or in any manner, persons who are paupers or persons who are afflicted with contagious diseases; to punish by fine or imprisonment, or both, any person who shall bring into the corporate limits any such pauper or person afflicted with contagious disease, knowing or having reason to believe, at the time that such person is a pauper or afflicted with such contagious disease, and to collect and recover from any such railroad company, carrier, or other person, the expense of keeping and maintaining such pauper or diseased person, until such person can be lawfully removed from the corporate limits. 
(46)  To provide for the poor of the municipality, and to that end, the municipality may contract with the county commission of Raleigh County for the keeping of such poor person, or any number of them, at the county poor house, at a price and on such terms as may be agreed upon between the county commission and the proper municipal authorities. 
(47)  To authorize the taking up and providing for the maintenance and safe keeping of (for such period as may be deemed expedient) all children within said city who are destitute of proper parental and other care. 
(48)  To arrest, convict and punish any person for cruelty, unnecessary or needless beating, torturing, mutilating, killing or overloading, or overdriving, or wilfully depriving of necessary sustenance, any horse or other domestic animal. 
(49)  To regulate the hitching of horses within the corporate limits, and the driving of cows and cattle through, upon and along the streets and alleys of the said city. 
(50)  To prohibit, prevent and punish for the pollution of any stream of water running into or through the said municipality; and to prohibit and prevent the throwing into any such stream of any trash, dirt, filth, offal, decayed substances or matters, or anything that would make said water unhealthy or unfit for domestic use. 
(51)  To prohibit, prevent and punish for any desecration of the Sabbath day; prohibit the playing of any game, exhibiting any show, theater, picture show, and the keeping open of business places except hotels, eating houses, boardinghouses and restaurants. 
(52)  To restrain, prevent and punish fraudulent practices of any kind or character within the municipality. 
(53)  To arrest, convict and punish any person for gambling or keeping any gaming table, commonly called "faro bank", or table and chips used in playing such game; crap, crap table, chips or dice used in playing such game; or roulette or the wheel, chips, or other equipment used in playing such game; or keno table or table of like kind or device used in playing the same; or table of like kind under any denomination, whether the game or games be played with cards, dice or otherwise on which anything is bet or wagered, whether the same be played in any public or private room or residence; and may convict and punish any person who shall be a partner or concerned in interest in the keeping of any such gambling devices heretofore enumerated, or in any game played, such as is prohibited hereby, or in keeping or maintaining any gambling house or place of gambling for money or anything of value; and shall have the right to destroy such gambling paraphernalia as may be found in use of any such premises; and any officer armed with a warrant for the arrest of any person engaged in any such unlawful game or for the search of any room in which gambling is suspected, or for the seizure of any gambling paraphernalia, shall have the right to break into any building, other than private dwelling house, without notice or demand, and into a private dwelling or room, after demand and refusal to open same, to execute any such warrant. 
(54)  To retain all felons and persons guilty of offenses against this state or the United States, and deliver them over to the authorities or court having jurisdiction of the offense whereof such persons are accused. 
(55)  To apprehend and punish any person who, without a state license therefor, is guilty of carrying about his person, within the municipality, any revolver or other pistol, dirk, bowie knife, sling shot, razor, billy, metallic or false knuckle, or any other dangerous or deadly weapons of like kind and character, as provided by Chapter 61 of the Code of West Virginia, or any amendment thereof, and the punishment therefor, whether for the first or other offenses, shall be that now or hereafter prescribed by said chapter for any such person guilty under the misdemeanor clause provided therein. 
(56)  To regulate the hanging of doors, the construction of stairways and elevators, and require fire escapes in theaters, churches, school buildings, factories and other places deemed necessary by the council. 
(57)  To establish fire limits and to regulate the construction of buildings, and designate materials to be used in the construction of buildings within such limits. 
(58)  To regulate the building of fire walls, fire places, chimneys, boilers, smokestacks, stove pipes, and the burning of waste paper, trash or other waste matter, in the corporate limits. 
(59)  To require any building that, in the opinion of the council, is dangerous, to be repaired, altered or removed by the owners thereof, or put in a safe condition, such as the council may approve, at the expense of such owner or occupier, and to provide punishments for failure to comply with any order of the council concerning same. 
(60)  To regulate the construction and inspection of all new buildings hereafter erected, the alteration and repair of any buildings now or hereafter erected, to require permits to be obtained of the council therefor, and the submission of plans and specifications to the council for its approval; to regulate the limits within which it shall be lawful to erect any steps, porticos, bay windows, awnings, signs, columns, piers, or other projection or structural ornaments of any kind for the houses or buildings on any street or alley. 
(61)  To provide for the prevention and extinguishing of fires, and for this purpose, the council may equip and govern fire companies, prescribe the powers and duties of such companies and departments, and of the several officers thereof, or may authorize volunteer fire companies, under such rules and regulations as the council may prescribe, and impose on those who fail to obey any lawful command of the officer in charge of any such company, or volunteer company, any penalty which the council is authorized to impose for violation of an ordinance, and to give authority to any such fire officer to direct the pulling down or destruction of any building, fence, wall or other thing, if such officers deem it necessary to prevent the spreading of any fire which is being extinguished under the direction of such officer, and without any liability on the municipality for damages therefor. 
(62)  To protect the persons and property within the corporate limits and preserve the peace and good order therein, and for this purpose, to appoint, when necessary, a police force and such other officers as may be deemed necessary; and to provide a lockup, jail or other suitable place to confine persons sentenced to imprisonment for violation of the ordinances of said city; provided, however, that the jail of Raleigh County may be used for that purpose, if authorized by the county commission of said county. 
(63)  To require any person violating any of the ordinances of said city, or any order for which a fine, imprisonment, or both is imposed, to work upon the streets of said city in case of nonpayment of said fine, until the same is paid by such labor, or in case imprisonment is imposed, to work upon the streets of said city during the term of such imprisonment in addition to the payment of such fine, under such regulations as the council may prescribe. 
(64)  To prescribe the powers, define the duties of the officers appointed under the corporate authority, fix their terms of service and compensation, if not otherwise prescribed by this act, and to require and take from them bonds, when deemed necessary, payable to the City of Beckley, with the sureties, and in such penalties as may be prescribed, conditioned for the faithful discharge of their respective duties. 
(65)  To make regulations with respect to, and have supervision and control over the erection, removal and relocation of all telephone, telegraph, electric light or other poles within said city, and the extension of wires, lines or poles by any individuals or corporations. 
(66)  To require the enlarging or extension of any electric light wire, telephone line, gas line, water system, or other public service within said corporate limits, to meet the needs of the inhabitants, when in the opinion of the council, such extension is necessary and justifiable. 
(67)  To grant and regulate all franchises in, upon, over and under the streets, alleys and public ways of said city, under such restrictions as shall be provided by ordinances and general law; but no exclusive franchise shall be granted by said city council to any individual or corporation; nor shall any franchise be granted for a longer period than twenty (20) years. 
(68)  To acquire, erect or authorize or prohibit the erection of gas works, electric light works or water works within the city limits, to prevent injury to such works or the pollution of any gas or water used or intended to be used by the public or by individuals; and to do all things necessary to adequately supply said city and the inhabitants thereof with pure, healthful and wholesome water; and to require any company furnishing gas or electricity for sale or distribution in said city to furnish an adequate supply thereof; to require gas fixtures, electric light wires, telephone wires and all apparatuses used in connection with any of these to be kept in repair and suitable for use, and free from danger, so far as practicable; to use, generate, distribute, sell and control electricity and gas for heat, light and power, and to furnish light for the streets, highways, buildings, stores and other places in and about said city. 
Editor's note- Word "and" before "adequate supply" was in original; probably a typographical error intended as "an". 
(69)  To require any gas company or person furnishing gas for said city or the inhabitants thereof, to put in standard meters for the measurement thereof, and may appoint a competent person to inspect the meters and remove the same if not standard and in good order; to prevent injury to any gas works, electric light works, water system or any gas meter or meters within said municipality. 
(70)  The council shall have the right to require of any water company or person furnishing water for the use of the inhabitants of said city, for hire, compensation or reward, to obey any order of the council with respect to keeping the reservoir or other source from which said water is furnished, free from filth and in good, clean condition, and may require said water company to properly filter the water distributed for use, and may require said company to put in such lines as may be necessary to pump the said water into the reservoir or other receptacle therefor, without pumping the same into the main distributing lines, or in any other way or manner effecting them; and may fix fines and penalties for any failure on the part of any corporation, company or other person distributing water, to obey any order of the council or any authorized officer of the city respecting the same, or any ordinance that may be enacted by the council relative thereto. 
(71)  The council shall have the right to provide a sewerage system for said city, and may require the owner of any property abutting upon any street or alley in which a sewer has been laid or placed, to connect a sewer leading from his or her property or lot into any public sewer which is located in such street or alley adjoining the same, and if the owner or occupier of said lot or property fails or refuses so to do, after having been given a reasonable notice, the council may enter upon such lot and construct such sewers, and may levy the actual cost thereof against the lot upon which the same is built and collect such costs from the owner of such lot in the same manner as city or state taxes are collected and as herein provided; in addition thereto, the council may punish by fine, or fine and imprisonment, any person who permits any drainage from his residence or lot to enter upon any street or upon any property after a sewer has been placed in a street or alley adjacent to his property to which he should connect, after notice has been given to him by the council to make such connection. 
(72)  The council shall have the right to impose fines and penalties for any interference with or destruction of the sewer system or any part thereof in said city, or for the destruction of or damage to any street, alley or sidewalk in said city, or any improper use thereof; it shall have the right to regulate or prevent the use of the sidewalks for bicycles, push carts, sleds, tricycles, roller skates and other things of like character, and to fix fines and penalties for violation of the ordinances respecting same. 
(73)  To grant by ordinance or resolution permits for the temporary use of such parts of its streets, roads, alleys and public places as the council may deem proper and right to be used in the construction, alteration or repair of buildings located thereon, or for such other purposes as the council may deem proper and right, and under such regulations and for such time as the council may prescribe. 
(74)  The council may buy, lease and operate either within or without the municipality, stone quarries, crushers and land for said purposes or for the purpose of furnishing a supply of stone or other material suitable for macadamizing or paving the streets, sidewalks and alleys, and improving public property. 
(75)  Whenever in the opinion of the council it is necessary that any sidewalk be built or repaired, it shall first have a competent engineer fix a grade line for such sidewalk and shall then, by order of the council, name the character of material out of which same is to be built, and fix the width thereof, and shall then give notice, in writing, to the owner or occupier of said lot, if he be found, and if he be not found, by posting a notice thereof upon the said lot and at the front door of the court house of Raleigh County for at least ten (10) days, requiring the construction of said sidewalk in accordance with the requirements of the council, and upon the grade fixed by the said engineer, and if such sidewalk be not built, altered or repaired within twenty (20) days after such notice is first given or posted, the council shall proceed to put in the same under its supervision and control, and shall charge the expense thereof against the property along which the same is being placed, altered or repaired, and shall cause an itemized account of the same to be made up and delivered to such property owner or occupier of such premises, if found, and if he be not found, have the same recorded in the county clerk's office of Raleigh County, and the same shall constitute a lien upon the said lot or property and shall be collected as other taxes are collected; provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the council from requiring immediate repair of such sidewalks now or hereafter constructed that may become dangerous; and after notice to the property owner along which the same run, the council may make such immediate repairs, if the property owner fails to make same after such notice, and the expense thereof shall be a lien in the manner aforesaid. 
(76)  To authorize by ordinance such committees or boards, and delegate such authority thereto as may be deemed necessary or advisable by the council; except that the council cannot delegate the authority to impose a lien upon real estate; and to employ such legal counsel on behalf of the city, from time to time, as the city may deem necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
(77)  To provide for the annual assessment of the taxable property in said city, including dogs kept in said city, and to provide a revenue for the city for municipal purposes and appropriate such revenue to its expenses; provided, nothing herein contained shall require the council to keep in repair and maintain any bridge or bridges within said corporation, now or hereafter owned by the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway Company, but the officers of said city in the preservation of law and order shall have jurisdiction over any such bridges within such corporation; and provided further, that the police regulations as may be ordained by said city, and the right and power to enforce the same shall extend one mile into the State of West Virginia beyond the corporate limits of said city, but not into any other municipal corporation. 
(78)  The council may, within any prescribed area, prohibit the erection on any street or in any square, of any building, or of any addition to any building, unless the outer walls thereof be made of brick and mortar or other fire-proof material. And the common council may require the removal of any building or addition which shall be hereafter created contrary to this prohibition, at the expense of the owner or owners thereof. 
(79)  The council shall keep all roads, streets and alleys within its limits passable and in good repair, and may provide the expenses therefor by a direct taxation, as provided under this charter, or in any other manner authorized by law; and residents of said city who are taxed therein for the purpose of maintaining such streets and alleys shall be exempt from the payment of any county road tax. 
(80)  In the enforcement of the ordinances, orders, rules, regulations and by-laws of the said city, no fine shall be imposed exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and no person shall be imprisoned as aforesaid, exceeding twelve (12) months; provided, that any violation of the liquor laws of this state shall be punished by the fines and penalties therein prescribed; and violations of the road law or automobile laws may be punished by the fines and penalties prescribed by general law, unless different fines and penalties are expressly prescribed by the ordinances of said city. And in all cases where a fine is imposed for an amount exceeding ten dollars ($10.00), or a person be imprisoned, an appeal may be taken from such decision upon the same terms and conditions that appeals are taken from the judgment of a magistrate of this state; and in no case shall a fine of less than ten dollars ($10.00) be imposed where the ordinance prescribes a fine if the defendant requests that such fine be made at least ten dollars ($10.00) for the purpose of appeal. 
(81)  The council shall have the right to enforce the attendance of its members at all regular meetings and at all special meetings of which such members have notice, and may cause the arrest and punishment by fine or fine and imprisonment, of any such member who refuses to attend and take part in its proceedings. 
(82)  It shall be the express duty of the council to present charges against any of its members, or any elective officer of the city, who fails to perform, or who does not promptly and diligently perform any duty prescribed by this act, or by any ordinance or resolution of the council, and upon hearing thereof before the council, after notice to such officer, he shall be removed from office by the council, if the charges be found correct. 
(83)  To carry into effect these enumerated powers and all others by this act or by general law conferred, or which may hereafter be conferred upon the said city or its council, or any of its officers, the said council shall have and possess full authority to make, pass and adopt all needful ordinances, by-laws, orders and resolutions, not repugnant to the constitution of the United States, constitution of West Virginia and laws of this state; and to enforce any and all of such ordinances, by-laws, orders or resolutions, by prescribing for a violation thereof fines and penalties, and imprisonment in either the county jail of Raleigh County, or the city prison, if there be one. Said fines and penalties shall be imposed and recovered, and such imprisonment inflicted and enforced by the judgment of the police judge of said city. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
State Law reference- General powers of cities, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5. 
Sec. 22. - Qualifications, powers and duties of city solicitor. 
    The city solicitor shall be a member of the Raleigh County bar, in good standing, and a citizen of the City of Beckley; he shall be the legal adviser of and counsel for said city and for all officers thereof in matters relating to their official duties. He shall prepare all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the city is concerned, and no written contract with the city, except bonds given to said city by officials or others, shall take effect until the legality thereof shall have been approved by such city solicitor. He shall attend the council meetings and perform such other duties, from time to time, as the council may require of him. 
Sec. 23. - Powers and duties of chief of police. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to preserve order and quiet in said city, and to see that all subordinate police officers faithfully perform their official duties. He shall attend all regular council meetings and be present in the police court, whenever the same shall be in session, and see that all its orders and requirements are properly executed. 
    In case of the violation of any ordinance of said city in the presence of or within view of the chief of police, or other police officer, the offender may be forthwith apprehended and taken before the police judge, and a complaint under oath, stating such violation, there lodged and filed, and thereupon such offender may be tried and dealt with according to law without summons. The chief of police or any other police officer of said city shall execute within the County of Raleigh any proper process issued by the police judge in proceedings for the enforcement of ordinances; he shall collect, by a levy of execution or otherwise, and duly account for all fines assessed and costs imposed and collected by him in such proceedings. He shall also have the rights and powers within said city in regard to the arrest of persons, the collection of claims and the execution and return of process, that are or may be lawfully exercised by a deputy sheriff within said county; and he and his sureties shall be liable for all fines, penalties and forfeitures for which a constable is liable, and for dereliction of duty in office, to be recovered in the same manner and in the same courts that such fines, penalties and forfeitures are recovered against deputy sheriffs. 
    In addition to the above duties, the chief of police shall have such other duties as the council may by ordinance prescribe. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Annotation- For a case sustaining trial court's instruction that chief of police had right to arrest, without warrant, persons charged with violation of a speed limit ordinance in his presence, and to confine them in jail until they could be brought before police judge the next day, subject to their right to have a reasonable opportunity to give bond, see Moran v. City of Beckley, 67 F. (2d) 161. Such case also held that it is for the jury to determine whether or not person arrested for a bailable offense was given "reasonable opportunity" to give bail. Such case further held that it was arbitrary and unjust to jail over night persons charged with bailable offense and, next morning, to accept bail in an amount they could give, when the night before he had asked for bail in an amount they could not give. 
Sec. 24. - Chief of fire department. 
    The duties of chief of fire department shall be such as the council may, by ordinance, prescribe. 
Sec. 25. - Powers and duties of city assessor. 
    It shall be the duty of the city assessor to co-operate with the county assessor to the end that all property within the city, subject to taxation, may be charged upon the land and personal property books, respectively, and proper valuation thereon placed. 
Sec. 26. - City health officer. 
    The city health officer shall be a legally qualified physician. His duties shall be such as the council may by ordinances prescribe. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 27. - Streets and roads; when residents exempt from county road tax. 
    The said city shall construct and maintain its own roads and streets and by reason thereof it shall not be required to pay any district or county road levies for the construction and maintenance of roads outside of the city limits, but this provision shall not be construed to relieve the city from any liability on existing or future county or district bond issues for road purposes. 
Sec. 28. - Effect of charter with respect to conditions existing in 1927. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of said city in force at the time of the passage of this act, which are not inconsistent therewith, shall be and remain in full force over the whole boundary of said city as established by this act until the same are amended or repealed by the council of said city, and the officers elected at the last election, in the City of Beckley, shall remain in office until their successors, under this act, are elected and qualified as hereinbefore provided, and after this act takes effect, the present officers of said city shall have jurisdiction over all the territory embraced in the boundary specified in this act, and such present officers shall then be vested with full power and authority to pass any new ordinances or resolutions under this act that are not inconsistent therewith. Nothing in this act shall be construed or held to in any way affect or impair any of the bonds, obligations or indebtedness of the City of Beckley existing at the time of the passage of this act. 
Editor's note- The charter act passed the legislature on April 26, 1927, and took effect ninety (90) days thereafter. This section speaks as of such time. 
Sec. 29. - Bond issues. 
    The City of Beckley, by and through its council, may issue and sell its bonds, in the manner, and subject to the limitations and conditions contained in Chapter 14, Acts of the Legislature, 1923. 
State Law reference- Ch. 14, Acts 1923, is now classified as W. Va. Code, §§ 13-1-1 to 13-1-32; 18-9-2. 
Sec. 30. - Licenses. 
    Whenever anything for which a license is required or permitted under the Code of West Virginia be done within said city, the council may require a license therefor, and may impose a reasonable tax thereon for the City of Beckley. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Sec. 31. - Common council; designation; quorum. 
    The council of said city shall be officially known as and called the "Common Council of the City of Beckley." A majority of the council shall be necessary to form a quorum for the transaction of business. 
Sec. 32. - Salaries; officials interested in contracts. 
    The council may at any time by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority of the members elected change the salaries of any appointive or elective officers; but any such changes that affect the salaries of the elective officers shall be effective only as to such officers as are thereafter nominated and elected; provided, however, that no changes shall reduce the compensation to be paid below the minimum fixed by this section. No officer, councilman, agent or employee of said city shall have a voice or be directly or indirectly pecuniarily interested in any contract, sale or purchase for or on behalf of the city, or in the proceeds of any improvement made by or on behalf of the city, nor shall he receive, directly or indirectly, any compensation for his services rendered on behalf of the city, other than herein provided to be paid, nor shall such councilman remain present while any such matters are being voted upon by the council. Salaries shall be paid by the city in monthly installments. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
Editor's note- The first paragraph, containing specific salaries, has been omitted, except the second sentence thereof, which has been placed at the end of the section. 
Code reference- Section 2-2 of the code for specific salary of elected officials. 
Sec. 33. - City not to incur debt exclusive of bond issues; liability of councilmen for violation. 
    The council of said city shall not for any purpose, exclusive of bond issues, create any indebtedness against the said city exceeding available revenues of the city for the current fiscal year, and any councilman who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be personally liable therefor and subject to all other penalties prescribed by any statute of this state for so doing; but nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the council from lawfully issuing orders after the first day of July, to be paid out of the city treasury, provided, such orders do not exceed the available revenues for that fiscal year, based upon the assessments and levies made or to be made for said year, but such orders shall not draw interest. 
Sec. 34. - Meetings of common council. 
    The council shall fix the place and time of holding its regular meetings. It may provide for special and adjourned meetings and prescribe rules and regulations not inconsistent with this act for the transaction of business and for its own guidance and government. 
Sec. 35. - How funds disbursed. 
    No money shall be paid out of the city treasury unless authorized by an order entered of record in the council journal, signed by the mayor, or other presiding officers, and the recorder-treasurer, and all warrants drawn upon the city treasury shall be signed by the mayor and recorder-treasurer before payment thereof shall be authorized by any city depository. 
Sec. 36. - City records as evidence. 
    A copy or transcript of any records of the police court, purporting to have been attested or certified by the police judge thereof, may be admitted as evidence in any court of this state without any proof of the signature, or of the official character of the person whose name is signed to it; and a copy or transcript of any records of any department of said city, purporting to have been attested or certified by the mayor or recorder-treasurer of said city, may be admitted as evidence in any court of this state without any proof of the signature or of the official character of the person whose name is signed to it, whether the seal of said city be attached thereto or not. 
Sec. 37. - Oaths and acknowledgments. 
    The mayor of said city shall have the same power within the city to administer oaths and affirmations as is now vested in a justice of the peace under the Code of West Virginia; and the recorder-treasurer of said city shall have the same power and authority to administer oaths or affirmations and take acknowledgments to deeds and other writings in said city as is now vested in a magistrate under and by virtue of said Code. 
(Election of 8-3-54) 
State Law reference- For state law as to authority of magistrate court to administer oaths and take acknowledgments, see W. Va. Code, § 50-2-1. 
Sec. 38. - Liens for street improvements; filing and indexing. 
    For the construction of all streets and sidewalks by this city, pursuant to section 8-18-2 of the Code of West Virginia, the lien for such improvements shall exist against the property so improved from the date the construction work actually begins, and the lien of the assessments provided for in section 8-18-10 of the Code of the West Virginia shall relate back to the beginning of such construction work; provided, no lien imposed by the said city on real estate therein except liens for municipal taxes shall continue to exist unless a notice thereof be filed for record in Raleigh County Court Clerk's office within ninety (90) days after the report of the completion of such improvements has been filed before the city council by the city engineer; such notice shall be recorded by said clerk in appropriate record book and indexed together with other liens against real estate; and releases of said liens shall, when discharged, be also recorded and indexed in said clerk's office as other releases. 
Sec. 39. - Mayor's power to punish for contempt. 
    The mayor of this city, while discharging his official duties, is hereby vested with the same power to punish for contempt committed in his presence, as is now vested in magistrates of this state. 
State Law reference- Power of magistrate court to punish for contempt, W. Va. Code, § 50-5-11. 
Sec. 40. - Prior charter repealed; what state statutes incorporated in this charter; other state laws applicable to city. 
    Chapter 8 of the Code of West Virginia, and all amendments thereto, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the several provisions of this act, are hereby adopted as a part of this act; and no act of the legislature or existing law of this state, in conflict with the several provisions of this act, shall be applicable to the City of Beckley; and the charter of the City of Beckley passed by the legislature of West Virginia on the fourteenth day of February, 1908, is hereby repealed. Nothing in this act shall be construed to modify, diminish or in anywise change or deprive the public service commission of the State of West Virginia of any of the rights, duties and responsibilities placed upon it under existing public service statutes, all of which are to remain in full force and effect insofar as this charter is concerned, notwithstanding any provisions herein contained. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This original charter, an Act of the Legislature passed on April 26, 1927, is included herein. The following table shows amendments to the charter. 
Election 
Date  Section 
this Charter 8-3-54 1-3 6, 7, 7a 8 10 16-19 19a 20, 21 26 30, 32 37  8-28-10 10 16  
PART II - THE CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Beckley, West Virginia," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Beckley City Code." 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify ordinances, W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4, (b). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction applicable to this Code and other ordinances. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the common council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Authority. Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance authority is given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy or subordinate unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such particular provision. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The words "the charter" or "city charter" shall mean the charter of the City of Beckley, as amended. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Beckley, in the County of Raleigh, and the State of West Virginia, except as otherwise provided. 
    Code of West Virginia, West Virginia Code. Citations to the "Code of West Virginia" or "West Virginia Code" shall be to the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended, or equivalent sections in any official code of the state subsequently adopted. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
    Council, common council, governing body. The terms "council", "common council", and "governing body", shall be construed to mean "the common council of the City of Beckley." 
    County. The terms "county", "the county" and "this county" shall be construed to mean the County of Raleigh, State of West Virginia. 
    General rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of language; provided, that technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a special meaning in the law, shall be construed according to such technical or special meaning. 
    Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    May. The word "may" shall be construed as permissive. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; a word importing the plural number only may be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed". 
    Officers and employees. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the common council prescribing the duties of any officer or employee of the city, or otherwise referring to such officer or employee, the name of any one of the city departments is used, or the head of any such department is referred to, the same shall be interpreted as meaning the particular department, or the head of the particular department to whose charge or under whose jurisdiction the particular officer or employee mentioned has been placed or assigned by ordinance or resolution. 
    Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, bodies politic and corporate, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. The word "premises", when used as applicable to property, shall extend to and include land and buildings. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property, and any mixed and lesser estates or interests therein. The words "personal property" shall include every kind of property except real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Public authority. The term "public authority" shall extend to and include boards of education, county, state and federal officers and any duly authorized public official. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or giving of such notice. 
    Recorder and treasurer; recorder-treasurer, etc. The words "city recorder", "recorder," "recorder-treasurer", "treasurer" or "city treasurer" mean the recorder-treasurer of the City of Beckley, West Virginia. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. Each of such terms includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    Solicitor, attorney. The terms "city solicitor" and "city attorney" mean the city solicitor of the City of Beckley, West Virginia. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of West Virginia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall include avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a side-walk or foot path, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the common council. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future. 
    Writing. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words, letters and figures. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, and the word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord". 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 2-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to state law, W. VA. Code, § 2-2-10(2). 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
    The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any offense committed, or penalty or punishment incurred, before the repeal took effect, or the ordinance expired, save only that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform as far as practicable to the ordinances in force at the time such proceedings take place, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
    When an ordinance which has repealed another is itself repealed, the former ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to state law, W. VA. Code, §§ 2-2-8, 2-2-9. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contractor or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall also apply in the event of amendments to the charter. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect or ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Incorporation of additions and amendments. 
    Additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Wherever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in officer or agency, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
    Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute, except where otherwise provided, a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-28-87; Ord. of 7-10-90; Ord. of 4-10-07) 
Charter reference- Maximum punishment, § 21(80); collection of fines, etc., § 20. 
State Law reference- Power of city to impose penalties for violation of ordinances, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-5(57). 
Sec. 1-9. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be deemed to affect the validity of any of the following ordinances, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect under their own terms and conditions: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance authorizing the execution of agreements with other governments or agencies; 
(3)  Any personnel pay or classification plan or other ordinance or part of an ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city; 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted to any person, firm or corporation; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city or excluding property from the city; 
(11)  Any zoning or subdivision ordinance of the city; 
(12)  Any taxation ordinance not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones or dealing with parking meters, parking meter zones or flow of traffic generally, not inconsistent with such Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing city rates, fees and charges; 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(16)  Any ordinance enacted after October 23, 1984. 
Sec. 1-10. - Official copies of Code to be kept by recorder-treasurer. 
    Two (2) copies of this Code shall be certified by the recorder-treasurer as correct and official and shall be placed and kept permanently on file in the office of the recorder-treasurer. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove either such copy of the Code from the office of the recorder-treasurer. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Official bonds. 
    Before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties the mayor, recorder-treasurer and chief of police shall give bond pursuant to the requirements of section 15 of the City Charter in the amounts as required by the governing body. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Compensation of officers and employees; allowing time off. 
(a)  The governing body shall by ordinance fix or cause to be fixed the salary or compensation of every elected official; provided, that the salary of any official shall not be increased or diminished during such official's term. 
(b)  The governing body shall approve the salaries or compensation of all other city officers and employees by and through the fiscal year budget. 
(c)  The governing body shall have plenary power and authority to provide by ordinance for the allowance of time off of elected officials, officers and employees with pay for vacations and illness, as additional consideration for their services and employment. 
(d)  Effective July 1, 2016, the Mayor shall be paid by the City of Beckley an annual salary of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). This salary shall be paid by the city in monthly installments. The increase in the salary of the mayor shall be effective for the individual entering upon the duties of the office of mayor on or subsequent to July 1, 2016. 
    The salaries of other city officers, including members of Common Council, remain in effect and are not altered by this section. 
(Code 1971, § 2-2; Ord. of 9-10-85; Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 10-24-06; Ord. of 6-28-11; Ord. of 6-28-16(1)) 
Charter reference- Fixing salaries, § 32. 
State Law reference- Authority of common council to over-ride charter provisions relating to salary, W. Va. Code, § 8-15-12. 
Sec. 2-3. - Recorder-treasurer-Dual capacities title; powers and duties generally. 
    The recorder, in addition to the duties as such shall also perform the duties of city treasurer, and shall have the title and be known as "recorder-treasurer". 
(Code 1971, § 2-17) 
Charter reference- Nomination and appointment of recorder-treasurer, §§ 4, 6, 7; duties of recorder, § 18. 
Cross reference- Duties of recorder-treasurer relative to elections, § 5-3 et seq.; designation as licensing officer, § 13-4 et seq.; duty to serve as cashier of sanitary board, § 9-224. 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of city recorders, generally, W. Va. Code, § 8-10-3 and § 8-10-4. 
Sec. 2-4. - Same-Fiscal records. 
    It shall be the duty of the recorder-treasurer to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of all money belonging to the city received by such official or under such official's control or custody. Annually, the recorder-treasurer shall prepare and submit to common council for approval by resolution the fiscal year budget. 
(Code 1971, § 2-18) 
Sec. 2-5. - Personnel Policies Manual. 
    City personnel regulations are contained in the Personnel Policies Manual, copies of which are on file in the office of the recorder-treasurer. 
Sec. 2-6. - Police department. 
    The organization and operation of the police department, and the powers, duties, rights, benefits and liabilities of the members thereof shall be as provided in the Code of West Virginia, Chapter 8, Articles 14, 14A and 22, which articles are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if written herein. 
Cross reference- Bond required for chief of police, § 2-1; hindering or failing to assist police officer and resisting arrest, § 10-1; wrongfully seeking to release property in control of police officer, § 10-2; impersonation of officer, § 10-3; false alarm for need of police assistance, § 10-5. 
Sec. 2-7. - Fire department. 
    The organization and operation of the fire department, and the powers, duties, rights, benefits and liabilities of the members thereof shall be as provided in the Code of West Virginia, Chapter 8, Articles 14A, 15 and 22, which articles are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if written herein. 
Charter reference- Authority of council to equip and govern fire companies, etc., § 21(61); authority to prescribe duties of chief of fire department, § 24. 
Cross reference- Bureau of fire prevention, § 7-1 et seq.; following or parking near fire apparatus, § 14-548; driving over fire hose, § 14-549; hindering public officer or employee in discharge of duties, § 10-1. 
Sec. 2-8. - Urban mass transportation authority-Established. 
    There is hereby created and established, pursuant to the provisions of Article 27 of Chapter 8 of the Code of West Virginia, as amended, an urban mass transportation authority to be known and designated as "Greater Beckley Area Transit Authority." 
(Code 1971, § 2-26) 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 2-9. - Same-Initial participating government. 
    The initial participating government shall be this city. 
(Code 1971, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-10. - Same-A public corporation. 
    Said authority shall be a public corporation and is hereby vested with all the powers authorized, and directed to perform all of the duties imposed, by Article 27 of Chapter 8 of the Code of West Virginia, as amended. 
(Code 1971, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-11. - Same-Composition; terms of members. 
    The board of said authority shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) members. The initial board shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be appointed by the council. The initial appointments by the council shall be as follows: Two (2) members for a term of one year; two (2) members for a term of two (2) years; and one member for a term of three (3) years. 
(Code 1971, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-12. - Same-Membership open. 
    Membership on said board hereby created shall be opened to representatives of other regional governmental bodies who may later so desire, by enacting an appropriate ordinance or order as prescribed by section 8-27-4 of the Code of West Virginia as amended, in which event, the board hereby created shall increase the membership of the board to such number as it may deem necessary, not to exceed fifteen (15). 
(Code 1971, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-13. - Same-Financial participation by city. 
    The city shall not obligate itself to participate financially with said authority except with the prior approval of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-14. - Insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  Pursuant to Chapter 8, Article 12, section 7 of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, the governing body of the city hereby authorizes the expenditure of public funds for the purchase of one or more policies of public liability insurance, with or without a sharing of the costs thereof by councilmembers, officers, agents, and employees of the City of Beckley, providing the city and its councilmembers, officers, agents, and employees insurance coverage for legal liability of the city and its councilmembers, officers, agents, and employees for bodily injury, personal injury or damage (including, but not limited to, false arrest and false imprisonment) and property damage, and affording the city and its councilmembers, officers, agents, and employees insurance coverage against any and all legal liability arising from, growing out of, by reason of, or in any way connected with any acts of commission or omission of the City of Beckley, its councilmembers, or its officers, agents, or employees in the performance of their official duties. 
    Further, the city is authorized to apply for liability insurance coverage to the extent available with the state board of risk and insurance management, pursuant to Chapter 29, Article 12A, section 5(b) of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, as an additional source for providing necessary liability insurance coverage for the city, its council members, officers, agents, and employees. The provisions of Chapter 29, Article 12A, section 1, et seq., of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference as if the full text thereof is set forth herein. 
(b)  The city further hereby authorizes the expenditure of public funds for indemnification of its councilmembers, officers, agents, and employees against any and all legal liability for losses, damages, expenses, and costs, including court costs and reasonable and necessary attorneys' fees, arising from, growing out of, by reason of, or in any way connected with any acts of commission or omission of said councilmembers, officers, agents, or employees in the performance of their official duties. Such indemnification shall be provided by expenditures from the general fund or by the purchase of insurance as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  In addition to that provided in subsections (a) and (b), the city shall reimburse any councilmembers, officer, agent, or employee for the expenditure of personal monies to purchase individual liability insurance that would provide liability protection to that councilmember, officer, agent, or employee for any legal liability incurred by reason of any acts of commission or omission arising from, growing out of, by reason of, or in any way connected with the performance of their official duties. 
(d)  If the insurance coverage provided pursuant to subsection (a) of this section is deemed to exclude an act of commission or omission of the city, councilmember, officer, agent, or employee, or if an insurance carrier refuses to provide coverage for the city, councilmember, officer, agent, or employee for any reason, expenditures from the general fund shall be made for payment of any and all of the legal liability contemplated by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  No indemnification shall be made under this section to any councilmember, officer, agent, or employee of the city for: Any conversion or diversion of public funds; any criminal act as defined by the laws of the United States, State of West Virginia, or any other governmental body; any criminal act which could or does result in civil liability to any third party or the city; any act of commission or omission committed by said councilmember, officer, agent, or employee while the same was insane or mentally incompetent; any amounts in settlement or otherwise disposing of a threatened or pending proceeding without approval of the governing body; any expenses incurred in defending a threatened or pending lawsuit which is settled or otherwise disposed of without the approval of the governing body. Provided, however, none of the exclusions contained herein shall be interpreted to enure to the benefits of any liability or other insurance carrier of the city, unless specifically contained in the contract of insurance between the city and said carrier. 
(Ord. of 2-22-86; Ord. of 6-25-86) 
Sec. 2-15. - Health insurance. 
(a)  Pursuant to Chapter 8, Article 12, section 8 of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, the governing body of the City of Beckley authorizes the expenditure of public funds for the purchase or provisions of a policy or policies of group health insurance to cover life; health; hospital care; surgical or medical diagnosis; care and treatment; drugs and medicines; remedial care, other medical supplies and services, or any combination of these. Further, the city is authorized to provide such health insurance, coverage either through a contract of insurance with a qualified health insurance carrier licensed to do business in the State of West Virginia; or through a plan of self-insurance with a qualified self-insurance health plan administrator licensed to do business within the State of West Virginia. 
(b)  Should the city decide to provide self-insurance for the councilmembers, officers, agents, or employees, then such self-insurance program shall be submitted for competitive bidding to qualified and authorized insurance businesses within the State of West Virginia for the purpose of administration of the program. 
(c)  Prior to the submission for competitive bidding, the recorder-treasurer of the city shall submit to common council a summary of all benefits to be contained in the health insurance program, including limitations, exclusions, restrictions, and other matters that are germane to the coverage to be incorporated in the program. 
(d)  As of March 8, 1986, the city is authorized to extend coverage to an active employee who retires on or after this effective date, as well as to his spouse and dependents. Further, the city is hereby authorized to extend group health coverage to the spouse and dependents of any deceased member of the group. The cost of the extended coverage for retirees, their spouses and dependents, and the spouses and dependents of any deceased member of the group shall be paid by that individual member and not by the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 6-25-86; Ord. of 2-9-88) 
Sec. 2-16. - Residency requirements. 
(a)  All fire fighters and police officers of the Fire Department and Police Department of the City of Beckley appointed in the classified civil service positions of the city, whether hourly or salaried, whether full-time or part-time, hereafter employed by the City of Beckley must be bona fide residents of Raleigh County, West Virginia. There is no residency requirement for applicants for employment; however, within eighteen (18) months from the date of appointment or employment, all personnel subject to this provision shall establish residency in the County of Raleigh, West Virginia. 
(b)  All personnel subject to the requirements of this section and hereafter to be employed by the city are required as a condition of their continued employment to have their place of abode in Raleigh County, West Virginia, and to be bona fide residents therein, except as otherwise provided by this section. A "bona fide resident", for the purpose of this section, means a person having a permanent domicile within Raleigh County, West Virginia, and one which has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside of Raleigh County. The use of a post office box or non-personal residence for mailing purposes shall not be considered a bona fide residence. 
(c)  All fire fighters and police officers holding positions in the City of Beckley on or before the 10th day of August, 1999, are not subject to the requirements of this section. All fire fighters and police officers holding positions in the City of Beckley who were appointed or employed after the 11th day of August, 1999, and who are subject to the residency ordinance adopted by City of Beckley Common Council on August 10, 1999, and revised on May 28, 2002, are subject to the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Failure of any employee or appointee in the classified civil service positions of the city to comply with the provisions of this section shall be cause for that employee's removal or discharge from the city service. 
(Ord. of 8-10-99; Ord. of 5-28-02; Ord. of 2-26-08) 
Secs. 2-17-2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL MEETINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of council, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-1, 8-12-5; extra territorial powers, §§ 8-12-5, (32), (42), (43), and 8-12-19; quorum of council, § 8-9-1. 

Sec. 2-200. - Days, time and place of regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the common council shall be on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m., in the Municipal Building; provided that when a second or fourth Tuesday of any month is a holiday, or immediately precedes or follows a holiday, the council may, by resolution or motion adopted at a preceding meeting, set another date for meeting, in lieu of such holiday, or cancel such holiday meeting, if it appears that the interests of the city and its inhabitants will not be adversely affected by such cancellation. 
(Code 1971, § 2-3, (a); Ord. of 4-14-15) 
Charter reference- Authority to fix, § 34. 
Sec. 2-201. - Calling special meetings; notice. 
    Special meetings may be called by the mayor, the mayor's designate, the recorder-treasurer, or two (2) members of the council signing the notice of the call. Notice thereof shall be given to each member of the council, by service on such member of such notice as legal notices are required to be served or by personal communication to such member and such member's agreement to attend or such member's acceptance of the notice being obtained, or the notice may be mailed to members at their post office addresses two (2) days before the meeting. At the special meeting, as to the members not present, either their acknowledgment in writing of the notice, the return of an officer that the notice was served, or an affidavit of the party serving the notice on a member that it was served, shall be filed and noted. If any member is out of the city for all of the two (2) days prior to the meeting, so that the notice could not be served, and an affidavit is filed by some member of the council that such member verily believes that to be a fact, then no notice shall be required as to the member so absent. 
    In the case of special meeting called, notice of the special meeting shall be published in the local newspaper at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time designated to commence the meeting, and such notice shall specify the time, place, and purpose of the special meeting. Such notice shall be conveyed to members of council heretofore specified, as well as the news media. (This provision shall not apply in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action.) 
(Code 1971, § 2-3, (b); Ord. of 2-9-88) 
Sec. 2-202. - Attendance of certain city officials. 
    It shall be the duty of the mayor, each member of the council, the city solicitor, and all department heads to attend each meeting of the council, regular or special. It shall be the duty of department heads to attend each regular meeting of the council, and to attend special meetings when requested by the council to do so. 
(Code 1971, § 2-4) 
Charter reference- Authority to require attendance of members, § 21(81). 
Sec. 2-203. - Duty of presiding officer. 
    The presiding officer shall call the common council to order at the appointed hour, or as soon thereafter as a quorum is present, and shall preserve order and decorum. 
(Code 1971, § 2-5) 
Charter reference- The mayor shall preside, § 17; quorum, § 31. 
State Law reference- Mayor presiding, W. Va. Code, § 8-9-1. 
Sec. 2-204. - Order of proceedings at regular meetings. 
    The order of proceedings of each regular meeting of council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pledge of allegiance to flag; 
(2)  Reading and approving the minutes; 
(3)  Enactment of ordinances; 
(4)  Reports from officers of the city; 
(5)  Hearing from council members present; 
(6)  Old business; 
(7)  New business; 
(8)  Hearing from members of the public present; 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1971, § 2-6) 
Charter reference- Authority to provide, § 34. 
State Law reference- Authority of council to adopt rules, etc., W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5, (45). 
Sec. 2-205. - Recognition by chair. 
    In case more than one (1) member of the council demands attention from the chair at the same time, the chair shall designate which one it recognizes. 
(Code 1971, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-206. - When motions and resolutions to be in writing. 
    Every motion or resolution shall be reduced to writing, if the mayor or any member of the council shall so demand. 
(Code 1971, § 2-13) 
Sec. 2-207. - Objections to motions and resolutions. 
    Any member of the council may object to any motion or resolution offered and have such protest entered of record, together with the reasons therefor when they are stated very briefly and in proper language. 
(Code 1971, § 2-14) 
Sec. 2-208. - Points of order. 
    All points of order shall be decided by the presiding officer, subject to an appeal to the council, which appeal shall be allowed only upon the demand of two (2) members of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-209. - Committee reports. 
    All reports of committees shall be made in writing and properly signed, if demanded by any two (2) members of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-11) 
Sec. 2-210. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
    The rules of parliamentary usage set forth in the current edition of "Robert's Rules of Order", by Col. Henry M. Robert, shall govern the council in all cases not provided for by the rules of council and the city charter. 
(Code 1971, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-211. - Procedure on violation of rule by members of council. 
    If any member transgresses any of the rules of the council in session, such member may be called to order by the presiding officer, in which case, the member called to order shall obey, subject to an appeal to the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-12) 
Sec. 2-212. - Suspension of rules. 
    The council may temporarily suspend any of its rules by a majority vote. 
(Code 1971, § 2-8) 
Secs. 2-213-2-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HANDICAPPED GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-300. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    CFR: The Code of Federal Regulations, the procedure by which Rules and Regulations of the Government of the United States is published. Copies of the CFR references are available to the public in the office of the Recorder-Treasurer of the City of Beckley. 
    Handicapped individual: Any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, and has a record of such an impairment or is regarded as having such impairment, as more particularly defined at 31 CFR Section 51.55(a), as amended. 
    Unlawful discriminatory practice: Any practice by the city, its departments or agencies, in violation of 31 CFR Section 51.55(b), as amended. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-1; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-301. - Purpose; scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to bring the city in conformity with current federal regulations issued by the Department of Treasury, Office of Revenue Sharing, 31 U.S.C. sections 6701-6724 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1983, known as the "Revenue Sharing Act", effective October 17, 1983. 
(b)  The grievance procedure provided for in this article is adopted and is to be utilized by any handicapped citizen of the city who feels aggrieved by noncompliance of the city with 31 CFR Section 51.55 et seq., incorporated herein by reference. This procedure shall not, however, apply to violations of sections 10-400 through 10-499, or section 14-802(a)(19) of this Code. 
(Code 1971, Ch. 2.5; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-302. - Filing complaint; verification and contents. 
    Any handicapped individual claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful discriminatory practice shall make, sign, and file with the recorder-treasurer of the city a verified complaint, which shall state the names of the persons, agents, departments, or other entity of the city who caused the situation complained of, and which complaint shall state the date and place of the alleged discriminatory practice, the particulars thereof, and such other information as may be required by the city. Upon their own initiative, however, the mayor or the city solicitor may in like manner sign and file such a complaint. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-2; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-303. - Investigation of complaint. 
    After the filing of any complaint, or whenever there is reason to believe that an unlawful discriminatory practice has been committed, the recorder-treasurer shall make a prompt investigation in connection therewith. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-3; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-304. - Determination of probable cause; notice; right to appear and present evidence; elimination of discriminatory practice. 
    If it shall be determined by the recorder treasurer, after investigation of a complaint, that no probable cause exists for substantiating the allegations of the complaint, the recorder-treasurer shall, within ten (10) days from such determination, cause to be issued and served upon the complainant written notice of such determination. The complainant or complainant's attorney may, within ten (10) days after such service, file with the recorder-treasurer a written request for a meeting with the recorder-treasurer to present evidence of probable cause to substantiate the allegations of the complaint. If it shall be determined after such investigation or meeting that probable cause exists for substantiating the allegations of the complaint, the recorder-treasurer shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful discriminatory practice complained of by conference, conciliation, and/or directive. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-4; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-305. - Hearing commission; public hearing; answer to complaint; administrative procedure act. 
    If the conference or conciliation between the recorder-treasurer and the complainant cannot resolve the alleged discriminatory practice, then the mayor shall appoint three (3) members of the council to convene as a hearing commission and to conduct a public hearing on the complaint. The case in support of the complaint shall be presented before the hearing commission by the complainant or complainant's attorney, and in every instance the complainant shall be present in person and shall have the burden of proving complainant's case. The recorder-treasurer may file a written verified answer to the complaint and appear at such hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, and submit testimony and evidence. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all the pertinent provisions of section 29A-5-1 et seq. of the Code of West Virginia, shall apply to and govern the hearing. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-5; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-306. - Findings of commission against city; cease and desist order; findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
    If, after such hearing and consideration of all the testimony, evidence, and record in the case, the hearing commission shall find by a preponderance of the evidence that the city or any of its agents, servants, or departments, has engaged in, or is engaging in, any unlawful discriminatory practice as defined, the hearing commission shall issue and cause to be served on the mayor an order to cease and desist from such unlawful discriminatory practice and to take such affirmative action as necessary to eliminate the condition which caused the complaint to be filed. Such order shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law as specified in section 29A-5-3 of the Code of West Virginia. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-6; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-307. - Findings of no unlawful discriminatory practice; issuance of order to complainant; dismissal. 
    If, after such hearing and consideration of all the testimony, evidence and record in the case, the hearing commission shall find that the city or any of its agents, servants, or departments, has not engaged in such unlawful discriminatory practice, the hearing commission shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law as aforesaid and shall issue and cause to be served on the complainant an order dismissing the complaint as to the city. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-7; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-308. - Issuance of order. 
    A copy of the order of the hearing commission shall be delivered in all cases by the commission to the complainant, to the city, and to the city solicitor, and to such other public officers as the commission may deem proper. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-8; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-309. - Right of Appeal. 
    Upon the issuance of its order by the hearing commission, any party who disagrees with the determination of the hearing commission shall have a full appeal and complete right of review and a hearing de novo as a matter of right by the circuit court of this county; provided, that, except as to the hearing de novo, any provision of Chapter 29A of the Code of West Virginia shall supersede this provision in the event of any conflict therewith. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-9; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 2-310. - Recordkeeping. 
    The recorder-treasurer of the city shall keep the records of all complaints and subsequent action for a period of ten (10) years. 
(Code 1971, § 2.5-10; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Secs. 2-311-2-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BECKLEY CONVENTION AND VISITOR'S BUREAU[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Oct. 22, 1985, added provisions designated as Art. V of Ch. 2 to the 1971 Code. These provisions have been included herein as Ch. 2, Art. IV, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-400. - Established. 
    Pursuant to section 21, paragraphs (76) and (83) of the Charter of the City of Beckley, and pursuant to Chapter 7, Article 18, section 1, et seq., of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, the establishment of the Beckley Convention and Tourist's Bureau is hereby authorized. 
    Additionally, pursuant an order of the Raleigh County Commission dated April 1, 1986, the Raleigh County Commission decided to merge with the Beckley Convention and Visitor's Bureau and to appropriate fifty (50) per cent of the proceeds from the Raleigh County Hotel Occupancy Tax passed on October 8, 1985, to the combined Beckley/Raleigh County Convention and Visitor's Bureau, Inc., in order to more effectively and efficiently expend funds to promote tourism and attract conventions in and to the City of Beckley and Raleigh County. 
    Due to this combined effort and unless changed, whenever the term "Beckley Convention and Visitor's Bureau" is used throughout this article, it shall read, "Beckley/Raleigh County Convention and Visitor's Bureau," and whenever the term "City of Beckley" is mentioned throughout this article, it shall read "City of Beckley and Raleigh County." 
(Ord. of 10-22-85, § 2-32; Ord. of 5-14-86) 
Sec. 2-401. - Bureau to be corporation. 
    The Beckley/Raleigh County Convention and Visitor's Bureau shall be a nonstock, nonprofit corporation formed under the corporate laws of the State of West Virginia. 
(Ord. of 10-22-85, § 2-33; Ord. of 5-14-86) 
Sec. 2-402. - Purpose. 
    The purpose or purposes for the Beckley Convention and Tourist's Bureau are: 
(1)  To operate a convention and visitor's bureau for the City of Beckley; to advance, stimulate, and promote exhibits, conferences, conventions, and visitors in the city; to assist generally in the promotion of exhibits, conferences, conventions, and visitors in the city; to do all and everything necessary, suitable, and proper for the accomplishment of any of the foregoing purposes or for the furtherance of any of the foregoing purposes; 
(2)  To cooperate and act in conjunction with other organizations, federal, state, or local in the promotion and advancement of conventions and tourism within the City of Beckley; 
(3)  To receive, accept, hold, and acquire any gifts, bequests, donations, monies, funds, properties of any type or nature whatsoever including personal and real, from any public or private source, in the furtherance of the purposes set forth; and 
(4)  To do any other act or thing lawfully permitted to be done by nonstock, nonprofit corporations formed under the West Virginia corporate law incidental to and connected with the advertisement, promotion and advancement of enticing conventions and visitors to the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 10-22-85, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-403. - Government of bureau. 
    The Beckley/Raleigh County Convention and Visitor's Bureau shall be governed by its articles of incorporation, amended articles of incorporation, and by-laws approved by the common council and the Raleigh County Commission and shall conduct and operate its business on a day-to-day basis through the direction of its board of directors. 
(Ord. of 10-22-85, § 2-35; Ord. of 5-14-86) 
Sec. 2-404. - Legal conduct of bureau. 
    The bureau shall have the right and power to contract and be contracted with, to sue and be sued, and shall be authorized to conduct itself in all regards as a nonprofit corporation as set forth in Chapter 31, Article 1, section 1, et seq., of the West Virginia Code 1931, as amended. 
(Ord. of 10-22-85, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-405. - Finance. 
    The bureau shall be primarily funded by the Beckley hotel tax and Raleigh County occupancy tax, but may accept further appropriations from the general budgets of either the city or county but only as made by common council for the city or the county commission for the county, and may accept gifts and donations or appropriations from other sources, whether public or private. 
(Ord. of 10-22-85, § 2-37; Ord. of 5-14-86) 
Sec. 2-406. - Contracting with others. 
(a)  The bureau may contract with other public or private organizations to advance and promote the purposes set forth in section 2-402, and may further enter into agreements among and between various taxing authorities as provided in Chapter 8, Article 23, section 1, et seq., of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, for such purposes. 
(b)  The bureau may enter into an agreement with the West Virginia Tax Commissioner, for auditing services as provided in Chapter 8, Article 23, section 1, et seq., of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, for auditing services to be performed by the tax commissioner; provided, that the bureau shall pay to the tax commissioner the reasonable cost of such audits. 
Secs. 2-407-2-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Jan. 23, 2001, amended Art. V of this chapter in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, former Art. V, §§ 2-500-2-505, pertained to purchasing procedures, bidding, and credits and derived from ordinances adopted Feb. 11, 1986 and Feb. 12, 1991. 

DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-501. - Short title. 
    This article may be cited as "The City of Beckley Purchasing Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-502. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for an efficient and equitable system of public purchasing by the city; to obtain the maximum purchasing value of public funds in procurement by the city; to provide for a procurement system of quality and integrity; and, to provide for selling surplus goods in a manner which is efficient and equitable and yields the highest sale price. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-503. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Article means this article V, section 2-500 et seq. 
    City means the City of Beckley. 
    City council means the governing board of the City of Beckley. 
    Contract means any city agreement, regardless of form or title, for the procurement or disposition of goods. 
    Gifts or favors means anything of any service or value. 
    Goods means supplies, apparatus, materials, equipment, and other forms of tangible personal property. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the City of Beckley. 
    Purchasing agent means the person designated purchasing agent pursuant to section 2-504 of this article. 
    Recorder-treasurer means the recorder-treasurer of the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-504. - Purchasing agent. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall have the responsibilities and powers of the purchasing agent under this article; provided, however, the recorder-treasurer may delegate some or all of the responsibilities and powers to a subordinate city employee and may designate the employee as purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall serve as such at the pleasure of the recorder-treasurer. Any such delegation shall be in writing, shall be filed in the office of the recorder-treasurer, and shall be available for public inspection in the manner provided by law. If the recorder-treasurer reserves any power or responsibility for him or herself, that reservation shall be expressed in the written delegation statement filed with the recorder-treasurer's office. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-505. - Powers and duties of the purchasing agent. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Procure or oversee the procurement of all goods needed by the city and advertise for bids for such goods. Consistent with this article and subject to the approval of the recorder-treasurer, the purchasing agent may adopt operating procedures relating to the purchase of goods for the city and may publish a handbook containing those procedures. 
(2)  Provide for, and oversee, the development of specifications for goods purchased by the city, administer purchase contracts to which the city is a party, and provide for inspecting and accepting goods purchased by the city. 
(3)  Process all claims for loss, damage, breakage, or shortage, or claims for refund and adjustment concerning the purchase of goods for the city. 
(4)  Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories of goods belonging to the city and provide for the transfer between city departments of surplus goods. 
(5)  Require bonds, insurance, and other forms of protection for the city in the process of procuring goods for the city. 
(6)  Terminate solicitations for bids when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest to do so. 
(7)  Reject any and all bids when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest to do so. 
(8)  Following consultation with the city attorney, terminate contracts or pursue other remedies when the party or parties with whom the city is contracting has, or have, breached the contract. 
(9)  Sell, lease, or dispose of goods and personal property of the city as prescribed in W. Va. Code, § 8-12-18. 
(10)  Perform such other duties as the recorder-treasurer shall direct. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-506. - Pre-audit certification. 
    The purchasing agent shall not approve any contract for the purchase of goods until the recorder-treasurer certifies, after pre-audit, that there is to the credit of the using department or agency, a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order. Subject to the approval of the recorder-treasurer, the purchasing agent may issue operating rules to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-507. - Gifts and favors prohibited. 
    The purchasing agent and every officer and employee of the city whose duties involve the purchase or sale of goods, or the preparation of specifications for the purchase of goods for the city, are expressly prohibited from engaging in any activity or accepting any gift or favor that is prohibited by the West Virginia Governmental Ethics Act. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-508. - Evasion prohibited. 
    No purchase or sale shall be divided for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENT 

Sec. 2-509. - Small purchases. 
    The purchasing agent shall establish procedures for purchases of goods involving the estimated expenditure of less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) of public money. These procedures shall require that competition be sought and written records adequate to document the competition be maintained in order to properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the small purchases made. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01; Ord. of 11-22-16) 
Sec. 2-510. - Purchases based on formal bids. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no contract for the purchase of goods involving the estimated expenditure of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or more of public money shall be awarded unless the provisions of this section are complied with. 
(1)  Proposals shall be invited by advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The advertisement shall state the time and place where specifications may be obtained and the time and place for opening of the bids. At least seven (7) full days must pass between the day the advertisement appears and the day of the bid opening. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all of the bids. 
(2)  The purchasing agent may require that bid deposits be submitted with each bid. If bid deposits are required, they shall be in an amount equal to five (5) percent of the amount of the bid and may be submitted in the form of (a) cash, (b) a cashier's check, (c) a certified check by a bank or trust company insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation, (d) a bid bond or other form of bid security deemed sufficient by the city attorney. The bid bond requirement, including the form in which bonds or other forms of bid security may be submitted, shall be included in the specifications. 
(3)  Bids shall be sealed. The purchasing agent shall establish rules regarding the acceptance of bids by facsimile, and such rules shall comply with the state code and be on file with the recorder-treasurer's office. 
(4)  All bids shall be opened in public and the purchasing agent shall make a record of the bids received. The record and the bids received shall be subject to public inspection after the bid opening in the manner prescribed by law. 
(5)  The purchasing agent may require the successful bidder to furnish a performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all the terms of the contract. The performance bond shall be in the form approved by the city attorney, and the form of the bond shall be made available with the description of the goods to which reference is made in subsection (1) of this section. The city council may reject the bond of any bidder if they find it to be unacceptable for any reason. 
(6)  Upon receipt of the bids, the two (2) council members at-large shall review and recommend award of the contract as they may determine. All contracts to which this section applies shall be subject to approval by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01; Ord. of 11-22-16) 
Sec. 2-511. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article do not apply to the purchase of goods when: 
(1)  A good is available from only one (1) source of supply; 
(2)  A special emergency exists involving the health and safety of the people or their property. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall prepare and submit to the city council a written report concerning any purchase to be made pursuant to this section, and all such purchases shall be subject to approval or ratification by the city council. The city council shall keep a record of all purchases made pursuant to this section, and these records shall be subject to public inspection in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-512. - Award credit for local merchants. 
    Purchases shall be made from, and contracts shall be awarded to, the lowest responsible bidder meeting bid specifications; provided, that, in determining the lowest responsible bidder, a competitive advantage of five (5) percent shall be afforded to the bidders with mercantile establishments situated within the city and who pay a city business and occupation tax and are current in its accounts to the city as provided in Article II, Chapter 13, of the City Code, with such five (5) percent competitive advantage to be based upon the gross amount of the bid received from the local merchant. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-513. - Waiver based on other government purchases. 
    When the recorder-treasurer determines that it is in the best interest of the city, the requirements of this article may be waived for the purchase of goods from any person or entity that has, within the previous twelve (12) months, after having completed a public, formal bid process substantially similar to that prescribed in section 2-510 of this article, contracted to furnish the goods to: 
(1)  The United States of America or any federal agency; or 
(2)  This state or any agency or political subdivision of this state. 
    Provided the person or entity is willing to furnish the goods at the same or more favorable prices, terms, and conditions as those described under the contract with the other unit or agency. Any purchase made under this section shall be approved or ratified by the city council at a meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-514. - Procurement; professional services. 
    Except as may be required by sections 2-515 and 2-516, for the purpose of procuring the services of accountants, clergy, physicians, lawyers, dentists, industrial hygienists, appraisers, or other professionals, professional service contracts shall be the responsibility of the mayor to employ such individuals or firms within the limit of funds available for lawful city purposes. Any department, board, or commission of the city may contract for such services without competitive procedures and without requiring a performance surety only with the prior written approval of the mayor. The city purchasing agent may promulgate procedures for the procurement of professional services. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01; Ord. of 8-12-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 8-10-1a. 
Sec. 2-515. - Contracts for architectural and engineering services; selection process where total project costs are estimated to cost two hundred fifty thousand dollars or more. 
    In the procurement of architectural and engineering services for projects estimated to cost two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more, the recorder-treasurer shall encourage such firms engaged in the lawful practice of the profession to submit an expression of interest, which shall include a statement of qualifications and performance data and may include anticipated concepts and proposed methods of approach to the project. All such jobs shall be announced by public notice published as a Class II legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of Article 3 (§ 59-3-1 et seq.), Chapter 59 of the West Virginia Code. A committee of at least three (3) representatives of the city, including both councilmen-at-large, shall evaluate the statements of qualifications and performance data and other material submitted by interested firms and select a minimum of three (3) firms which, in their opinion, are best qualified to perform the desired service. Interviews with each firm selected shall be conducted, and the committee shall conduct discussions regarding anticipated concepts and proposed methods of approach to the assignment. The committee shall then rank, in order of preference, not less than three (3) professional firms deemed to be the most highly qualified to provide the services required. The mayor shall commence scope of service and price negotiations with the highest qualified professional firm or the architectural or engineering services or both, which agreement shall be approved by the common council before the city may enter into a binding contract. Should the mayor be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified at a fee determined to be fair and reasonable, price negotiations with the firm of the second choice shall commence. Failing accord with the second most qualified professional firm, the mayor shall undertake price negotiations with the third most qualified professional firm. Should the mayor be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with any of the selected firms, then the committee shall select additional professional firms in order of their competence and qualifications, and the mayor shall continue negotiations in accordance with this section until and agreement is reached. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-516. - Contracts for architectural and engineering services; selection process where total project costs are estimated to cost less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars. 
    In the procurement of architectural and engineering services for projects estimated to cost less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), competition shall be sought by the city. The mayor shall conduct discussions with three (3) or more professional firms solicited on the basis of known or submitted qualifications for the assignment prior to the awarding of any contract: provided, that if a judgment is made that special circumstances exists and that seeking competition is not practical, the mayor may, with the prior approval of the council, select a firm on the basis of previous satisfactory performance and knowledge of the city's facilities and needs. After selection, the city and firm shall develop the scope of services required and negotiate an agreement which shall be approved by the common council before the city may enter into a binding contract. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-517. - Tie bids. 
    In the event of a tie, ties shall be resolved by the flip of a coin performed during a meeting of the common council of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-518. - Non-discrimination policy. 
    In every case, all contracts shall be made and purchases shall be awarded without regard to race, religion, political affiliation, sex, handicap, or national origin. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-519. - Reservations. 
    Whether or not expressly set forth in the notice of solicitation for bidding, the city shall be privileged and hereby reserves the right to reject any and all bids and further reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to determine whether a bidder is responsible based upon past performance and the best information available at the time of the awarding of the contract or purchase order. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
DIVISION 3. - OTHER 

Sec. 2-520. - Intergovernmental agreements, contracts with other governmental agencies. 
    If the city enters into an intergovernmental agreement or contract with another governmental agency as permitted by state law, the provisions of this article shall apply unless the agreement or contract contains express provisions for the procurement of goods, in which case, if the intergovernmental agreement or contract was adopted by ordinance as required by W. Va. Code, § 8-11-3(10), the procurement terms of the agreement or contract shall apply. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-521. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article shall, for any reason, be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article, but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this article shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-522. - Receipt of federal or state funds. 
    If any requirement of the provisions set forth in this article jeopardizes the receipt of federal or state funds, then such requirement or provision shall be void and of no force or effect for that specific project. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Sec. 2-523. - Ordinances repealed. 
    All other ordinances of the city that are in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. of 1-23-01) 
Secs. 2-524-2-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BECKLEY BUILDING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, construction and related activities, Ch. 4; fire protection, Ch. 7; abandoned airtight containers, dangerous conditions on private property, § 8-4; nuisances, garbage, trash, junk and weeds, § 8-200 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, § 9-200 et seq.; building security requirements, §§ 10-200, 10-204, 10-205; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 12; zoning, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 2-600. - Creation and powers. 
    There is hereby formed, created, and established a municipal building commission to be known as the Beckley Building Commission. In accordance with Chapter 8, Article 33, Section 1 et seq. of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, the commission shall be a public corporation and have perpetual existence; shall have all powers granted by Chapter 8, Article 33, Section 4 of the West Virginia Code; and any other powers granted to it by applicable law. 
(Ord. of 1-24-89) 
Sec. 2-601. - Board of directors. 
    The board of the commission shall consist of three (3) members: One shall be appointed as a member of the board of the Beckley Building Commission to serve a term of one (1) year from the passage date hereof; one shall be appointed as a member of the board of the Beckley Building Commission to serve a term of two (2) years from the passage date hereof; and one shall be appointed as a member of the board of the Beckley Building Commission to serve a term of three (3) years from the passage date hereof. 
    At the conclusion of the term of the appointment of each member of the commission, the mayor shall appoint a successor with the approval of common council for a term of five (5) years. Not more than two (2) of the three (3) members of the board shall be from the same political party and no member may hold any office (other than the office of notary public) or employment under the United States of America, the State of West Virginia, any county or political subdivision thereof, or any political party. All members shall be residents of the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 1-24-89) 
Sec. 2-602. - Property. 
    The commission shall not acquire, encumber, or dispose of any real property without the prior written consent of the common council of the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 1-24-89) 
Sec. 2-603. - Indebtedness. 
    No indebtedness of any nature of the commission shall constitute an indebtedness of the City of Beckley, the County of Raleigh, or any agency thereof except the commission. No indebtedness or obligations incurred by the commission shall give any right against any member of the common council of the City of Beckley or any member of the commission. 
(Ord. of 1-24-89) 
Sec. 2-604. - Powers and authority. 
    In addition to the powers allowed by statute, the commission shall make and adopt all necessary, appropriate, and lawful bylaws and rules and regulations pertaining to its affairs; elect such officers and appoint such committees as may be necessary for the conduct of its affairs; and do all things reasonable and necessary to carry out its functions. 
(Ord. of 1-24-89) 
Sec. 2-605. - Compensation. 
    No member of the board [commission] shall receive any compensation for his services as such, but each member shall be reimbursed actual reasonable and necessary expense incurred in the discharge of his duties as a member of the board [commission]. 
(Ord. of 1-24-89) 
Sec. 2-606. - Insurance. 
    All members of the commission shall be afforded the insurance coverage as specified in section 2-14 of the Beckley City Code for any act or acts of the commissioner while within the purview of his duties as a commissioner. 
(Ord. of 1-24-89) 
Secs. 2-607-2-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-701. - Created; function. 
    There is created a commission to be known as the City of Beckley Beautification Commission which shall perform services prescribed by this chapter to enhance the aesthetic beauty of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91) 
Sec. 2-702. - Purpose. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commission to advise and recommend to the mayor and common council such programs or projects as would, in the opinion of the commission, improve the beauty of the city and promote the general welfare of its citizens. 
(b)  The mayor shall request the advice or cooperation of the commission for any project or program connected with the beautification, cleanliness, or general welfare of the city. 
(c)  The commission shall submit an annual report on or before the first meeting in March of the common council of the city to the mayor and common council, generally outlining a suggested program and/or progress during the previous year. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91) 
Sec. 2-703. - Members. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of no more than eleven (11) members who shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the common council. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed for terms as follows: Three (3) members for a term of one year, four (4) members for a term of two (2) years, four (4) members for a term of three (3) years. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years and until their successors are duly appointed. Members so appointed according to this subsection (b) shall have their term begin on the first day of May next succeeding their appointment. 
(c)  Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(d)  Members of the commission shall be reimbursed by the city for their actual expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties, and the common council may appropriate such funds as it deems appropriate to finance the activities of the commission. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91) 
Sec. 2-704. - Officers. 
(a)  The commission shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice chairman, secretary, and treasurer and such other officers as it determines to be necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(b)  The commission shall hold such meetings and adopt such rules as shall be necessary for the transaction of its business. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91) 
Secs. 2-705-2-720. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted June 12, 1990, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as Art. VIII, §§ 2-721-2-727. 
Cross reference- Buildings; construction and related activities, Ch. 4; zoning, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 2-721. - [Composition; terms of members.] 
    The commission shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor of the City of Beckley to a term commencing on the first day of July. The initial appointments shall be for terms of one (1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years, and five (5) years, and shall thereafter be for a term of five (5) years. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, Art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 2-722. - [Vacancies.] 
    If a vacancy shall occur in the commission, the vacancy shall be filled by the mayor for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, Art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 2-723. - [Compensation.] 
    No member of the commission shall receive any compensation for their service on the commission. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, Art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 2-724. - [Meetings.] 
    The commission shall fix a time and place for regular meetings, which shall be held no less than once a month. Special meetings may be called, upon written request to the secretary, by the chairperson or by at least three (3) members. 
    However, written notice shall not be required if the date, time, and place of a special meeting has been fixed at a regular meeting. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, Art. I, § 4) 
Sec. 2-725. - [Election of chairperson and secretary.] 
    The commission shall, at the July meeting, elect from its members a chairperson and a secretary. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, Art. I, § 5) 
Sec. 2-726. - [Minutes.] 
    The secretary shall cause to be filed a copy of the minutes of all meetings, with the Recorder-Treasurer of the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, Art. I, § 6) 
Sec. 2-727. - [Powers and authority.] 
(a)  The commission shall make a survey of, and designate, historic landmarks, buildings, structures, and sites which constitute the principal historical and architectural sites which are of local, regional, statewide, or national significance. No building, structure, or site shall be deemed to be a historic one unless it has been prominently identified with, or best represents, some major aspect of, or ideals related to, the history of the locality, region, state, or nation. In the case of buildings or structures which are to be so designated, they shall embody the principal or unique features of an architectural type or demonstrate the style of a period of our history or method of construction, or serve as an illustration of the work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose genius influenced the period in which he worked or has significance in current times. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare a register of buildings, structures, and sites which meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, publish lists of such properties and, with the consent of the property owner(s), inspect such properties from time to time and publish a register thereof from time to time setting forth appropriate information concerning the registered buildings, structures, and sites. 
(c)  The commission shall, with the consent of the property owners, certify and mark with appropriately designed markers, buildings, structures, and sites which it has registered. 
(d)  The commission shall establish standards for the care and management of certified landmarks and withdraw such certification for failure to maintain the standards so prescribed. 
(e)  The commission may acquire by purchase, gift, or lease and administer registered landmarks and easements and interests therein, both real and personal, except before the commission may acquire real property, they must obtain the prior approval of common council. 
(f)  The commission may lease or sell property so acquired under terms and conditions designed to insure the proper preservation of the landmark in question, except before the commission may lease or sell real property, they must obtain the prior approval of common council. 
(g)  The commission shall establish historic districts for registered landmarks, utilizing the same guidelines set forth in subsection (a) above, and designate the area thereof by appropriate markers. 
(h)  The commission may identify historical districts for registered landmarks and aid and encourage the city to adopt rules and regulations for the preservation of historical or architectural values. 
(i)  The commission may prepare and place historical markers on or along the highway or street closest to the location which is intended to be identified by such markers. 
(j)  The commission may seek the advice and assistance of individuals, groups, or departments and agencies or government who or which are conducting historical preservation programs and coordinate the same insofar as possible. 
(k)  The commission may seek and accept gifts, bequests, endowments, and funds from any and all sources for the accomplishment of the functions of the commission. 
(l)  The commission shall adopt rules and regulations concerning the operation of the commission, the functions and responsibilities of its officers, employees, assistants, and other personnel and such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. 
(m)  The commission may adopt such other rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article, but no such rules and regulations shall be inconsistent with the provisions of any plan of the Planning Commission of the City of Beckley. 
(n)  The commission may, with the consent of the property owner, certify property as being a registered landmark. It may seek and obtain from such property owner an agreement as to such restrictions upon the use of the property as the commission finds are reasonable and are calculated to perpetuate and preserve the features which led it to designate such property as an historical landmark. All such agreements between the commission and the property owner shall be in writing, and when duly signed and acknowledged, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Raleigh County Commission; and when so recorded, there shall be notification to the common council of the restrictions herein set forth. 
(o)  When the commission establishes an historic district, it shall notify the assessor of the fact of such establishment and the boundaries of the district, together with the restrictions which are applicable to the properties located in such district which have been mutually agreed upon by such commission and the owners of property within such district. The agreement shall be recorded in the same manner as the recordation of agreements between the commission and owners of designated landmarks. The assessor shall take such factors into consideration in assessing the properties therein. 
(p)  The commission shall cooperate and coordinate its activities with the West Virginia Historical Society and the West Virginia Department of Culture and History, with the view of developing a unified program for the identification, study, preservation, and protection of all historic buildings, structures, and sites in the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, Art. II, §§ 1-16) 
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate, § 21(31). 
Cross reference- Applicability of traffic regulations to riders of animals and drivers of animal-drawn vehicles, § 14-7; wrongfully seeking to release animal in custody of city officer, § 10-2. 
State Law reference- Livestock generally, W. Va. Code, § 19-18-1 et seq.; male breeding animals, W. Va. Code, §§ 19-10-1-19-10-13; authority of city to regulate keeping of animals and fowl, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5, (26). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Animal warden: The person designated by the council as enforcement officer under this chapter. 
    At large: Any animal or fowl shall be deemed to be "at large" when it is off the property of its owner and not under control of a competent person. 
    Dog pound: The county animal shelter; provided, that if the city shall establish a dog pound, then "dog pound" shall mean the city dog pound. 
    Exposed to rabies: An animal has been "exposed to rabies" if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
    Humane society: The county humane society. 
    Owner: Any person owning, keeping or harboring an animal or fowl. 
    Restraint: A dog is under "restraint" if it is controlled by a leash, at "heel" beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
    Spayed female: Any female animal which has been operated upon to prevent conception. 
(Code 1971, § 3-1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Bird sanctuary-Area embraced. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1971, § 3-44) 
Sec. 3-3. - Same-Hunting, molestation, etc., of birds and nests prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. 
(Code 1971, § 3-45) 
Sec. 3-4. - Same-Authorizing destruction of starlings, pigeons, etc. 
    If starlings or pigeons or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a menace to health or property in the opinion of the mayor or the council, the mayor or council may cause or authorize the destruction of such birds or fowl. 
(Code 1971, § 3-46) 
Sec. 3-5. - Cruelty. 
    No person shall overdrive, overload, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance or unnecessarily or cruelly beat, or needlessly mutilate or kill any animal or fowl; nor shall any person impound or confine any animal in any place and fail to supply it during such confinement with a sufficient quantity of good, wholesome food and water, or carry in or upon any vehicle or otherwise, any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; nor shall any person keep cows or other animals in any enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, or feed cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk, or abandon to die any maimed, sick, infirm or diseased animal. 
(Code 1971, § 3-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 61-8-19; authority to arrest persons abusing animals, § 8-12-5(27). 
Sec. 3-6. - Poisoning animals; placing poison within reach of animals or children. 
    No person shall maliciously or wilfully and without the consent of the owner administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such capacity, to any animal that is the property of another. 
(Code 1971, § 3-6) 
State Law reference- Similar law, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-27. 
Sec. 3-7. - Inspection of pet shops. 
    All pet shops and all other establishments operated in the city where live animals are kept for commercial purposes, shall be subject to inspection by the animal warden, police officer or any other designated officer or employee of the city or county; all such inspectors shall have the right of entry at any time upon demand to the keeper or proprietor thereof, and the refusal to allow such inspection shall be a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 3-8. - Keeping of swine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any swine within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 3-3) 
Sec. 3-9. - Keeping wild animals, venomous reptiles and other such exotic animals. 
(a)  No wild animal, venomous reptile or other such exotic animal may be kept within the city except under such conditions as shall be fixed by the council and the keeper of which shall have a permit from the West Virginia Department of Natural Resources; provided, that wild animals, venomous reptiles and other such exotic animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions, in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by the council. 
(b)  A record of all sales of such animals shall be kept by the seller thereof, showing the name and address of the purchaser, so that if such animal is lost, its owner may be located. Such record shall be available to the animal warden. 
(Code 1971, § 3-8) 
Cross reference- Keeping vicious dogs, § 3-209. 
Sec. 3-10. - Livestock and fowl at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner of or having charge of horses, mules, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens or other fowl or animals, except dogs and domestic cats, to suffer or allow them to run at large within the city, except on the premises of the owner. 
(Code 1971, § 3-2) 
Charter reference- Provisions authorizing council to prohibit animals and fowl running at large, § 21, (31). 
Sec. 3-11. - Female domestic cats in heat to be confined. 
    Every female domestic cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner that such female cat cannot come in contact with another animal, except for controlled breeding purposes. 
(Code 1971, § 3-7) 
Sec. 3-12. - Keeping of howling, yelping, squalling, crying, crowing, and barking animals; penalties. 
(a)  No person shall keep or harbor any dog, cat, fowl, or other animal, within the municipality which, by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, crying, squalling, crowing, barking or otherwise, creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such character, intensity, and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the municipality. Such animals are hereby declared a public nuisance. Any person who shall allow any animal habitually to remain, be lodged, or fed within any dwelling, building, yard, pen, coop, stable, or enclosure which he occupies or owns, shall be considered as harboring such animal in violation of this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any person shall complain to the police department that a dog, cat, fowl, or other animal which habitually howls, yelps, cries, squalls, crows, barks or otherwise creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises and is being kept in violation of subsection (a) above, the police department shall notify the owner of said animal that a complaint has been received and that the person should take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the howling, yelping, crying, squalling, crowing, or barking. 
(c)  If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping an animal as set forth in subsection (b) above is ineffective, then a verified complaint of at least two (2) citizens, not from the same family or household, or by a city police officer, may be presented to the municipal judge, alleging that a dog, cat, fowl, or other animal who habitually howls, yelps, cries, squalls, crows, barks, or otherwise creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises is being kept by any person within the city. The police department shall inform the owner of such animal or the owner of the property at which the animal is kept or harbored that said petition has been filed and shall cite the owner of the animal or owner of the property at which the animal is kept or harbored for the violation alleged in said petition. 
(d)  A person who violates any provision of this section by failure to comply with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this article shall preclude the city from enforcing city ordinances for abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law including, but not limited to, seeking injunctive and other equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 11-25-03) 
Secs. 3-13-3-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 3-200. - License-Required; procedure to obtain; receipt for fee payment. 
    No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog within the city unless such dog is licensed as provided in this article. Written application for such license shall be made to the recorder-treasurer, or such official's designee, and shall state the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the dog. The license fee shall be paid at the time of making application and a numbered receipt therefor shall be given to the applicant; the tag hereinafter provided for shall be issued to the owner when proof of vaccination for rabies has been furnished as provided in section 3-201. 
(Code 1971, § 3-23) 
State Law reference- Regulation of dogs generally, W. Va. Code, § 19-20-1 et seq.; registration of dog kennels, § 19-20-3. 
Sec. 3-201. - Same-Proof of vaccination; applying part of license fee to cost of vaccination. 
    No dog shall be licensed until proof of vaccination for rabies within the preceding twelve (12) months shall have been furnished, and out of the license fee paid to the city for any dog which shall be vaccinated for rabies under the supervision of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 3-24) 
Sec. 3-202. - Same-Fee; period; delinquency. 
(a)  The yearly license fee shall be one dollar ($1.00) for males and two dollars ($2.00) for females, for each dog over the age of six (6) months. 
(b)  All dog licenses shall be issued for one (1) year, beginning with the first day of July. Applications for licenses may be made within sixty (60) days prior to and for thirty (30) days after the start of the licensing year without penalty, but when application is made after thirty (30) days of the licensing year have elapsed, the applicant shall be assessed a penalty of fifty (50) per cent of the license fee, which amount shall be added and collected with the regular license fee; provided, that if the dog did not become subject to licensing until after the start of the licensing year, then no penalty shall be assessed. 
(Code 1971, §§ 3-25, 3-26) 
State Law reference- Annual tax authorized, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-13-10, 19-20-2. 
Sec. 3-203. - Same-Tags. 
(a)  Upon complying with the provisions of sections 3-200 and 3-201 and upon payment of the fee prescribed in section 3-202, there shall be issued to the dog owner a numbered metallic tag, stamped with the number and the year for which issued. The shape or design of such tag shall be changed from year to year. 
(b)  Every dog owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to the dog's choke chain, collar or harness, which must be worn by the dog at all times. 
(c)  In the event that a metallic license tag issued for a dog shall be lost, the owner may obtain a duplicate tag upon the payment of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Code 1971, §§ 3-27, 3-28) 
Sec. 3-204. - Same-Transfer upon transfer of ownership. 
    If there is a change in ownership of a dug during the license year, the new owner may have the current license transferred to such new owner's name upon the payment of a transfer fee of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Code 1971, § 3-29) 
Sec. 3-205. - Same-Exemption of nonresidents of city. 
    The licensing requirements of this article shall not apply to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for not longer than thirty (30) days; provided, that all such dogs shall at all times while in the city be kept within a building, enclosure or vehicle, or be under restraint by the owner. 
(Code 1971, § 3-30) 
Sec. 3-206. - Improper use of tax receipts and dog tags. 
    No person shall use for any dog a tax receipt or license tag issued for another dog. 
(Code 1971, § 3-31) 
Sec. 3-207. - Restraint-Required generally. 
(a)  The owner shall keep such person's dog under restraint at all times and shall not permit such dog to be at large off the premises or property of the owner, unless under the control of a competent person. 
(b)  Any dog not under restraint as required by subsection (a) of this section may be destroyed by the city if circumstances are such that it is not feasible to impound such dog under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 3-33) 
Sec. 3-208. - Same-Female dogs in heat to be confined. 
    Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner that such dog cannot come in contact with another animal, except for controlled breeding purposes. 
(Code 1971, § 3-32) 
Sec. 3-209. - Fierce, vicious and dangerous dogs to be confined. 
    The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every fierce, dangerous or vicious dog, and not take such dog out of such building or secure enclosure unless such dog is securely muzzled. 
(Code 1971, § 3-34) 
Sec. 3-210. - Right-of-entry of officers. 
    For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and to enforce its provisions, any agent of the city or any police officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which a dog is kept or harbored and to demand the exhibition by the owner of such dog of the license for such dog. 
(Code 1971, § 3-35) 
Secs. 3-211, 3-212. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Nov. 25, 2003, deleted former §§ 3-211 and 3-212 of the Code, which pertained to keeping of barking dogs and crying cats and petitions complaining of barking dogs and crying cats, respectively, and derived from ordinances adopted April 22, 1986, and April 9, 1991. 
Sec. 3-213. - [Removal of dog waste from private and public property.] 
    In the event a dog relieves itself on private property (property not owned or under the control of the dog owner or person responsible for the dog [handler]), the owner or handler is responsible to immediately remove the dog feces (waste) from the private property. If the dog owner or handler fails to immediately remove the waste from the private property, the private property owner or legal occupant may file a sworn written statement with the city's municipal court and a citation may be issued by the city police to the dog owner or handler for failure to immediately remove the waste, and the citation shall order the dog owner or handler to appear in municipal court to answer the allegation contained in the citation. 
    If the offense occurs on public property (i.e. streets, sidewalks, city park or city green space) and is witnessed by an individual who files a sworn statement with the municipal court, the city police may issue a citation against the dog owner and/or handler. 
    If the dog owner and/or handler is found guilty of violating this section, the dog owner and/or handler may be fined seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the first offense and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each subsequent offense. 
    If the offense, whether occurring on private or public property, is witnessed by a city police officer or by a city code enforcement officer, the police officer or code enforcement officer may issue a citation for the offense. 
(Ord. of 8-22-17) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted August 22, 2017, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 3-213. 
Secs. 3-214-3-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Vaccination of dogs, § 3-201. 
State Law reference- Vaccination of dogs against rabies, W. Va. Code, § 19-20A-1 et seq.; diseases among domestic animals, §§ 19-9-1 to 19-9-40. 

Sec. 3-300. - Quarantine-When required; place; animal bites to be reported. 
    Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal warden and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the warden for a period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the warden. In the discretion of the animal warden, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the dog pound, or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of such owner's choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the dog pound. 
(Code 1971, § 3-10) 
Sec. 3-301. - Same-Duty of owners to surrender animals; expenses; reclamation. 
    The owner, upon demand made by the animal warden, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, which expense shall be borne by the owner. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of all fees for impoundment and keeping and for all delinquent license fees and upon compliance with applicable provisions of this Code and state law relating to regulation and licenses and the payment of any tax on dogs. 
(Code 1971, § 3-11) 
Sec. 3-302. - Same-Proclamation, city-wide; restrictions; extension of period. 
(a)  When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed rabid, the animal warden may recommend to the mayor a city-wide quarantine for a period of thirty (30) days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine by the mayor no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine no animal may be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of the animal warden. 
(b)  In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six (6) months. 
(Code 1971, § 3-12) 
Sec. 3-303. - Same-Disposition of animals bitten by rabid animals. 
    During any period of rabies quarantine as provided in this article, every animal bitten by an animal found to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed, or, at the owner's option and expense, shall be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, or held under thirty (30) days' quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined, unless the animal had theretofore been vaccinated for rabies within a period of one (1) year. 
(Code 1971, § 3-13) 
Sec. 3-304. - Failure of owner to surrender animal to proper authority. 
    No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the animal warden. 
(Code 1971, § 3-14) 
Sec. 3-305. - Reports-Duty to report animal bites by physicians, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the animal warden the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(Code 1971, § 3-15) 
Sec. 3-306. - Same-By veterinarians of rabies suspect animals. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal warden such veterinarian's diagnosis of any animal observed by such veterinarian as a rabies suspect. 
(Code 1971, § 3-16) 
Sec. 3-307. - Record of bites and investigations. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal warden to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to such warden and such warden's investigation thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 3-17) 
Sec. 3-308. - Killing or removing of certain animals. 
    No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as provided in this article, nor remove such animal from the city without written permission from the animal warden. 
(Code 1971, § 3-18) 
Sec. 3-309. - Disposition of rabid animals. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the animal warden shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(Code 1971, § 3-19) 
Sec. 3-310. - Disposition of carcasses of animals exposed to rabies. 
    The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal warden. 
(Code 1971, § 3-20) 
Sec. 3-311. - Exemptions from provisions of article. 
    Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this article, except where such duties are expressly stated. 
(Code 1971, § 3-21) 
Secs. 3-312-3-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Provision authorizing pound and pound master, § 21(31). 
Cross reference- As to wrongfully seeking to release animal in custody of city officer, § 10-2. 
State Law reference- Impoundment of dogs, W. Va. Code, §§ 19-20-7, 19-20-8; authority of county court and city to contract for joint operation and maintenance of dog pound, § 19-20-8a. 

Sec. 3-400. - Animals subject to impoundment; impoundment mandatory except under certain circumstances. 
    Unlicensed dogs, dogs found running at large, unsecured, fierce, dangerous or vicious dogs, or other animals, unspayed stray female dogs, unconfined female dogs and domestic cats in heat, and animals other than dogs and cats when found running at large shall be taken up by the animal warden or police officers of the city and impounded, and the owner and keeper may be charged with the violation; provided, that when dogs are found running at large and their ownership is known to the police officers or the animal warden, such dogs need not be impounded, but such officer or warden may, at such officer's or warden's discretion, cite the owners of such dogs for violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 3-37) 
Sec. 3-401. - Notice to owners. 
    Immediately upon impounding dogs or other animals, the police officers or animal warden shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dogs or other animals so impounded, and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain the custody of such animals. 
(Code 1971, § 3-38) 
Sec. 3-402. - Redemption procedure. 
(a)  The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded animal, except as hereinafter provided in this section, upon compliance with the license provisions of this chapter, if applicable and the payment of all impoundment fees. 
(b)  No female dog or domestic cat in heat, no fierce, dangerous or vicious dog, no wild animal which is kept within the city contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and no animal impounded for being a nuisance may be redeemed unless such redemption is authorized by a court having jurisdiction or by the council; provided, that when, in the judgment of the animal warden or the county humane society an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed. 
(Code 1971, § 3-40) 
Sec. 3-403. - Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
(a)  Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article and not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) days, may be humanely destroyed or placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the council; provided, that if the animal is one to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody are determined by state law, such law shall be complied with; and provided further, that an unspayed female dog which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray shall not be allowed to be adopted from the dog pound unless the prospective owner shall agree to have such female spayed, or the county humane society agrees to do so. 
(b)  The city may transfer title of all animals held by it to the county humane society after the legal detention period has expired and the animal has not been claimed by its owner. In the event of such transfer of title, the humane society shall pay for each such animal's food until it shall be removed from the custody of the city. Impounded animals may be otherwise disposed of in accordance with the law, after the legal detention period has expired and the animals have not been claimed by their owners. 
(Code 1971, § 3-42) 
Sec. 3-404. - Animal warden to keep records. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal warden to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into such warden's custody. 
(Code 1971, § 3-43) 
Secs. 3-405-3-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 3-500. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Beckley. It is intended to be applicable to "dangerous" dogs, as defined herein by insuring responsible handling by their owners through registration, confinement, and liability insurance. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-501. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer or animal warden means any person employed, appointed, or designated by council who is authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control or cruelty under the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. 
    At large means that a dog is not under the direct control of the owner. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that, because of its aggressive nature, training, or characteristic behavior, presents a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings or domestic animals, or would constitute a danger to human life, physical well-being, or property or other domestic animals if not kept under the direct control of the owner. This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. The term "dangerous dog" includes any dog that, according to the records of either any city, any county, any state, or any law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, endangered, or inflicted injury on a human being on public or private property, or when unprovoked, has chased or approached a person upon the street, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one (1) or more persons and dutifully investigated by any of the above referenced authorities; or 
(2)  Has severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting; or 
(4)  Has previously been declared a dangerous dog by another municipality, any county, or any state. 
    Direct control means immediate, continuous physical control of a dog such as by means of a leash, cord, secure fence, or chain of such strength to restrain the dog and controlled by a person capable of restraining the dog, or safe and secure restraint within a vehicle. If the controlling person is, at all times, fully and clearly within unobstructed sight and hearing of the dog, voice control shall be considered direct control when the dog is actually participating in training or in an official showing, obedience, or field event. Direct control shall not be required of dogs actually participating in a legal sport in an authorized area or to government police dogs. 
    Impoundment means the taking or picking up and confining of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer, animal warden, or any other public officer, under the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 3 of the City Code or any applicable West Virginia Code provision. 
    Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft materials or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of any animal to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
    Owner means any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity owning, harboring, or keeping any animal, or in the case of a person under the age of eighteen (18), that person's parent or legal guardian. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) or more consecutive days. This definition shall not apply to any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel. 
    Sanitary condition means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
    Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, led under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-502. - Procedure for declaring a dog dangerous. 
(a)  An animal control officer, animal warden, or any adult person may request, under oath, that a dog be classified as dangerous as defined in section 3-501 by submitting a sworn, written complaint on a form approved by the police department to the police department. Upon receipt of such complaint, the police department or other designee shall notify the owner of the dog that a complaint has been filed, and that an investigation into the allegations as set forth in the complaint will be conducted. 
(b)  Criteria to be considered during the above investigation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Provocation; 
(2)  Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal; 
(3)  Previous aggressive behavior of the dog; 
(4)  Site and circumstances of the incident; and 
(5)  Statements from interested parties. 
(c)  At the conclusion of an investigation, the mayor may: 
(1)  Determine that the dog is not dangerous and, if the dog is impounded, may waive any impoundment fees incurred and order the release of the dog to its owner; or 
(2)  Determine that the dog is dangerous and order the owner to comply with the requirements for keeping dangerous dogs set forth in section 3-505, and if the dog is impounded, release the dog to its owner after the owner has paid all fees incurred for the impoundment. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-503. - Notification of dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  Within five (5) business days after declaring a dog dangerous, the city shall notify the owner by certified mail of the dog's designation as a dangerous dog and any specific restrictions and conditions for keeping the dog as set forth in section 3-505. The chief of police, mayor, chief code enforcement official, and the city's animal control officer shall all be notified of any designation of any dog as a dangerous dog. Such notification shall describe the dog and specify any particular requirements or conditions placed upon the dog owner. The police department will keep a record of any designation of a dog as a dangerous dog. 
(b)  If the city cannot, with due diligence, locate the owner of a dog that has been seized pursuant to this article, the city shall cause the dog to be impounded for not less than five (5) business days. If, after five (5) days, the owner fails to claim the dog, the city may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-504. - Appeal from dangerous dog declaration. 
    If the mayor determines that a dog is dangerous at the conclusion of the investigation conducted under section 3-502, that determination shall be final unless the dog owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within thirty (30) days after receiving notice that the dog has been finally declared dangerous. The appeal shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the city's determination of dangerousness. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-505. - Keeping of dangerous dogs. 
    The keeping of a dangerous dog, as defined in section 3-501, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Leash. No person having charge, custody, control, or possession of a dangerous dog shall allow the dog to exit its kennel, pen, or other proper enclosure unless such dog is securely attached to a leash no more than six (6) feet in length. No such person shall permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person capable of controlling the dog is in physical control of the leash. 
(2)  Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to allow the dog to be outside of its proper enclosure unless it is necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases, the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog's breathing or vision. 
(3)  Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a locked pen or other secure enclosure that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, light, and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The structure must have secure sides and a secure top, or all sides must be at least six (6) feet high; 
b.  The structure must have a bottom permanently attached to the sides or the sides must be imbedded not less than one (1) foot into the ground; and 
c.  The structure must be of such material and closed in such a manner that the dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own. 
(4)  Indoor confinement. No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(5)  Signs. All owners, keepers, or harborers of dangerous dogs shall display, in a prominent place on their premises, a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog". 
(6)  Liability insurance, surety bond. The owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the city proof that he/she has procured liability insurance or a surety bond in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering any damage or injury that may be caused by such dangerous dog. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the city to be notified immediately by the agent issuing the policy in the event that the insurance policy is canceled, terminated, or expires. The liability insurance or surety bond shall be obtained prior to the issuing of a permit to keep a dangerous dog. The dog owner shall sign a statement attesting that he shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance policy during the twelve-month period for which a permit is sought unless he ceases to own or keep the dog prior to the expiration date of the permit period. The owner shall provide the city with notice of any cancellation on the liability insurance policy. In the event that the owner proves to the satisfaction of the city that insurance is not available, the owner may post with the city, of an equivalent amount, payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog. 
(7)  Mandatory spaying or neutering. Within thirty (30) days of the determination that a particular dog is dangerous, the owner of said dog shall have it spayed or neutered and provide the city with a written statement from the veterinarian who performed the operation verifying the same. 
(8)  Notification of escape. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall notify the city immediately if such a dog escapes from its enclosure or restraint and is at-large. Such immediate notification shall also be required if the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal. 
(9)  Failure to comply. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner of a dangerous dog registered with the city to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. An owner or keeper of a dangerous dog who fails to register the dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day that the dangerous dog is not registered shall be a separate offense. The fine for any other violation of this section, for which the specific fine amount has not been set forth, shall be one hundred dollars (100.00) with each day that the offense continues being a separate citable offense. Any dog found to be in violation of this section 3-505 shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in section 3-505 may result in the city revoking the permit providing for the keeping of such animal. Other ordinances pertaining to penalties for injuries inflicted by dogs shall be in addition to the penalties set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-506. - Permit and tag required for a dangerous dog. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall, within three (3) business days after classification of the dog as dangerous or upon acquisition of such a dog, obtain an annual permit from the City of Beckley Code Enforcement Department to harbor the dog. The fee for such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, a red tag shall be issued to the owner of the dangerous dog. The tag shall be worn at all times by the dog to clearly and easily identify it as a dangerous dog. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog who registers but fails to place the foregoing red tag on said dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day shall be a separate citable offense. 
(c)  The permit for maintaining a dangerous dog shall be presented to an animal control officer or law enforcement officer upon demand. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-507. - Notification of intent to impound. 
(a)  When the city intends to impound a dog declared to be dangerous for violation of section 3-505, it shall notify the owner or custodian of the dog, by certified mail, of the intended impoundment at least five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment except as provided in section 3-508. 
(b)  The notice of intent to impound shall inform the owner or custodian of the dog that he may request, in writing within five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, a hearing before the mayor or his designee to contest the intended impoundment and finding of violation. 
(c)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing pursuant to subsection (b) hereof, a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request for a hearing. Notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog's owner or custodian requesting such hearing. 
(d)  If the owner or custodian requests a hearing pursuant to subsection (b) hereof, no impoundment shall take place until conclusion of the hearing, except as authorized in section 3-508. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-508. - Immediate impoundment. 
(a)  A dog previously declared to be dangerous may be immediately impounded without a pre-impoundment hearing when the mayor or chief of police determines such immediate impoundment is necessary for the protection of public health or safety. Such immediate impoundment may be ordered for violation of section 3-506 or when the dog bites a person or domestic animal. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of the dog immediately impounded pursuant to subsection (a) hereof shall be notified of the impoundment by certified mail within five (5) days after the dog's impoundment. 
(c)  The notice of impoundment shall inform the owner or custodian of the dog that he may request, in writing, a hearing before the mayor to contest the impoundment within five (5) days after the mailing of the notice of impoundment. 
(d)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing under subsection (c) hereof, a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after such request. Notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog owner requesting the hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-509. - Impoundment hearing. 
(a)  If, after a hearing on impoundment, the mayor or his designee finds no violation of section 3-505 or that the dog has not bitten an individual or a domestic animal, the dog shall be returned to its owner or custodian if already impounded or shall not be impounded as intended. 
(b)  Incident to the finding and conclusions made at the impoundment hearing, the mayor or his designee may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the dog in addition to those set forth in section 3-505 to insure the health and safety of the public and the animal. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Posting of bond or other proof of ability to respond to damages; 
(2)  Specific requirements as to size, construction, and design of a kennel in which to house the dog; 
(3)  Requirements as to type and method of restraint and/or muzzling of the dog; 
(4)  Photo identification or permanent marking of the dog for purposes of identification; and 
(5)  Payment of reasonable fees to recover the costs incurred by the City of Beckley in insuring compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-510. - Destruction. 
(a)  The mayor or chief of police may order the destruction of a dog that it determines to be extremely dangerous to public health or safety, a dog that has made an extremely vicious attack upon an individual, or a dog declared dangerous whose owner is unable or unwilling to adequately restrain it. 
(b)  The city shall give written notice by certified mail of its intention to destroy such dog to the owner or custodian of the dog who may request, in writing, within ten (10) business days after delivery of such notice a hearing before the mayor to contest the intended destruction. 
(c)  If no hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b) hereof, the dog shall be destroyed pursuant to applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b) hereof, such hearing shall be held by the mayor or his designee within ten (10) business days after the request, and the dog shall not be destroyed prior to the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  The dog owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required for the city to humanely and safely keep the animal during any legal proceeding. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-511. - Appeal from order of humane destruction. 
    If a section 3-510 hearing results in the mayor or his designee ordering a dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed, that decision shall be final unless the dog owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within ten (10) days after receiving notice of the destruction order. If an appeal is timely filed, the mayor or his designee shall suspend the destruction order pending the final determination of the court. The appeal shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the mayor's destruction order. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-512. - Change of ownership. 
(a)  Any owner of a dangerous dog who sells or otherwise transfers ownership, custody, or residence of the dog shall, within ten (10) days after such change of ownership or residence, provide written notification to the city police department of the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner. It also shall be the responsibility of the person transferring ownership or custody of the dog to provide written notification of the dog's classification as dangerous to the person receiving the dog. The previous owner shall furnish a copy of such notification to the city along with written acknowledgment by the new owner of his receipt of such notification. The Beckley Police Department shall notify the code enforcement department and the city's animal control officer of any changes of ownership, custody, or residence of the dog within three (3) business days after receiving the required information from the previous dog owner. 
(b)  Any person receiving a dog classified as dangerous must obtain the required permit, tag, and enclosure prior to acquisition of the dog from the city code enforcement department. The new owner shall comply fully with the provisions of this article pertaining to obtaining liability insurance, payment of fees, and maintenance, control, and ownership of a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Sec. 3-513. - Continuation of dangerous dog declaration. 
    Any dog that has been declared dangerous by this city, another municipality, any county, or any state shall be subject to the provisions of this article as long as it remains in the city. The person owning or having custody of any dog designated as a dangerous dog by any municipality, county, or state government shall notify the mayor or his designee within ten (10) days of moving the animal into the City of Beckley. The restrictions and conditions applicable to dangerous dogs and contained within this article shall remain in force while the dog remains in the city. 
(Ord. of 3-25-03) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of common council to regulate construction, alteration, repair, correction or demolition of buildings, § 21(24), (27), (38), (56)-(60), (78). 
Cross reference- Building commission, § 2-600 et seq.; required connection of sewer, § 9-260 et seq.; permit to divert watercourse, § 8-7; dangerous condition on public premises, § 8-5. See also Ch. 15 for similar requirements. 
State Law reference- Authority of city generally, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-12-5(28), 8-15-1; authority of city to inspect private premises, § 8-12-15; authority of city to require closing or demolition of buildings unfit for human habitation, § 8-12-16; authority of state fire marshal, Ch. 29, Art. 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Building code official-Office created. 
    The City of Beckley Code Enforcement Department is hereby created. The person appointed to head such office shall be known as the chief, code enforcement department, the building official, and the code official and shall have responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of the State Building Code, City of Beckley Code Chapters 4, 8, 12 and 15, and such other responsibilities as assigned by the mayor and/or the common council of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 5-2; Ord. of 10-25-94; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-2. - Same-Nomination, appointment, term of office, and qualifications. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint a qualified individual as chief, building official, and code official as is qualified under such rules and regulations as the state fire commission and the common council may adopt. The chief shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor and common council. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint such number of inspectors, plans examiners, permit technicians, administrative specialists, or other employees as shall be necessary for the administration of the code enforcement department as authorized by the common council. 
(Code 1971, § 5-3; Ord. of 10-25-94; Ord. of 10-22-96; Ord. of 4-22-03, § 2; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-3. - Same-Administrative powers and duties generally; records. 
(a)  The administrative duties of the building official shall be to receive, process, and issue applications required by the chapter and to issue permits and furnish prescribed certificates. 
(b)  In the enforcing of compliance with any building law, code, or ordinance; the removal of illegal conditions; the securing of necessary safeguards during construction; and, in requiring adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, the building official shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(c)  The building official shall keep comprehensive records of all applications received and permits, certificates, notices, and orders issued. The building official shall retain on file copies of required plans and documents relating to building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence as WV Code may require. All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons in compliance with WV Code, during office hours observed by the city, but shall not be removed from city offices. 
(Code 1971, § 5-4; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Cross reference- Ex officio member of mechanical trades board, § 4-639. 
Sec. 4-4. - Same-Powers and duties as to inspections. 
    The building official shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provision of buildings laws, this Code, and other ordinances are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. The building official shall, when requested by proper authority or when the interest of the city so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this chapter and render written reports thereon to the mayor. The building official or a duly appointed deputy or assistant shall make the inspections required under the provisions of this chapter and the State Building Code. The building official, and any duly appointed deputy or assistant, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hour, upon compliance with applicable provisions of WV law. 
(Code 1971, § 5-5; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Cross reference- Inspection of oil, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and sheet metal work by building official, § 4-603. 
Sec. 4-5. - Concrete, blacktop, aprons, etc.; standards for determining. 
    No permit shall be issued for the construction, renovation, or remodeling of any building involving a concrete, asphalt, gravel, or other impervious material; driveway, sidewalk, walkway, terrace or apron abutting a city right-of-way until the City of Beckley Board of Public Works shall approve it under the provisions of Section 12 of the City of Beckley Code; and, the City of Beckley Sanitary Board shall approve it for compliance with storm water and surface water provisions of Chapter 9, Article V of the City of Beckley Code. 
(Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 10, 2013, repealed the former § 4-5, and enacted a new § 4-5 as set out herein. The former § 4-5 pertained to fire limits and derived from Code 1971, § 5-1. 
Sec. 4-6. - Grease interceptors. 
    No permit shall be issued for the installation or modification of a grease interceptor until the installation is approved by the City of Beckley Sanitary Board. Dishwashers may not drain into a grease interceptor. 
(Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 10, 2013, repealed the former § 4-6, and enacted a new § 4-6 as set out herein. The former § 4-6 pertained to concrete and blacktop aprons, etc.-Board of public works approval required in certain cases and derived from Code 1971, § 5-27; an ordinance adopted Oct. 25, 1994. 
Sec. 4-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 10, 2013, repealed § 4-7, which pertained to concrete and blacktop aprons, etc.-Standards for determining and derived from Code 1971, § 5-28; an ordinance adopted Oct. 25, 1994. 
Sec. 4-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 10, 2013, repealed § 4-8, which pertained to concrete and blacktop aprons, etc.-Findings required for issuance of permit and derived from Code 1971, § 5-29; an ordinance adopted Oct. 25, 1994. 
Sec. 4-9. - State Building Code. 
4.1 General. 
1.1 Scope. There is adopted by reference, for the purpose of of establishing rules and regulations, the State Building Code, the standards considered necessary for the safe-guarding of life and property and to endure compliance with the minimum standards of construction of all structures erected or renovated, as promulgated by the West Virginia State Code and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Beckley. One (1) copy, certified by the Mayor, shall be maintained in the office of the code enforcement department and shall be available to the public for inspection and use during all business hours, and one (1) copy shall be maintained on file in the office of the Recorder-Treasurer. 
1.2 Authority. WV Code 29-3-5b. 
1.3 Effective date. August 1, 2016 
4.2. Definitions. 
2.1. "ANSI" means American National Standards Institute, 25 West 43 rd St., Fourth Floor, New York, NY 10036. 
2.2. "ASTM" means American society of Testing and materials. 
2.3. "Fire Commission" means the thirteen (13) appointed members of the West Virginia State Fire Commission. 
2.4. "Fire Marshall" means the West Virginia State Fire Marshal and/or his or her designated representatives. 
2.5. "ICC" or "International" means International Code Council. 
2.6. "Local jurisdiction" means municipal, county, or other local government. 
2.7. "NFPA" means National Fire Protection Association. 
2.8. "State Building Code" means the entire contents of this rule and the referenced national standards and codes. 
(Code 1971, §§ 5-17, 5-19; Ord. of 11-8-94; Ord. of 10-22-96; Ord. of 1-27-98; Ord. of 4-22-03, § 2; Ord. of 9-12-06; Ord. of 9-10-13; Ord. of 8-23-16) 
Cross reference- Fire Prevention Code, § 7-200; National Fire Codes, § 7-202. 
Sec. 4-9.1. - Same-Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  ANSI means American National Standards Institute, 11 West 42nd Street, New York, New York 10036. 
(2)  ASTM means American Society of Testing and Materials. 
(3)  Building code includes all aspects of safe building construction and mechanical operations and all safety aspects related to building construction and mechanical operations. 
(4)  Fire commission means the thirteen (13) appointed members of the West Virginia State Fire Commission. 
(5)  Fire marshall means the West Virginia State Fire Marshall and/or his designated representatives. 
(6)  City or Local jurisdiction means the City of Beckley. 
(7)  ICC or International means International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041-3401. 
(8)  NFPA means National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P. O. Box 9101, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101. 
(9)  State Building Code means the entire contents of WV CSR 87-4 and the referenced national codes. 
(10)  Board of appeals means the Beckley Building Code Board of Appeals in accordance with section 4-9(d)(1)(iii). All appointments are for five (5) years or until a successor is appointed including three alternates who may be called to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternates shall possess the same qualifications as members and shall serve five-year terms or until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. of 10-22-96; Ord. of 4-22-03, § 2; Ord. of 9-12-06) 
Sec. 4-10. - Same-Amendments. 
    The City of Beckley/State Building Code is hereby amended with the following insertions: 
(1)  2012 International Building Code. 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
Section 1612.3 insert: City of Beckley...September 11, 1984. 
The City of Beckley hereby adopts the following IBC 2012 Appendices: 
Appendix C-Group U Agricultural Buildings. 
Appendix E-Supplementary Accessibility Requirements. 
Appendix F-Rodent Proofing. 
Appendix G-Flood-resistant construction. 
Appendix H-Signs. 
Appendix I-Patio Covers. 
Appendix J-Grading. 
(2)  2009 International Residential Code. 
Section R101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
Table R301.2(1) insert: 
Ground Snow Load-= or > than 30 psf live load 
Wind speed-90 mph 
Seismic Design Category-C 
Weathering-Severe 
Frost Line Depth-24" 
Termite-M-H 
Decay-S-M 
Winter Design Temp-11 degrees 
Ice Shield Underlayment Required-Yes 
Flood Hazards-September 11, 1984 
Air Freezing Index-1000 
Mean Annual Temp.-50.4 
Section P2603.3.6.1 insert: 24 inches private sewage disposal systems...24 inches building sewers. 
Section P3103.1 insert: at least 12 inches above the roof or 12 inches above the anticipated snow accumulation. 
The City of Beckley hereby adopts the following Appendices to the IBC 2009: 
Appendix E-Manufactured Housing used as Dwellings. 
Appendix G-Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. 
Appendix H-Patio Covers. 
Appendix K-Sound Transmissions. 
(3)  2012 International Existing Building Code. 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
Section 1301.3 insert: January 1, 1989. 
The City of Beckley hereby adopts the following Appendices to the IEBC 2012: 
Appendix B-Supplementary Accessibility Requirements for Existing Building and Facilities. 
(4)  2012 International Plumbing Code. 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
Section 305.6 insert: 24 inches private sewage disposal...24 inches building sewers. 
Section 904.1 insert: at least 12 inches above the roof or 12 inches above the anticipated snow accumulation. 
The City of Beckley hereby adopts the following Appendices to IPC 2012 
Appendix D-Degree Day and Design Temp (Charleston). 
Appendix E-Sizing of Pipe Systems. 
Appendix F-Structural Safety. 
Appendix G-Vacuum Drainage System. 
(5)  2012 International Mechanical Code. 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
The City of Beckley hereby adopts the following Appendix to the IMC 2012: 
Appendix A-Combustion Air Openings and Chimney Pass-Throughs. 
(6)  2012 International Fuel Gas Code. 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
The City of Beckley hereby adopts the following Appendices to IFGC 2012: 
Appendix A-Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping. 
Appendix B-Sizing of Vent Systems. 
Appendix C-Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft Systems and Direct Vent Venting System. 
(7)  2009 International Energy Conservation Code-For residential buildings, effective 11/30/13. 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
(8)  2012 International Property Maintenance Code. 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Beckley. 
Section 302.4 insert: 10 inches. 
Section 304.14 insert: April 15 to November 15. 
Section 602.3 insert: November 15 to April 30. 
Section 602.4 insert: November 15 to April 30. 
(Code 1971, § 5-18; Ord. of 11-8-94; Ord. of 10-22-96; Ord. of 1-27-98; Ord. of 4-22-03, § 2; Ord. of 9-12-06; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-11. - Same--Unlawful acts; penalty; injunctive relief upon violation. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another to occupy, or permit another person to occupy any premises, property, structure, or equipment regulated by the City of Beckley Building Code, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or fail to obey a lawful order of the code official or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted under the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate a provision of the City of Beckley Building Code, or any provisions of Chapters 4, 8, 12 and/or 15 of the Code of the City of Beckley, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Injunction. In the case of any unlawful acts, the mayor or such person as the mayor may designate, is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and maintain a suit to restrain by injunction the violation of the Building Code, notwithstanding the penalty for the violation thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 5-20; Ord. of 11-8-94; Ord. of 4-22-03, § 2; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-12. - Same-Conflicts. 
(a)  Whenever there arises a conflict between the State Fire Code and the State Building Code, the State Fire Code shall take precedence. 
(b)  Whenever there arises a conflict between the International Plumbing Code portion of the State Building Code and the rules of the West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources, the rules of WV DHHR take precedence. 
(c)  Wherever there arises a conflict between the State Building Code and the statutory laws of the State of West [Virginia], the West Virginia Code shall take precedence. 
(d)  In the event that any provision of the State Building Code conflicts with any provision of the electrical code adopted in this chapter, and such conflicting provisions relate to electrical work, the applicable provisions of the electrical code shall prevail. 
(Code 1971, § 5-21; Ord. of 11-8-94; Ord. of 10-22-96; Ord. of 4-22-03, § 2; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Oct. 22, 1996, deleted former § 4-13 of the Code which pertained to the adoption of State Building Code and derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 29, 1990. Similar provisions are currently set out as § 4-9 of the Code. 
Secs. 4-14-4-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to require permit, § 21(60). 
Cross reference- Improvement permit, § 15-21(B). 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require building permits, and to inspect private premises, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-12-14 and 8-12-15. 

Sec. 4-200. - "Estimated cost" defined. 
    The term "estimated cost", as referred to in this chapter, shall mean the reasonable cost of both labor and materials involved in the prosecution and completion of work, a job or a project, and all the parts thereof, until ready for use or occupancy. The work, job, or project may not be subdivided into separate projects to reduce the "estimated cost" of a permit fee or to exempt the applicant or contractor from any other provisions of this chapter or Code. 
(Code 1971, § 5-7; Ord. of 10-25-94) 
Sec. 4-201. - Obtaining permit before work commences. 
    No person shall do any act for which a permit is required by this article, or permit any condition to exist upon any premises owned by such person or under such person's control when a permit is required by this chapter for the maintenance of such condition, without first having procured the permit therefor as required by this chapter. Any person who acts through an agent, contractor, employee or other person in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense against this section jointly with the person committing the act which constitutes the offense. 
(Code 1971, § 5-8; Ord. of 10-25-94) 
Sec. 4-202. - Application; contents; bond condition precedent to issuance of permit. 
    All persons making application for a permit under this section may, as a condition precedent to the issuance therefor, be required to give bond to the city in an amount equal to two (2) per cent of the estimated cost, and such bond shall be given with surety acceptable to the recorder-treasurer, binding such principals and surety to indemnify and save harmless the city in the payment of any taxes due to the city under any contract for the construction, alteration, or improvement of any building, structure, or lot for which a permit is issued under this section. 
(Code 1971, § 5-10; Ord. of 10-25-94) 
Sec. 4-203. - Workers' compensation and public liability insurance condition precedent for certain permits. 
    No permit shall be issued for the construction of a building or structure in the city, or for the alteration of the exterior of any building or structure unless a certificate or other proof is filed showing that the contractor carries worker's compensation insurance and public liability insurance with the limits of. not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate. 
(Code 1971, § 5-11; Ord. of 10-25-94; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-204. - Fees-Payable prior to issuance of permit; when additional fee payable upon completion of work. 
    No permit required by this chapter shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this article have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, has been paid; provided, that upon completion of any work for which a permit has been obtained as provided in this article, if the actual costs exceed the estimated costs upon provided in this article, if the actual costs exceed the estimated costs upon which the permit was granted, then an additional fee in accordance with section 4-205 shall be due and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as provided for by this Code. 
    When no estimated cost is provided by the applicant or a discrepancy occurs in the application, whereby the accuracy of such estimated cost figures are in question, the following may be used by the department: 
$100.00 per square foot for all inhabited structures or areas. 
$80.00 per square foot for garages, porches, decks, accessory buildings. 
$60.00 per square foot for unfinished basements, sidewalks. 
    Upon completion of any project where the estimated costs can be documented as being less than stated on the application, a refund of part of the building permit fee amount may be issued when proper documentation as required is submitted and approved. 
(Code 1971, § 5-9; Ord. of 10-25-94; Ord. of 9-12-06; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-205. - Same-For construction or alteration. 
    For a permit for the construction, alteration or improvement of a building, structure or lot, the fee shall be one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the total cost of both labor and materials involved in the prosecution and completion or work, a job or project and all the parts thereof. 
    A single family residence owner shall be exempt from a permit fee for such work, job or project normally subject to a permit fee up to an amount of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) provided they provide such work themselves or with the assistance of a relative residing in that same single family residence. Any individual found in violation, by obtaining such a permit fraudulently, employing a contractor or subcontractor of hiring or using a non-licensed contractor help shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A repeat offense shall mean a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
    Any person who starts work on any project or job without first obtaining a building permit shall pay double the usual fee. Each succeeding day said required permit is not obtained shall constitute a separate violation and each violation shall be subject to double the usual fee. 
(Code 1971, § 5-12; Ord. of 10-25-94; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Secs. 4-206-4-208. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-12-06, repealed §§ 4-206-4-208 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to fees for removal from one lot to another; fees for the removal to another location on the same lot, and fees for demolition, respectively and derived from Code 1971, §§ 5-13-5-15 as subsequently amended. 
Sec. 4-209. - Same-Refund upon discontinuance of work; new permit required if work resumed. 
    In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made and the portion of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder; provided, that no refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made; provided, that no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made, no work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued. 
(Code 1971, § 5-16) 
Secs. 4-210-4-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTOR-MECHANIC LICENSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-12-06 repealed Art. III in its entirety and reenacted §§ 4-300 and 4-301 to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 10-25-94. 

Sec. 4-300. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as City of Beckley Contractor-Mechanic Licensing. 
(Ord. of 10-25-94; Ord. of 9-12-06; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-301. - Policy declared. 
(a)  The City of Beckley hereby adopts, by reference, the provisions of WV Code, Chapter 21, Article 11, WV Contractor Licensing Act; Chapter 21, Article 14, Title 432, Series 19, Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards; Chapter 29, Article 3b, Title 103, Series 1, Supervision of Electricians; and, Chapter 12, Article 4, Title 28, Series 3, Certification of Plumbers; as amended, including legislative rules. 
(b)  Any person or entity required to be issued and maintain a West Virginia Contractors License; West Virginia Master, Journeyman, or Apprentice Electrician License; or, West Virginia Master, Journeyman, or Apprentice Plumber License shall be required to register with, and provide a copy to the department including all required supporting documents, and maintain each as current. 
(c)  The requirements for registration with the department issuance of a City of Beckley contractor's license shall be the same as the requirements for a West Virginia Contractor' License except a registration as a City of Beckley Contractor includes documentation of public liability insurance coverage with general liability limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)aggregate. Electricians and plumbers employed by a currently licensed contractor are exempt from this public liability insurance requirement when registering and providing documentation as a mechanic. 
(d)  There shall be no fee for registration as a City of Beckley Contractor, Electrician, Plumber or other Mechanic. Allowing such registration and required documentation including WV Contractor License, WV Business Registration, WV Worker's Compensation coverage, public liability insurance coverage, electrician, plumber, or mechanic license, or other documentation to expire, shall result in an administrative reinstatement of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. of 10-25-94; Ord. of 9-12-06; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Secs. 4-302-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted July 27, 1993, repealed former Art. IV, §§ 4-401-4-413, which pertained to the housing code, and enacted similar provisions as Art. IV, §§ 4-400-4-408. Said provisions have been redesignated as Art. VIII, §§ 4-901-4-909, at the discretion of the editor. An ordinance adopted Nov. 8, 1994, enacted a new Art. IV, §§ 4-401-4-410, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 4-401. - General. 
(a)  Scope. This rule governs licensing, fees, examinations, powers of the code enforcement department, and penalties for violations in accordance with West Virginia Code 21-11-1 et seq., and West Virginia Code 29-5-1 et seq. 
(b)  Authority. Authority for this article shall be West Virginia Code 21-11-5. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-402. - Application and enforcement. 
(a)  Application. This legislative rule applies to the department and to all persons, materials and transactions governed by or otherwise within the jurisdiction of the department. 
(b)  Enforcement. The enforcement of these rules is vested in the city code enforcement department. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-403. - Definitions. 
    Advertisement means and includes the use of a newspaper, magazine, or other publication, book, notice, circular, pamphlet, letter, handbill, poster, billboard, sign, placard, card, label, tag, window display, store sign, radio, and/or television announcement, telephone directory, or any other oral, visual, or written means or method now or hereinafter employed to bring to the attention of the public the business of a contractor. 
    Building inspection means to visually examine any structure under construction or renovation or any appurtenance, components or systems therein for the purpose of determining compliance or noncompliance with any of the provisions of the City of Beckley/West Virginia State Building Code. 
    Building inspector means any person, certified as required by West Virginia State Fire Commission Legislative Rules Title 87, Series 7, who performs building inspections and submits a building inspection report verifying compliance or non-compliance with the City of Beckley/West Virginia State Building Code. 
    Capital improvements means improvements that are affixed to or attached to and become a part of a building or structure or the real property or which add utility to real property or any part thereof and that last, or are intended to be relatively permanent. 
    Cease and desist order means an order issued by the department pursuant to the provisions of West Virginia Code 21-11-1 et seq., City of Beckley Code Chapter 4, Article VI and of this rule. 
    Construction project means the entire undertaking for which the contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) is responsible. 
    Contractor means a person who, in any capacity for compensation, other than as an employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, structure, lot or excavation associated with a project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structure or works in connection therewith, where the cost of the undertaking is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more for the material and labor involved. Contractor includes a construction manager who performs management and counseling services for a construction project for a professional fee. 
"Contractor" or "contracting activity" also means and includes the furnishing of work, or both materials and work, for another (by a sole contractor, general contractor, prime contractor or subcontractor) in fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration, or improvement of a new or existing building, structure, or lot or any part thereof, or for the alteration, capital improvement or development of real property, or performing activity governed by any or all State Building Codes and the National Fire Protection Association Code and the National Electrical Code or its successor. The terms "contractor" and "contracting" are synonymous. 
Contractor does NOT include: 
(1)  One who merely furnishes material or supplies without fabricating or consuming them in the construction project; 
(2)  A person who personally performs construction work on the site of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or residential purposes; 
(3)  A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and who functions under the control of any other licensing or regulatory board, whose primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management and maintenance who, acting in his or her respective professional capacity and any employee of such professional, acting in the course of his or her employment, performs any work which may be considered to be performing contracting work, except that such work shall be considered to be maintenance work only, and such work shall not materially add to the economic value of the property or asset. 
(4)  A corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship whose primary purpose is to prepare construction plans and specifications used by the contractors defined in this section and who employs full-time a registered architect licensed to practice in this state or a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in this state. Employees of such corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship shall also be exempt from the requirements of this rule. 
    Department means the City of Beckley Code Enforcement Department. 
    Division means the West Virginia Division of Labor. 
    Drywall (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is the installation of drywall, gypsum, wallboard panels and assemblies, and work incidental thereto. Also included is the preparation of surfaces for suitable painting or finishing including taping and texturing, installation of lightweight steel wall partitions and supporting members for gypsum drywall and the installation and repair of movable partitions for the application of gypsum drywall panels. 
    Electrical contractor means a person who engages in the business of contracting to install, erect, repair, or alter electrical equipment for the generation, transmission, or utilization of electrical energy and work incidental hereto. 
    Emergency basis under West Virginia Code 21-11-6(c)(6) exists upon occurrence of an event, circumstance, or situation which presents an imminent threat to persons or property constituting a serious health or safety hazard. 
    Employee of a contractor means any individual who works under the control and supervision of a contractor subject to this rule for a wage and other benefits as required by law. An employee of a contractor is not a subcontractor. 
    Excavation (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is the installation, alteration, and repair of earthen material by digging, trenching, grading, or compacting the material for cut, fill, grade, or trench, and work incidental thereto. Included in the scope of this definition is the installation, alteration, and repair of crib walls, gabion walls, and other devices not to exceed six (6) feet in height for the purpose of controlling the movement of earthen materials. 
    General building contractor means a person whose principal business is in connection with any structures built, being built, or to be built for the support, shelter, and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, requiring in the construction the use of more than two (2) contractor classifications, or a person who supervises the whole or any part of such construction. A general building contractor is considered to be a commercial, business, or industrial contractor. A general building contractor who desires to perform electrical; plumbing; heating, ventilating and cooling; piping; or general engineering contracting work as defined in this section shall obtain a license in those classifications. 
    General engineering contractor means a person whose principal business is in connection with public or private work projects; including, but not limited to, one or more of the following: Irrigation, drainage and water supply projects; electrical generation projects; swimming pools; flood control; harbors; railroads, highways; tunnels; airports and airways; sewers and sewage disposal systems; bridges, inland waterways; pipelines for transmission of petroleum and other liquid or gaseous substances; refineries; chemical plants and other industrial plants requiring a specialized engineering knowledge and skill; piers and foundations; and structures or work incidental thereto. "Swimming pools" means a public swimming pool as defined by the B.O.C.A. National Building Code, 1990, Article Section 623.2.A. 
    Heating, ventilating, and cooling contractor means a person who engages in the business of contracting to install, erect, repair, service, or alter heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment or systems to heat, cool, or ventilate residential and commercial structures or work incidental thereto. 
    Home inspection means a visual analysis for the purpose of providing a professional opinion of the condition of an existing building and its carports and garages, any reasonable accessible installed components, and the operation of the building systems, including controls normally operated by the owner, for the following components of a residential dwelling of four (4) units or less: heating systems,, cooling system, electrical system, plumbing system, structural components, foundation, roof covering, exterior and interior components, and site aspects as they affect the dwelling. 
    Home inspector means any person who is certified pursuant to West Virginia State Fire Commission Legislative Rules Title 87, Series 5, and who engages in the business of performing home inspections for compensation and writing home inspection reports. A home inspector is not a building inspector, does not perform construction or renovation inspections. A home inspector shall not write a report or render an opinion on compliance or non-compliance with codes, statutes, regulatory requirements, special utility, insurance, or restrictions relating to a residential structure or any of its components or systems. 
    Landscaping (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is preparation and alteration of land for horticulture and arboriculture and work incidental thereto. This definition includes irrigation systems and controls. Carpentry is limited to decorative fences and screens, planter boxes, and plant tubs common to the industry. Landscaping includes the installation of nonloadbearing slabs, walkways, and areas using concrete, brick, stone, or gravel and all other materials and equipment associated with the installation of such materials. Excluded are concrete slabs exceeding four hundred (400) square feet and concrete walkways exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in surface area. Excluded are retaining walls over three (3) feet in height, decorative walls or fences over six (6) feet in height, perimeter walls and fences, and load-bearing slabs and walkways. 
    License means a license to engage in business in this city as a contractor in one of the classifications set out in this rule. 
    Masonry (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is the installation of brick, concrete block, stone, marble, slate, or other units and products common to the masonry industry, with or without mortar, and work incidental thereto. Also included is the installation of grout, caulking, tuck pointing, sandblasting, mortar washing, purging, cleaning, and welding of reinforcement steel related to masonry construction. 
    Multifamily contractor means a person who is engaged in construction, repair, or improvement of a multifamily residential structure or work incidental thereto. "Multifamily structures" means two (2) or more residential units, as defined by this section. 
    Person includes an individual, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity engaged in the undertaking of construction projects, or any combination thereof. 
    Piping contractor means a person whose principal business is the installation of process, power plant, air, oil, gasoline, chemical or other kinds of piping; and boilers, and pressure vessels using joining methods of thread, weld, solvent weld, or mechanical methods or work incidental thereto. 
    Plumbing contractor means a person whose principal business is the installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of piping, plumbing fixtures, plumbing appliances, and plumbing appurtenances, venting systems and public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building or structure; included in this definition is installation of gas piping, chilled water piping in connection with refrigeration processes and comfort cooling, hot water piping in connection with building heating, piping for stand pipes or work incidental thereto. 
    Posting of the license means placing a copy of contractor's license on each job site where contracting work is being performed by each contractor working at the job site location where the general public and inspecting agents of the department can easily read each contractor's name, license number, license classification, and license expiration date. 
    Remodeling and repair (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is all general remodeling, additions, and repairs to existing structures requiring the use of two (2) or more unrelated trades and work incidental thereto where the cost of the undertaking does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). This includes all rough and finish general carpentry work including the installation of related hardware and accessories and all minor repairs and replacement of pre-manufactured items on existing structures. 
    Residential asphalt (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is to proportion, mix, and place base materials and place paving and surfacing consisting of graded mineral aggregates bonded with asphalt or bituminous materials so that a firm, smooth surface suitable for driveways, parking areas, and play areas is obtained and work incidental thereto, including the application of seal coatings. This definition includes the excavation, grading, and fill necessary to properly prepare the existing surface to accept a paved surface. 
    Residential concrete (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is installation and repair of concrete, concrete reinforcing materials, concrete products, and accessories common to the industry, as used in residential applications. This definition includes the forming, pouring, and finishing of concrete structures such as footings, foundation, slabs, basements, sidewalks and walkways, driveways and parking areas, fence footings, decorative concrete walls not to exceed four (4) feet in height, and retaining walls not to exceed five (5) feet in height and the excavation incidental to the performance of such work. 
    Residential contractor means a person whose principal business is in connection with the construction, repair, or improvement of real property used as, or intended to be used for, residential occupancy or work incidental thereto. 
    Residential occupancy means occupancy of a structure for residential purposes for periods greater than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days. 
    Residential pools (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is the construction, service, and repair of residential swimming pools and spas, with or without solar heating devices, and work incidental thereto. Included in the scope of this definition is water and gas service lines from the point of service to the pool equipment, electrical wiring from pool equipment to first readily accessible disconnect, pool piping, fittings, backflow prevention devices, waste lines, other integral parts of swimming pools and spas and attached solar water heating devices. Also included are swimming pool accessories, covers, safety devices, and the installation of fencing around swimming pools. The construction of other structures or appurtenances is excluded. 
    Residential siding (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is the fabrication, construction, and/or installation of wood, aluminum, steel, or vinyl siding and work incidental thereto. All such materials must be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and, when necessary, on furred-up grill or network. 
    Residential structure means a building or structure used or intended to be used for residential occupancy, together with related facilities appurtenant to the premises as an adjunct or residential occupancy, which contains not more than three (3) distinct floors which are abovegrade in any structural unit regardless of whether the building or structure is designed and constructed for one or more living units. Dormitories, hotels, motels, or other transient lodging units are not residential structures. 
    Roofing (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is to install a watertight covering to roof surfaces by use of, but not limited to, cedar, cement, metal, composition shingles, wood shakes, cement and clay tile, built-up roofing, single ply, fluid-type roofing systems, and other acceptable roofing materials including spray urethane foam, asphalt, and application of protective roof and deck coatings, application of damp-proofing and/or waterproofing, installation of roof insulation panels and other roof insulation systems and work incidental thereto. 
    Specialty contractor means a person who engages in specialty contracting services or work incidental thereto said specialty which does not substantially fall within the scope of any contractor classification as set out in West Virginia Code 21-11-1, et seq. 
    Subcontractor means a person who performs a portion of a project undertaken by a principal or general contractor or another subcontractor. 
    Tree trimmer (specialty) contractor means a contractor whose primary business is to cut, materially alter, prune, or remove trees or shrubs. 
    Undertaking means the entire construction project. The value of the undertaking shall be determined by adding the cost of labor and material required to accomplish it. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94; Ord. of 9-10-13) 
Sec. 4-404. - Licensure required. 
(a)  No person may engage in the business of a contractor in this city without a license. The following are exempt: 
(1)  Work done exclusively by employees of the United States Government, the State of West Virginia, a county, municipality or municipal corporation, and any governmental subdivision or agency thereof directly in conjunction with, and in the course of, their employment. 
(2)  The sale or installation of a finished product, material, article, or merchandise which is not actually fabricated into and does not become a permanent fixed part of a structure; 
(3)  Work performed personally by an owner or lessee of real property on property the primary use of which is for agricultural or farming enterprise; 
(4)  A material supplier who renders advice concerning use of products sold and who does not provide construction or installation services; 
(5)  Work performed by a public utility company regulated by the West Virginia Public Service Commission and its employees; 
(6)  Repair work contracted for by the owner of the equipment on an emergency basis in order to maintain or restore the operation of such equipment; 
(7)  Work performed by an employer's regular employees, for which the employees are paid regular wages and not a contract price, on business property owned or leased by the employer. The term "business property owned or leased by the employer" shall not include any property upon which work is performed by the owner or lessee employer for the purpose of: Speculative sales or leasing; or otherwise intending the sale or lease of the property for commercial or residential use by an entity other than the employer itself; 
(8)  Work personally performed on a structure by the owner or occupant thereof; and 
(9)  Work performed when the specifications for such work have been developed or approved by engineering personnel employed by the owner of a facility by registered professional engineers licensed pursuant to the laws of this state when the work to be performed because of its specialized nature or process cannot be reasonably or timely contracted for within the general area of the facility. 
(b)  A copy of the license must be posted in a conspicuous position at every construction site where work is being done by the contractor. The contractor's license number shall be included in all contracting advertisements and all fully executed and binding contracts. No bid shall be accepted which does not bear on its face, the contractor's license number. 
(c)  The inspector or other authority of the city municipality charged with the duty of issuing building or other permits for construction as defined in this article, shall not issue such permits to any person who does not possess a valid contractor's license when required by this article. 
(d)  (1) No license may be assigned, transferred or otherwise disposed of so as to permit the unauthorized use thereof. Any person who violates this section is subject to the penalties provided for in this article. 
(2)  No license may be used for any purpose by any person other than the person to whom the license is issued. The person who makes application for a license for the entity is the license holder. If the license holder severs his or her relationship with the entity, the entity must name a successor, subject to the approval of the department and section 4-406 of this article. The successor, who desires to be licensed, must notify the department within thirty (30) days and must certify, on a form prescribed by the department, the same information as was certified by the original license holder. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-405. - License application, renewal. 
(a)  Any person desiring to be licensed as a contractor shall submit to the department a written application requesting licensure, providing all information as the department may require on forms supplied by the department and shall pay the applicable license fee as defined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  All license applicants must pass a written examination in the contractor classification(s) for which they seek licensure, as defined in section 4-406 of this article; provided that in accordance with West Virginia Code 21-11-7(b), if a person holds a business registration certificate to conduct business in this state as a contractor on the thirtieth day of September, 1991, the department shall issue a contractor's license without examination if that person certifies with the department, by affidavit, that he or she has complied with the requirements of West Virginia Code 21-11-5(c), and pays the appropriate license fee. 
(c)  Any person desiring a license shall, at the time of application, pay the annual fee as established by the department. Except that in the case of a sole proprietorship conducting business only as an electrical contractor where the business owner holds an electrician's license issued under the provisions West Virginia Code 29-3B-4 and provides proof thereof to the department, the annual fee is twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(d)  A license issued under the provisions of this article is valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issue unless sooner revoked for cause. 
(e)  The holder of a valid license may renew the license on or before the expiration date making renewal application on forms provided by the department and paying the appropriate fee as set forth in subsection 4-405(c) of this article. If the renewal application is received or postmarked more than fifteen (15) days after the expiration date, the applicant is required to pay, in addition to the annual renewal fee, a penalty fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided, that no license which has lapsed for a period of two (2) years or more may be renewed. A renewal of a license may be conditional by action of the department under the provisions of West Virginia Code 21-11-13 and 21-11-14. The department will provide each license with a renewal notice at least thirty (30) days in advance of the expiration date. 
(f)  A duplicate license may be issued by the board to persons who, by application and affidavit, certify that the original license certificate has been permanently lost or destroyed and that the applicant is in full compliance with the requirements of West Virginia Code 21-11-1, et seq. and this article. The board shall charge a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each duplicate license issued. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-406. - Examination required. 
(a)  On and after the first day of October, 1991, any person desiring a license under the provisions of this article, must be examined by the West Virginia contractor licensing board and achieve a minimum score of seventy (70) per cent to qualify for a license. Any person who fails to achieve the minimum required score may apply for re-examination at the next regular examination session. 
(b)  The West Virginia contractor licensing board shall provide examinations for each of the following contractor classifications: 
(1)  Electrical; 
(2)  General building contractor; 
(3)  General engineering contractor; 
(4)  Heating, ventilating, and cooling contractor; 
(5)  Multifamily contractor; 
(6)  Piping contractor; 
(7)  Plumbing contractor; 
(8)  Residential contractor; or 
(9)  Specialty contractor: 
a.  Drywall specialty contractor; 
b.  Excavation specialty contractor; 
c.  Landscaping specialty contractor; 
d.  Masonry specialty contractor; 
e.  Remodeling and repair specialty contractor; 
f.  Residential asphalt specialty contractor; 
g.  Residential concrete specialty contractor; 
h.  Residential pools specialty contractor; 
i.  Residential siding specialty contractor; 
j.  Roofing specialty contractor; 
k.  Steel erection; 
l.  Low voltage systems; 
m.  Manufactured home installation; 
n.  Sprinkler and fire protection; 
o.  Property maintenance contractor; 
p.  Carpet installers; 
q.  Painting; 
r.  Pressure washing; 
s.  Tree trimming; 
t.  Demolition contractor; 
u.  Finished carpentry; 
v.  Underground utility installer; 
w.  Locksmiths 
x.  Communication networks; 
y.  Asbestos removal; 
z.  Septic and sewage systems; 
aa.  Well drilling; 
bb.  Elevator installation/repair; 
cc.  Industrial machinery installation; 
dd.  TV cable installation; 
ee.  Window installation; 
ff.  Sign installation; 
gg.  Fencing; 
hh.  Underground storage tanks; 
ii.  Pre-fab housing/log home; 
jj.  Site clearing; 
kk.  Reclamation; 
ll.  Cleanroom construction; 
mm.  Above ground storage tanks; 
nn.  Sheet metal fabrication/installation; 
oo.  Environmental serv/haz waste; 
pp.  Specialty installers; 
qq.  Unclassified specialty. 
(c)  The department will provide examinations for plumbers and HVAC mechanics under rules proscribed by the common council. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-407. - Disciplinary powers of the department. 
(a)  The department may take the following disciplinary actions for causes defined in West Virginia Code 21-11-14: 
(1)  Permanently revoke a license; 
(2)  Suspend a license for a specified period; 
(3)  Censure or reprimand a licensee; 
(4)  Impose limitations or conditions on the professional practice of a licensee; 
(5)  Impose requirements for remedial professional education to correct deficiencies in the education, training and skill of a licensee; and 
(6)  Impose a probationary period requiring a licensee to report regularly to the department on matters related to the grounds for probation. The department may withdraw probationary status if the deficiencies that require the sanction are remedied. 
(b)  The department may summarily suspend a licensee pending a hearing, as provided for in section 4-409 of this article, or pending an appeal after hearing upon a determination that the licensee poses a clear, significant, and immediate danger to the public health and safety. 
(c)  The department may reinstate a suspended or revoked license of a person, if, upon a hearing, the board finds and determines that such person is able to practice with skill and safety. 
(d)  The department may accept the voluntary surrender of a license; provided, that such license may not be reissued unless the board determines that the licensee is competent to resume practice and the licensee pays the appropriate renewal fees. 
(e)  A person adversely affected by disciplinary action may appeal to the appeals board within sixty (60) days of the date such disciplinary action is taken. The board shall hear the appeal in accordance with the provisions of West Virginia Code 29A-5-1, et seq., and section 4-409 of this article. 
(f)  In all disciplinary hearings, the appeals board has the burden of proof as to all matters in contention. No disciplinary action shall be taken by the board except on the affirmative vote of the majority of the board. Except for violations of West Virginia Code 21-11-13, no disciplinary action shall be taken by the board for any such cause as is set out West Virginia Code 21-11-14 unless the licensee has been finally adjudicated as having perpetrated such act in a court of record. Other than as specifically set out in West Virginia Code 21-11-13, the board has no power or authority to impose or assess damages. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-408. - Cease and desist orders. 
(a)  Upon a determination that a person is engaged in a contracting business in this state without a valid license, the department shall issue a cease and desist order requiring such person to immediately cease all operations in this city. The order shall be withdrawn upon issuance of a license to such person. After an administrative hearing, as provided for in section 4-409 of this article, the appeals board may impose a penalty of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) upon any person engaging in a contracting business without a valid license. 
(b)  Any person continuing to engage in a contracting business in this state without a valid license after the service of a cease and desist order is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The department may institute proceedings in the circuit court of the county in which the alleged violations of West Virginia Code 21-11-1, et seq. and the provisions of this article occurred or are now occurring to enjoin any such violation. 
(c)  Any person who undertakes any construction work without a valid license when such license is required by West Virginia Code 21-11-1, et seq., when the total cost of the contractor's construction contract on any project upon which the work is undertaken is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more, shall, in addition to any other penalty herein provided, be assessed by the department an administrative penalty not to exceed two hundred dollars per day for each day the person is in violation. 
(d)  The appeals board shall, as defined in section 4-409 of this article, provide for an administrative hearing before a penalty is assessed. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-409. - Administrative hearings. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by any action of the department, may appeal to the appeals board within sixty (60) days of such action. The board shall hear the appeal within fifteen (15) days from receipt of notice of appeal in accordance with the provisions of West Virginia Code 29A-5-1, et seq. Within five (5) days of receipt of a request for hearing, the appeals board shall provide a notice containing the date, time, place of the hearing, and a short and plain statement of the matters asserted. 
(b)  The appeals board may employ a hearing examiner to conduct the hearings and present proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law to the board for its action. 
(c)  The appeals board shall provide a written final decision to the aggrieved person within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing. The final decision of the appeals board is subject to judicial review by the circuit court of competent jurisdiction. Any such appeal shall be filed with the court within thirty (30) days of the date of the final decision of the appeals board. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-410. - Severability. 
(a)  If any provisions of this article or their application to any person is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the provisions or application of this rule which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this end, the provisions of this rule are severable. 
(Ord. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-411. - Standards for the certification and continuing education of municipal county and other public sector building code officials, inspectors and plans examiners. 
4-411.1. General. 
1.1 Scope. This rule establishes the requirements for the certification, continuing education and training of City of Beckley Building Code Officials, Building Code Inspectors and Building Code Plans Examiners to ensure compliance with the City of Beckley/West Virginia State Building Code and conforms with Title 87, Series 7, Legislative Rules, State Fire Commission. 
1.2 Authority. WV Code 29-3-5b 
1.3 Effective date. July 1, 2016 
4-411.2 Definitions. 
2.1. "Code Enforcement Department" means a division of any municipality, county or other governmental entity which has adopted and enforces the State Building Code. 
2.2. "Code Official" is a person who oversees and administers the Code Enforcement Department in a municipality, county or other local government entity that has lawfully adopted the State Building Code. In this role, the person may typically supervise one or more Deputy Code Officials, and other administrative and technical staff employed by the Code Enforcement Department. The Code Official: a) examines construction documents to ascertain compliance with provisions of the State Building Code, and/or b) performs field inspections to determine compliance with approved plans and code requirements, and/or c) enforces the relative administrative provisions of the State Building Code such as supervising building code inspectors or plans examiners, issues building permits, occupancy permits, notices of violations and orders, and initiates compulsory process. 
2.3. Continuing education" means additional training and education that is attained or pursued subsequent to initial certification by the State Fire Commission. 
2.4. "Continued Education Unit" or CEU" means a unit of measurement for each instructional unit of approved continuing education. 50 minutes of instruction shall equate to 0.1 unit of CEU credit. 
2.5. "Deputy Code Official" is a person who: a) examines construction documents to ascertain compliance with provisions of the State Building Code, and/or b) performs field inspections to determine compliance with approved plans and code requirements, and c) enforces the relative administrative provisions of the State Building Code under the authority of the Code Official. Though this person may possess the qualifications of a Code Official, they work under the supervision, authority, and control, of the Code Official as the chief executive officer of the Code Enforcement Department. 
2.6. "Discipline" is a particular category of the ICC codes (i.e. building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, property maintenance) in which the individual is certified under this rule. 
2.7. "ICC" refers to the International Code Council. 
2.8. "Inspector" refers to a class of certifications issued by the State Fire Commission in various disciplines. An Inspector's duties include examining construction sites and building locations to ensure they are constructed or maintained in accordance with the State Building Code and the adopted applicable ICC codes relative to the situation. An Inspector may issue a report of the condition or circumstance to the Code Official for further action. 
2.9. "Plans Examiner" refers to a class of certifications issued by the State Fire Commission in various disciplines. A Plans Examiner's duties include reviewing construction documents submitted as part of a permitting or compliance review to determine their compliance with the State Building Code and the adopted applicable ICC codes relative to the situation. A Plans Examiner may issue a report of the findings and conclusions of the review to the Code Official for further action. 
2.10. "State Building Code" refers to the code authorized by W. Va. Code § 29-3-5b and adopted by the West Virginia State Fire Commission in the Commission's rule, State Building Code, W. Va. Code R. § 87-4-1 et seq. (87CSR4), including all provisions and all codes and standards incorporated by reference in the rule. 
2.11. "State Fire Commission" means the thirteen (13) appointed members of the West Virginia State Fire Commission. 
2.12. "State Fire Marshal" refers to the West Virginia State Fire Marshal and his or her designated representatives. 
4-411.3. Certification of Code Officials, Inspectors and Plans Reviewers. 
3.1. Categories and Qualifications for Certification. The State Fire Commission may issue Certification to an individual within the following categories upon a sufficient showing that the person possesses these designated qualifications: 
3.1.a. Code Official- The State Fire Commission may issue certification for a Code Official in a specific category to an applicant who receives a passing grade in all of the examinations required for that category, or in the alternative, one who is licensed to practice in this State as an Architect or Professional Engineer. The following category of examinations will be approved: 
3.1.a.1. Building Code Official- Successful completion of the training and examination necessary to be certified as a building code official, residential building code inspector, commercial building inspector, or building plans examiner by the International Code Council; or may complete an equivalent certification by an examination authority accepted by the State Fire Commission. 
3.1.a.2. Plumbing Code Official- Successful completion of the training and examination necessary to be certified as a residential plumbing inspector, or commercial plumbing inspector, or plumbing plans examiner by the International Code Council; or an equivalent certification by an examination authority accepted by the State Fire Commission. 
3.1.a.3. Mechanical Code Official- Successful completion of the training and examination necessary to be certified as a residential mechanical inspector, or commercial mechanical inspector, or mechanical plans examiner by the International Code Council; or an equivalent certification by an examination authority accepted by the State Fire Commission. 
3.1.a.4. Electrical Code Official- Successful completion of the training and examination necessary to be certified as a residential electrical inspector, or commercial electrical inspector, or electrical plans examiner by the International Code Council; or an equivalent certification by an examination authority accepted by the State Fire Commission. 
3.1.a.5. Property Maintenance Code Official- Successful completion of the training and examination necessary to be certified as a property maintenance and housing inspector by the International Code Council; or an equivalent certification by an examination authority accepted by the State Fire Commission. 
3.1.a.6.i. Provided, a Property Maintenance Code Official certification shall only be permitted in a local jurisdiction which has adopted solely the International Property Maintenance Code ("IPMC"). 
3.1.a.6.ii. Provided, any police officer(s), employed by a local jurisdiction, shall be permitted to enforce provisions of the property maintenance code pertaining to general property maintenance issues (high grass, rubbish and garbage, etc.) without certification. Such officer(s) shall not cite violations relating to any structure(s) intended for human occupancy. 
3.1.b. Inspector. The State Fire Commission will issue certification for an Inspector in a specific category to an applicant who receives a passing grade in all of the examinations required for that category, or in the alternative, one who is licensed to practice in this State as an Architect or Professional Engineer. The following category of examinations will be approved: 
3.1.b.1. Residential Building Inspector- BI Residential Building Inspector. 
3.1.b.2. Commercial Building Inspector- B2 Commercial Building Inspector. 
3.1.b.3. Residential Electrical Inspector- E1 Residential Electrical Inspector and hold a valid WV Master Electrician's License. 
3.1.b.4. Commercial Electrical Inspector- E2 Commercial Electrical Inspector and hold a valid WV Master Electrician's License. 
3.1.b.5. Residential Mechanical Inspector- M1 Residential Mechanical Inspector. 
3.1.b.6. Commercial Mechanical Inspector- M2 Commercial Mechanical Inspector. 
3.1.b.7. Residential Plumbing Inspector- P1 Residential Plumbing Inspector. 
3.1.b.8. Commercial Plumbing Inspector- P2 Commercial Plumbing Inspector. 
3.1.b.9. Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector- 64 Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector. 
3.1.b.10. Other Inspector Certifications- 21 Accessibility Inspector; C1 Floodplain Inspector; 47 Reinforced Concrete Inspector; 92 Prestressed Concrete Inspector; 84 Structural Masonry Inspector; 86 Spray-applied Fireproofing Inspector; S1 Structural Steel and Bolting Inspector; S2 Welding Inspector; EC Soils Inspector; DR Disaster Response Inspector; and 77 Commercial Energy Inspector. 
3.1.c. Plans Examiner- The State Fire Commission will issue certification for a Plans Examiner in a specific category to an applicant who receives a passing grade in all of the examinations required for that category, or in the alternative, one who is licensed to practice in this State as an Architect or Professional Engineer. The following category of examinations will be approved: 
3.1.c.1. Building Plans Examiner- B3 Building Plans Examiner. 
3.1.c.2. Residential Building Plans Examiner- R3 Residential Building Plans Examiner. 
3.1.c.3. Electrical Plans Examiner- E3 Electrical Plans Examiner and hold a valid WV Master Electrician's License. 
3.1.c.4. Mechanical Plans Examiner- M3 Mechanical Plans Examiner. 
3.1.c.5. Plumbing Plans Examiner- P3 Plumbing Plans Examiner. 
3.2. Any person holding valid certification as a building code official, building code inspector, or building code plans reviewer under the provisions of W.Va. Code R. 87-7-1 et seq., effective July 1, 2016, whose administrative activities are limited thereunder to fewer than all five categories listed in subdivisions 3.1.a.1-5, may acquire certification and licensing for the remaining category or categories by demonstration of the qualifications established in subsection 3.1. of this section. 
3.3. Application for certification(s) shall be made in writing to the State Fire Commission upon forms designated or prescribed by the State Fire Marshal. 
3.4. The fee for certification is $75.00. 
3.4.a. Applicants seeking certification(s) by the State Fire Commission shall be subject to the required fee of $75.00 for each class of certifications (i.e. $75.00 for one or all qualifying Code Official certification(s); $75.00 for one or all qualifying Inspector certifications; and/or $75.00 for one or all qualifying Plans Examiner certification(s).) 
4-411.4. Continuing Education Requirements. 
4.1. In order to maintain certification and qualify for renewal of the license, each code official, inspector, or plans examiner, or any person certified and licensed as any combination thereof, shall complete a minimum of 0.5 continuing education units in courses approved by the State Fire Commission during each year for a total of 1.5 units acquired prior to the renewal date. 
4.2. The State Fire Commission may establish code training provider standards, curriculum or subject matter standards, trainer qualifications and reporting requirements for continuing education programs. 
4.2.a. The following instruction providers are deemed presumptively approved by the State Fire Commission: the ICC; the National Conference of States on Building Codes and Standards; a Federal, Commonwealth or State agency as it relates to building codes; an accredited academic institution as it relates to building codes; a model code organization or its accredited local chapter (WVCOA); a trade association representing design professionals or the construction industry; a national standards writing organization; and/or an association serving or representing state municipalities as it relates to building codes. 
4-411.5 Renewal of Certification and License. 
5.1. Every person certified and licensed under this rule shall renew his or her certification(s) every three years. A certification is not valid for a period greater than three years. 
5.2. The State Fire Marshal may designate the forms to be used for application for renewal of certification and shall make them available to all persons licensed under this rule. Not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of a certification, the State Fire Marshal shall notify the person by mail of the pending expiration and provide that person with copies of the forms required to apply for renewal of the certification. 
5.3 The fee for renewal of the certification is $75.00. 
5.3.a. Applicants seeking renewal of certification(s) by the State Fire Commission shall be subject to the required fee of $75.00 for each class of certifications (i.e. $75.00 for one or all qualifying Code Official certification(s); $75.00 for one or all qualifying Inspector certifications; and/or $75.00 for one or all qualifying Plans Examiner certification(s).) 
4-411.6 Probationary Employment of Uncertified Code Officials, Inspectors and Plans Examiners. 
6.1. An uncertified person shall be granted a probationary status for a period not to exceed two (2) years, during which the certification requirements of subsection 3.2. shall be satisfied. Upon proof of qualification for certification as required by subsection 3.2, the individual shall be certified in the respective categories listed in Section 3 of this Rule. 
6.2. During the period of probationary status, the individual must submit to the State Fire Commission a report of the person's status in completing testing in the ICC disciplines. This report must be made within ninety (90) days of the grant of probationary status and every ninety (90) days thereafter through the period of probation. Failure to comply with this condition may result in the revocation of the probationary status. 
6.3. Not less than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the probationary period granted, an individual may request an extension of the probationary period. The State Fire Commission may, upon good cause shown, extend the period of probationary status for not more than six (6) months during which the individual must present monthly reports of their status in obtaining proper certification. Failure to comply with this condition may result in revocation of the probationary status. 
6.4. In the event a probationary status or request for extension of probationary status is denied by the State Fire Marshal, the individual may request an administrative hearing pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code § 29A-5-1 et seq. with the State Fire Commission within thirty (30) days after receipt of the decision. 
4-411.7 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of Certifications; Other Fees. 
7.1. The State Fire Commission may deny, suspend, or revoke, any certification or application for certification for any of the following grounds: 
7.1.a. failure to provide sufficient or complete documentation; 
7.1.b. providing false documentation; 
7.1.c. making any misrepresentation in the process of application for certification or renewal of certification; 
7.1.d. failure to comply with the continuing education requirements; 
7.1.e. failure to submit full payment of certification fees or renewal of certification fees; or 
7.1.f. failure to submit an application within the time periods provided by this rule. 
7.1.g. upon satisfactory proof that a certification holder or applicant has been convicted of a felony. 
7.1.h. willfully departed from accepted standards of conduct in violation of the rules of the State Fire Commission or State Fire Marshal; or 
7.1.i. willfully violated any federal, state or local law, rule or regulation, while acting in his or her official capacity as a Code Official, Inspector or Plans Examiner. 
7.2. The State Fire Commission may assess a late payment fee for any application submitted after the filing deadline according to the following schedule: $50 for an application submitted less than fifteen (15) days after the filing deadline, $100.00 for an application submitted fifteen (15) to thirty (30) days after the deadline, and $200 for an application submitted more than thirty (30) days after the filing deadline. 
7.3 If a person fails to renew his or her certification within sixty (60) days of the date of expiration, that person is not entitled to a renewal and shall reapply as a new applicant for certification. 
4-411.8 Local Code Enforcement Departments; Annual Reports. 
8.1 Any municipality, county or local governmental entity, adopting and enforcing the State Building Code shall have a designated Code Enforcement Department. 
8.1.a. A Code Enforcement Department must employ a certified Code Official as the administrator of the organization. The Code Official may supervise one or more Deputy Code Officials, and other administrative and technical staff employed by the Code Enforcement Department. 
8.2. A person may not be employed or serve as a code official, code plans examiner or inspector unless that person is certified in his or her respective category by the State Fire Commission. 
8.2.a. Any certified law enforcement officer(s) employed by a local jurisdiction may be permitted to enforce provisions of the property maintenance code pertaining to general property maintenance issues (high grass, rubbish and garbage, etc.) without certification. However, such officer(s) may not cite violations relating to any structure(s) intended for human occupancy. 
8.3. The Code Official shall submit an annual report to the State Fire Commission indicating the number of employees in their respective code enforcement department, their job title, whether the employee is or is not certified by the State Fire Commission in their respective discipline, as well as a verification that the entity has adopted the current version of the State Building Code. The municipality, county or local governmental entity, shall also report what ICC codes are being enforced respectively. 
8.4. This annual report shall be filed with the State Fire Commission no later than the thirtieth day of June of each year. 
8.5. Conflict of Interest. No employee or person who contracts for services within the jurisdictional area of a Code Enforcement Department shall perform services for any department which would require that person or employee to exercise authority or make an evaluation of any work furnished by him or by a private contractor that employs him or with which he has a financial interest. Further, such employee or person shall not engage in conduct that is prohibited or considered a conflict of interest pursuant to the respective ICC code. 
8.5. The State Fire Commission may deny, suspend, or revoke, any certification or application for certification for any violation of this section. 
4-411.9 Complaints; Determination of Probable Cause. 
9.1. The State Fire Marshal, or his or her designee, shall be empowered with the authority of investigating and administratively handling any complaint filed alleging a violation of sections 7 and/or 8 of this rule. 
9.2. Any person, firm, corporation, member of the State Fire Commission, State Fire Marshal, or public officer, upon observing an infraction of the requirements of Section 7 or 8 of this rule may file a written complaint with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The State Fire Marshal may provide a form for this purpose, but a complaint may be filed in any written form. 
9.3. To the extent possible, the complaint should describe the alleged violation which prompted the complaint, including any of the following information: 
9.3.1. The name and address of the certified individual or applicant against whom the complaint is lodged; 
9.3.2. The date of the alleged unlawful act; 
9.3.3. The nature of the alleged unlawful act; and 
9.3.4. The location of the alleged unlawful act. 
9.4. The State Fire Marshal shall maintain a separate file for each complaint received, and each file shall have a number assigned to it. The individual that is the subject of the Complaint shall be deemed and hereinafter referred to as the "Respondent". 
9.5. The State Fire Marshal shall maintain a complaint log which records the receipt of each complaint, its nature and its disposition. 
9.6. Upon receipt of a complaint, the State Fire Marshal shall issue one of the following acknowledgments to the complainant: 
9.6.1. That the matter will be reviewed by the State Fire Marshal; 
9.6.2. That the complaint is outside the jurisdiction of the State Fire Commission and State Fire Marshal, with suggestions, if any such exist, as to how the complainant might best obtain a resolution of his or her problem; or, 
9.6.3. That more information will be required in order to adequately review the individual complaint. 
9.7. If the State Fire Marshal acknowledges the complaint under subsection 9.6.1, or 9.6.3, the State Fire Marshal shall send a copy of the complaint, including any supporting documentation, by certified mail to the Respondent for his or her written comment. If the acknowledgement falls under 9.8.2, the State Fire Marshal may, in his/her discretion, notify the Respondent with a copy of the complaint and inform the Respondent that the complaint is being dismissed for lack of jurisdiction and no further action is necessary by the Respondent. 
9.8 If the matter is being further reviewed or investigated pursuant to subsection 9.6.1, or 9.6.3, the State Fire Marshal shall afford the Respondent an opportunity to submit a written response to the State Fire Marshal within thirty (30) days of the date of such correspondence, or waive the right to do so. 
9.8.1. A copy of the complaint sent to the certificate holders or applicants shall be considered properly served when sent to their last known address. It is the responsibility of the certificate holder or applicant to keep the State Fire Marshal informed of his or her current address. 
9.9. After acknowledgement of a complaint under subdivision 9.6.1 or 9.6.3, the State Fire Marshal shall cause to be conducted any reasonable inquiry or investigation he or she considers necessary to determine the truth and the validity of the allegations set forth in the complaint. At his or her discretion, the State Fire Marshal may assign a designee to inquire or investigate the complaint. 
9.9.1. If a complaint is assigned to a designee, the designee shall timely review and investigate the complaint. Upon completion of the inquiry/investigation, the designee shall provide the State Fire Marshal with a written report. The report shall contain a statement of the allegations, a statement of facts, and an analysis of the complaint including a description of the inspection, the records reviewed, and interviews conducted, and a statement of the designee's findings and recommendations. 
9.9.2. During the course of the inquiry/investigation, the designee shall provide an update to the State Fire Marshall at least every sixty days (60) about the status and anticipated duration of the investigation. The State Fire Marshal may direct or cease certain activities of the designee in order to facilitate a timely resolution of the inquiry/investigation. 
9.10. The State Fire Marshal, or designee, may issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum to complete the State Fire Marshal's investigation and to determine the truth or validity of complaints. 
9.11. As part of any inquiry or investigation, the Respondent shall be afforded an opportunity to have an investigative interview which, at the discretion of the State Fire Marshal (or designee), may be recorded and transcribed by a court reporter. A copy of such recording or transcription shall be placed in the investigation file. 
9.12. Notwithstanding subdivision 9.11, to facilitate the disposition of a complaint, the State Fire Marshal, or designee, may request any person to attend an informal conference at any time prior to the State Fire Marshal entering any order with respect to the complaint. The State Fire Marshal, or the designee, shall give notice of the conference, which shall include a statement of issues to be informally discussed. Statements made at a conference may not be introduced at any subsequent hearing on the merits without the consent of all parties to the hearing. No prejudice shall attach for failure to attend a conference pursuant to a request. 
9.13. Upon completion of the inquiry/investigation by the State Fire Marshal (or designee), the State Fire Marshal shall make a recommendation to the State Fire Commission as to the disposition of the complaint. The State Fire Marshal, or designee, shall make his or her respective written findings and recommendations known to the State Fire Commission, and the State Fire Commission shall make a determination whether or not probable cause is found to limit or restrict a certification, suspend a certification or revoke any certification issued by the State Fire Commission. 
9.13.1. At any point in the course of an investigation or inquiry into a complaint, the State Fire Marshal may decide to recommend to the State Fire Commission that there is not and will not be sufficient evidence to warrant further proceedings, or that the complaint fails to allege misconduct for which a certified individual or applicant may be sanctioned by the State Fire Commission: Provided, that the State Fire Marshal or designee shall make their respective findings and recommendations to the State Fire Commission in writing prior to the State Fire Commission dismissing the complaint. 
9.13.2. At any point in the course of an investigation or inquiry, the State Fire Marshal may recommend to the State Fire Commission that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a finding of probable cause that a violation has occurred. 
9.14. If the State Fire Commission finds probable cause that a violation may have occurred, a Formal Complaint setting forth a statement of violations, along with a Notice of Hearing, shall be issued by the State Fire Commission. The administrative procedures governing the Complaint and Hearing are more fully set forth in Series 9 of Title 87 (W.Va. C.S.R. § 87-9-1 et seq.) 
4-411.10 Appeal of denial of certification; hearings; evidence. 
10.1. Any person who desires to appeal a decision or Order may appeal the decision or Order pursuant to the provisions contained in Series 9 of Title 87 of the West Virginia Code of State Rules. The taking of evidence and hearing procedures shall be made in conformity therewith. 
4-411.11 Orders. 
11.1. Any final order entered by the State Fire Commission following a hearing conducted pursuant to these rules shall be made pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code §§ 29A-5-3. Such orders shall be entered within forty-five (45) days following the submission of all documents and materials necessary for the proper disposition of the case, including transcripts, and shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
11.2. The findings of fact and conclusions of law must be approved by a majority of the State Fire Commission either by a poll or vote at a meeting, before a final order is entered. A copy of the final order approved by a majority of the State Fire Commission shall be served upon the demanding or charged party and/or his or her attorney of record, if any, within ten (10) days after entry by the Fire Commission by personal service or by registered or certified mail. 
11.3. State Fire Commission's Order and Decisions are final and Conclusive - Any order or final written decision of the State Fire Marshal based upon or made in the course of the administration or enforcement of the provisions of W. Va. Code §29-3-5b et seq. based upon or made pursuant to this rule, is final, unless vacated or modified upon review pursuant to the appeal rights and procedures provided by Chapter 29A of the W. Va. Code and this rule. 
4-411.12 Appeal. 
12.1. An appeal from any final order of the State Fire Commission entered in accordance with these rules shall comply with the provisions of W. Va. Code § 29A-6-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 6-28-16(2)) 
Secs. 4-412-4-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 27, 1990, amended the Code by repealing provisions contained in §§ 4-500 and 4-501. Said provisions pertained to the Standard Plumbing Code, 1982 edition, with revisions through 1984, as amended, recommended by the Southern Congress International, Inc., and derived from the Code of 1971, §§ 16-1-16-3. Provisions contained in § 4-502 were construed by the editor to be superfluous and hence have been omitted at his discretion, which provisions pertained to similar subject matter as the provisions mentioned hereinabove, and derived from the Code of 1971, § 16-4. See § 4-13. 

Secs. 4-500-4-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of Oct. 25, 1994 repealed former Art. VI, §§ 4-600-4-604, 4-636-4-648, and 4-660-4-683, in its entirety. Former Art. VI pertained to the mechanical code and derived from the Code of 1971, §§ 12-1-12-42. 

Secs. 4-600-4-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 26, 2006, amended Art. VII in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 28, 1992. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4-700. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this ordinance is to: 
(1)  Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community. 
(2)  Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future. 
(3)  Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water supply and sanitary sewage disposal in cooperation with the county sanitarian, and to protect natural drainage. 
(4)  Assure the county assessor obtains information concerning improvement of real property as required by W. Va. Code § 11-3-3A. 
(5)  Assure county E-911 addresses are obtained to maintain the currency of established emergency response dispatch systems. 
(6)  Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its residents, by preventing the unwise design and construction of development in areas subject to flooding. 
(b)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in floodprone areas. Any ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-701. - Applicability. 
    It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business, or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development, new construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, or the placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) within the City of Beckley unless a permit application has been completed and a permit and certificate of compliance has been obtained from the floodplain administrator. In addition, where land is to be subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or otherwise developed, a site plan must be submitted to, and approved by, the floodplain administrator prior to any development. 
    Provisions of all other codes, ordinances, and regulations shall be applicable insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this article and the community's need to minimize the hazards and damage resulting from flooding. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-702. - Interpretations and definitions. 
(a)  Interpretations. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following interpretations shall apply: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  The singular includes the plural. 
(3)  The plural includes the singular. 
(4)  The term "shall" or "will" is always mandatory. 
(5)  The word "building" or "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof". 
(6)  The word "ordinance" shall refer to the floodplain article. 
(b)  Definitions. 
General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
(1)  Appurtenant structure means a structure on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. This does not include a gas or liquid storage tank. 
(2)  Base flood means the flood, which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this ordinance, the one-hundred (100) year flood. 
(3)  Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
(4)  Certificate of compliance means a certification that the entire development, including the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure, is in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(5)  Contractor -W. Va. Code § 21-11-3(c). A person who in any capacity for compensation, other than as an employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, structure or excavation associated with a project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith, where the cost of the undertaking is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. Contractor includes a construction manager who performs management and counseling services on a construction project for a professional fee. 
Contractor does not include: 
a.  One who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating or consuming them in the construction project; 
b.  A person who personally performs construction work on the site of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or residential purposes; 
c.  A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and who functions under the control of any other licensing or regulatory board, whose primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management and maintenance, who acting in his or her respective professional capacity and any employee of such professional, acting in the course of his or her employment, performs any work which may be considered to be performing contracting work; 
d.  A pest control operator licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code § 19-16A-7 to engage in the application of pesticides for hire, unless the operator also performs structural repairs exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on property treated for insect pests; or 
e.  A corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship whose primary purpose is to prepare construction plans and specifications used by the contractors defined in this section and who employs full time a registered architect licensed to practice in this state or a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in this state. Contractor also does not include employees of such corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship. 
(6)  Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
(7)  Flood means a general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
(8)  Floodplain means: 
a.  A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 
b.  An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(9)  Floodplain administrator means the mayor shall be the floodplain administrator. The mayor may delegate this authority to others as deemed appropriate. The floodplain administrator may also be identified as the floodplain manager. 
(10)  Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(11)  Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
(12)  Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for unknown factors that may contribute uncertainty to flood heights of any given flood and floodway condition, such as wave action, blockage at stream crossings, and increased runoff from urbanization of the watershed. 
(13)  Historic structure means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
(14)  Licensed manufactured home dealer means a business licensed to sell manufactured homes in the West Virginia as set forth in the W. Va. Code. 
(15)  Licensed manufacturing home installer means a contractor licensed to install manufactured homes in West Virginia as set forth in the W. Va. Code. 
(16)  Licensed professional surveyor means any person licensed by the W.V. State Board of Examiners of Land Surveyors to engage in the practice of land surveying as defined in the W. Va. Code. 
(17)  Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished enclosure constructed with flood resistant materials as defined in the FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) and usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article. 
(18)  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
(19)  New construction means structures for which the start of construction as herein defined commenced on or after September 11, 1984 and including any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(20)  One-hundred (100) year flood means a flood that has one (1) chance in one-hundred (100) or a one (1) per cent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(21)  Person means any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
(22)  Practice of engineering means any service or creative work, as described in W. Va. Code Ch. 30, Art. 13, the adequate performance of which requires engineering education, training and experience in the application of special knowledge of the mathematical, physical and engineering sciences to such services or creative work as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning and design of engineering works and systems; planning the use of land and water; teaching of advanced engineering subjects, engineering surveys and studies; and the review of construction for the purpose of assuring compliance with drawings and specifications any of which embraces such services or work, either public or private, in connection with any utilities, structures, buildings, machines, equipment, processes, work systems, projects and industrial or consumer products or equipment of a mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or thermal nature, insofar as they involve safeguarding life, health or property, and including such other professional services as may be necessary to the planning, progress and completion of any engineering services. Engineering surveys include all survey activities required to support the sound conception, planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of engineered projects. 
Any person who practices any branch of the profession of engineering or who, by verbal claim, sign, advertisement, letterhead, card or in any other way represents himself or herself to be a registered professional engineer, or by using another title implies that he or she is a registered professional engineer or that he or she is registered under W. Va. Code, Ch. 30, Art. 13 or who holds himself or herself out as able to perform, or who performs any engineering service or work or any other service designated by the practitioner which is recognized as engineering, is considered to practice or offer to practice engineering within the meaning and content of W. Va. Code Ch. 30, Art. 13. 
(23)  Principally above ground means where at least fifty-one (51) per cent of the actual cash value of a structure, less land value, is above ground. 
(24)  Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(25)  Registered professional engineer means a person who has been duly registered or licensed as a professional engineer by the West Virginia State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers as required under W. Va. Code § 30-13-3(f). 
(26)  Remedy a violation means to bring a structure or other development into compliance with the requirements of this article, or, if full compliance is not possible, to reduce the adverse impacts of the non-compliance to the greatest extent feasible. 
(27)  Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
(28)  Start of construction. (The definition for start of construction is to be used only when calculating the starting time of the six-month expiration of a permit.) 
The date the permit was issued, permits including for substantial improvement or substantial damage, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Although a permit must be obtained prior to beginning, permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(29)  State coordinating office means the West Virginia Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management. 
(30)  Stream as defined in W. Va. Code § 7-1-3u, any watercourse, whether natural or man-made, distinguishable by banks and a bed, regardless of their size, through which water flows continually or intermittently, regardless of its volume. 
(31)  Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
(32)  Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means cumulative flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) per cent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See "Substantial improvement." 
(33)  Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. 
This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", as defined herein regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violation of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all article requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific article requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from article requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
For the purpose of this definition, improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
(34)  Top of bank means the lines depicted on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) maps delineating each side of a stream indicate the top of bank. In the field a professional familiar with fluvial geomorphology should document the top of bank. When a professional is not employed the top of the bank will be considered to be the top of the first significant slope landward of the waters edge when it is followed by at least fifty (50) feet of relatively flat land. 
(35)  Violation means the failure of any structure or development to be fully compliant with all requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-703. - Establishment of the floodplain area. 
(a)  Identification. 
(1)  The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the City of Beckley which are subject to the one hundred (100) year flood, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and described in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for the City of Beckley by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) dated November 1, 1984 or the most recent revision thereof. 
(2)  The identified floodplain area shall also be those areas of the City of Beckley which have been identified as flood hazard areas by the City of Beckley by use of historic or other technical data and shown on the City of Beckley "Local Flood Hazards Map". These areas shall be designated as appropriate with the level of technical data described below and shall be managed accordingly. 
(b)  Descriptions of floodplain areas. The identified floodplain shall consist of the following four (4) specific areas: 
(1)  The floodway area (F1) shall be those areas identified as such in the FIS and as shown on the floodway map or FIRM. In the approximated floodplain area (F4) for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half (1/2) the width of the floodplain as measured from the top of the bank of the channel to the upland limit of the floodplain. The term shall also include floodway areas identified in other studies for the approximated area discussed in section (b)(4) below. 
(2)  The floodway fringe area (F2) shall be those areas for which specific one hundred-year flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but which lie beyond the floodway area. 
(3)  The AE area without floodway (F3) shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which one hundred-year flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been delineated. 
(4)  The approximated area (F4) shall be those areas identified as an A zone on the FIRM or floodway map included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no one hundred (100) year flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available the floodplain administrator shall require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering or other techniques. Only professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications shall undertake hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. The responsible professional shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computation, etc., used to determine base flood elevations and floodways shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-704. - Changes in designation of area. 
(a)  The delineation of the identified floodplain area may be revised by the City of Beckley where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual document the necessity for such changes. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the federal insurance administration (FIA). 
(b)  The City of Beckley may identify and regulate new flood hazard or ponding a areas. These areas may be delineated using locally derived technical information such as flood of record, historic high water marks and/or topographic data. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-705. - Elevations prevail. 
(a)  If the lowest natural grade adjacent to a proposed building site that is within an identified flood hazard area is at or above the base flood elevation specified in the flood insurance study, the structure shall not be required to conform to the flood prevention design and construction standards or flood-related development codes in section 4-712 below. Topographic data certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. The applicant is advised to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA to have the special flood hazard area designation removed from the parcel or structure. 
(b)  If the lowest natural grade adjacent to a proposed building site is below the base flood elevation specified in the flood insurance study, the site shall be considered to be within the floodplain area and the proposed structure shall be required to conform to all appropriate provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-706. - Boundary disputes. 
    Should a dispute concerning any district boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the floodplain administrator and any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the City of Beckley Board of Zoning Appeals. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant/applicant. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-707. - Utilization of the floodplain area. 
(a)  Floodway (F1). 
(1)  Within any floodway area (F1), no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, repair of substantial damage, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(2)  The floodway shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible to carry the discharge of the base flood. Because floodways present increased risk to human life and property because of their relatively faster and deeper flowing waters: 
a.  New development shall not be permitted in the floodway where reasonable alternatives exist elsewhere. In addition to the requirements below the applicant shall demonstrate that there are no reasonable alternatives other than the floodway encroachment before a permit is issued. 
b.  When the floodway is the only reasonable alternative the applicant shall demonstrate that the floodway encroachment is the minimum necessary to accomplish the project. 
(3)  All permitted uses, activities, and development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained herein, and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Floodway fringe (F2) and approximated floodplain (F4). 
(1)  In the floodway fringe (F2) and approximated floodplain (F4), any development and/or use of land shall be permitted provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood-proofing and related provisions contained herein and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments which are proposed to take place either fully or partially within the approximated floodplain area (F4) and which are greater than ten (10) lots or two (2) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data. 
a.  This data may be available from an authoritative source, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resource Conservation Service or state and local water resource department. 
b.  If the required data is not available from other sources the applicant shall develop the technical data using detailed methodologies comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study. This data shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. 
(3)  All new or improved structures located in the approximated floodplain (F4) shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade unless base flood elevation data has been obtained from an authoritative source or developed by a qualified professional using a detailed methodology as described above. 
(c)  AE area without floodway (F3). Within any AE area without floodway, no new construction or development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood more than one (1) foot at any point. This requirement can be satisfied by utilization of the floodway area where determined. 
(d)  Alteration or relocation of a stream. 
(1)  Whenever a developer intends to alter (including placement of bridges, culverts or other stream crossings) or relocate a stream within the floodplain area, the developer shall notify in writing, by certified mail, City of Beckley, floodplain administrator; the State Coordinating Office at Building 1 Room EB-80, 1900 Kanawha Boulevard, Charleston, West Virginia 25305-0360 and any adjacent communities of all such intended activities prior to the alteration or relocation of the stream, and shall submit copies of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration c/o FEMA Region III, One Independence Mall, Sixth Floor, 615 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19106-4404. All applicants proposing to alter or relocate a stream must obtain all required permits including those set forth in the City of Beckley Stream Alteration/Stream Crossing Administrative Procedures. The floodplain administrator shall require copies of all necessary permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state law requires approval prior to issuing the local permit. 
(2)  The developer shall also assure the City of Beckley, in writing, that the carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of stream will be maintained. The floodplain administrator may require the applicant to demonstrate that the altered or relocated portion of stream will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. If hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be undertaken by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted professional practice. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  The floodplain administrator may require the use of certain "best practice" techniques in the construction of bridges, culverts or stream alterations to prevent damage or loss of stream crossings and localizing flooding caused by blockages. These techniques may include, but are not limited to, wing walls, trash grates or requiring openings to be of sufficient size to pass debris and carry future increases in flood heights. 
(4)  All new and replacement bridges, culverts and other stream crossings shall adhere to the relevant anchoring requirements contained in this ordinance. 
(5)  The developer is required to provide the City of Beckley a legal agreement detailing all scheduled inspections and maintenance to be performed on altered or relocated watercourses including culverts and bridges. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer this agreement to the new owner when the land associated with the watercourse alteration is transferred. A copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(6)  The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material required by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) to revise the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by the floodplain administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-708. - Criteria for building and site plan approval. 
(a)  General. Permits are required in order to determine whether all new construction or substantial improvements are: 
(1)  Located in the identified floodplain or floodway. 
(2)  Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  Constructed with material and utility equipment resistant to flood damage as outlined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) or the most recent revision thereof. 
(4)  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Basic format. The basic format of the permit shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur. 
(3)  Name, address, and valid WV license number of contractor(s), or affidavit stating that work is being performed by individuals exempt from contractor licensing as set forth in W. Va. Code Title 28, Series 2, § 3.9(b) of State Regulations or the most recent revision thereof. 
(4)  Site location including tax map and parcel number. 
(5)  The contract required by W. Va. Code of State Regulations, Title 28, Series 4, and all addendums to the contract(s) shall be presented to the floodplain administrator for review within five (5) business days of contract signing. The City of Beckley does not require and will not keep copies of the contracts or addendums. Failure to present contract or addendums for review may void the permit. If a licensed contractor is not involved or the work is of an aggregate value of less than ten thousand dollars (10,000.000), including materials and labor, brief written description of proposed work and the estimated cost will suffice. 
(6)  A standard site plan showing the exact size and location of the proposed development, adjacent roads and watercourses with direction of flow as well as any existing buildings or structures. 
(7)  An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to pay any and all fees associated with the permitting process as set forth in this article. 
(8)  An acknowledgement that the applicant agrees to allow the floodplain administrator, or his designees, and the floodplain compliance officer access to the development to inspect for compliance. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-709. - Elevation and floodproofing information. 
    All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum elevation requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered significantly by increasing the elevation of the lowest floor above the freeboard height required by this ordinance. 
    Depending on the type of structure involved, the following information shall also be included in the application for work within the floodplain area: 
(1)  For structures to be elevated two (2) feet above the base flood elevation: 
a.  A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. 
b.  A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor, certified by a registered professional engineer, surveyor, or architect. 
c.  Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls, foundations, erosion protection measures, etc. When required by the floodplain administrator, a registered professional engineer or architect shall prepare these plans. 
d.  Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation at the building site. 
e.  During the course of construction, as soon as the basic elements of the lowest floor are in place and before further vertical construction, the applicant shall submit elevation data certifying the height of the lowest floor completed by a licensed surveyor. 
f.  A nonconversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant whenever the community determines that the area below the first floor could be converted to a non-conforming use (generally applies to areas below base flood elevation that are five (5) feet high or more). This agreement shall state: 
1.  The area below base flood elevation shall not be converted for use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as detailed in this article. 
2.  The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the existence of this agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  For structures to be flood proofed to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation (nonresidential structures only): 
All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum flood proofing requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered significantly by increasing the level of flood proofing above the height required by this ordinance. In order to obtain an "elevation credited" flood insurance rate on dry flood proofed buildings, flood proofing must extend at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
a.  Plans showing details of all flood proofing measures, prepared by a registered professional engineer or architect, showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. 
b.  A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing ground, proposed finished ground, lowest floor, and flood proofing limits; certified by a registered professional engineer, surveyor, or architect. 
c.  A flood proofing certificate, FEMA 81-65, as revised by FEMA, shall be prepared by the registered professional engineer or architect who prepared the plans in subsection a. above, stating the structure in question, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities is designed so that: 
1.  The structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest structural element to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
2.  The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic, buoyant, impact, and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities, pressures, and other factors associated with the base flood. 
(3)  For structures constructed of flood resistant materials-Used solely for parking of vehicles, or storage (appurtenant structures only): 
a.  Plans showing details of all flood proofing measures and showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. 
b.  A completed elevation certificate showing elevation of existing ground, proposed finished ground, and lowest floor. 
c.  A certificate must be prepared by the floodplain administrator that confirms that the structure in question, together with attendant utilities, is designed so that: 
1.  Flood resistant materials are used from two (2) feet above the base flood elevation down and that all utilities are located at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls are equalized by allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
iv.  The applicant shall sign a non-conversion agreement and notify prospective buyers of the existence of the agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the non-conversion agreement to any new owner at closing via notarized signature. A copy of the signed agreement shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-710. - Site plan criteria. 
    The owner or developer of any proposed development, including subdivisions and manufactured home parks, shall submit a preliminary site plan to the floodplain administrator that includes the following information: 
(1)  Name of engineer, surveyor, or other qualified person responsible for providing the information required in this section. 
(2)  A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or development with respect to the town's floodplain areas, proposed lot sites, and fills. In addition, it is required that all subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments which are proposed to take place either fully or partially within the approximated floodplain (F4) and which are greater that ten (10) lots or two (2) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data. If FEMA has completed a flood insurance study (FIS), that data must be used to substantiate the base flood. Otherwise, the developer may submit data provided by an authoritative source, such as U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resources Conservation Service, state and local water resource departments, or technical data developed using detailed methodologies comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study. This data shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. 
(3)  Where the subdivision and/or development lies partially or completely in the floodplain areas, the plan map shall include detailed information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities and building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of two (2) or five (5) feet depending upon the slope of the land and identify accurately the boundaries of the floodplain areas. 
(4)  Where the subdivision lies partially in the floodplain area and all proposed development will take place on natural grade a significant vertical distance above the floodplain area, development of detailed base flood elevation data may not be necessary. In these cases the site plan for the proposed development must clearly delineate the area to be developed and the location of the floodplain areas as depicted on the FEMA map. A registered professional engineer, licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated qualifications must certify the site plan. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-711. - Restrictions to subdivision of land in floodplain areas. 
    Subdivision of land in the floodplain area must result in lots that include a buildable portion outside of the identified flood hazard area and be served by streets within the proposed subdivision having surfaces not lower than one (1) foot below the elevation of the line defining the floodplain limits. All new structures must be sited on the portion of the subdivided lot that is located outside of the identified flood hazard area. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-712. - Specific requirements. 
(a)  Design and construction standards. In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings, structures, and related utilities and facilities, the following restrictions apply to all development, subdivision proposals, manufactured home parks, new construction and to construction of substantial improvements, and the repair of substantial damage to existing structures occurring in the floodplain area: 
(1)  Basements and lowest floors. 
a.  All new construction, relocation, substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of residential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork and utilities, elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  All new construction, relocation, substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is flood proofed in accordance with the requirements detailed in this ordinance. 
c.  For all new construction, relocation, substantial improvements, and repair of substantial damage, those fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(2)  Manufactured home placement. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be sited within the identified flood hazard areas of the City of Beckley shall be installed by a contractor possessing a valid WV manufactured home installer's license. The installer shall use an installation design engineered to withstand flood hazards specific to the particular home site. The installation design shall incorporate the following floodplain management requirements: 
1.  Elevation so that the lowest floor, ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump are elevated two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength engineered for use in a flood hazard area and attached to a permanent foundation. 
3.  The frame of the unit shall be anchored to an adequately anchored permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
4.  Installation designs incorporating dry stacked block shall not be used in flood hazard areas. 
5.  Ground anchors shall not be considered permanent foundation systems. 
b.  The floodplain administrator shall perform or shall cause to be performed a site inspection. The inspector shall certify, in writing, that the manufactured home has been installed to the standards set forth in this section. 
(3)  Appurtenant structures. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. below, appurtenant structures shall be located out of the floodplain area or elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Where appurtenant structures not connected to the principal structure are to be located on sites below the base flood elevation, the following flood damage reduction provisions apply: 
1.  Structures shall be no more than six hundred (600) square feet in size and valued at less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
2.  Floors shall be at or above grade on at least one (1) side. 
3.  Structures shall be located, oriented, and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
4.  Structures shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
5.  Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) shall be used in the construction of the structure from the lowest structural element to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
6.  Machinery, electric devices or appliances, and all utilities shall be located at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
7.  The venting requirements contained in section 4-712(a)(1) are applicable and shall be strictly adhered to. 
c.  A nonconversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant stating that the use of the appurtenant structure or detached or attached garage shall not be changed from the use permitted, acknowledging that the structure may be subject to greater flood risk and that higher flood insurance premiums may be possible, and that a change in use may require full compliance with this ordinance. The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the existence of this agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(4)  Recreational vehicle placement. 
a.  Recreational vehicles to be placed within any floodplain area shall comply with West Virginia Code and any other city ordinances that apply. 
(5)  Fill. The City of Beckley officially recognizes the beneficial functions the floodplain serves in storage and transportation of water during floods. Placement of fill in the floodplain area is discouraged and should be minimized. In the floodway, no fill shall be permitted unless it meets the requirements of section 4-707(a) of this ordinance. All fill placed in the floodplain area shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
a.  Fill shall be used only to the extent which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties. The City of Beckley may require the applicant to show through hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques that proposed fill would not adversely affect adjacent properties. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in efficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the City of Beckley. 
b.  Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
c.  Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to provide table access. For residential structures, fill shall extend laterally fifteen (15) feet beyond the building line from all points before the start of sloping required in following subsection. For nonresidential structures, fill shall be placed to provide access acceptable for intended use. At grade access, with fill extending laterally fifteen (15) feet beyond the building line shall be provided to a minimum of twenty-five (25) per cent of the perimeter of a nonresidential structure. 
d.  Fill shall consist of soil or rock material only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted. 
e.  Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling. 
f.  Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one (1) vertical on two (2) horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the floodplain administrator. 
g.  Fill slopes exposed to flood waters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood of five (5) feet per second or less must be protected from erosion by covering them with grass, vines, weeds, or similar vegetative undergrowth. 
h.  Fill slopes exposed to flood waters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood of greater than five (5) feet per second must be protected from erosion by armoring them with stone or rock slope protection. 
i.  The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material required by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) to revise the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by the floodplain administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. 
(6)  Placement of buildings. 
a.  All buildings and structures shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum obstruction effect upon the flow and height of floodwater. 
1.  Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow and, 
2.  So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood-flow lines as those of adjoining structures. 
(7)  Anchoring. 
a.  All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse. 
b.  All air ducts, large pipes, and storage tanks located at or below the base flood elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation. 
c.  All manufactured homes shall be anchored in compliance with the requirements of 42 CSR Series 19, Sections 10.1, 10.2, and 10.3, et seq. Anchoring shall be adequate to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to the over-the-top and frame ties, attached to foundation elements, such as the following: 
1.  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side for manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long. 
2.  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side. 
3.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. 
4.  Any additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(8)  Flood protection setback. 
a.  A flood protection setback equal to twice the width of the watercourse channel measuring from the top of one (1) bank to the top of the opposite bank or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less, shall be maintained from the top of the banks of all watercourses. To reduce erosion, natural vegetation shall be maintained in this area. Where natural vegetation does not exist along the watercourse and conditions for replanting are suitable, high priority shall be given to planting vegetation in the setback area to stabilize banks and enhance aquatic resources. 
b.  Necessary public works and temporary construction may be exempted from this subsection. 
c.  The floodplain administrator may consider an appeal to the flood protection setback requirement if the applicant demonstrates that it is impossible to allow any development without encroachment into the flood protection setback area. The appeal conditions shall be the minimum necessary and shall be made only after due consideration is given to varying other siting standards, such as side, front and back lot line setbacks. 
(9)  Storage. 
a.  No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored below base flood elevation. 
b.  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
c.  Due to the potential of masking the natural elevation making it more difficult to enforce this ordinance, material that resembles "fill" material such as earth, aggregate or rock (but excluding topsoil) shall not be considered "storage" material for purposes of this subsection. The storage of topsoil shall be limited to one hundred and eighty (180) days. 
(10)  Utility and facility requirements. 
a.  All new or replacement water systems whether public or private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
b.  All new or replacement sanitary disposal systems, whether public or private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
c.  All other new or replacement public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
d.  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(11)  [Drainage.] Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazard. 
(12)  Backflow preventers. Back flow prevention valves should be used for all enclosed structures with sewage or drainage facilities located in the floodplain. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Secs. 4-713-4-799. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 4-800. - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
    The mayor may appoint the zoning officer or other designee as floodplain administrator to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-801. - Development permits and site plan approvals required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development or the new construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, the placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) within the City of Beckley unless a permit application and standard site plan has been completed, and a permit has been obtained from the floodplain administrator. In addition, where land that is either partially or fully in the regulatory floodplain is to be subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or otherwise developed, a detailed site plan must be submitted to, and approved by, the floodplain administrator prior to any development. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-802. - Approval of permits and plans. 
    The floodplain administrator shall review, or shall cause to be reviewed; all permit applications and plans in order to determine whether proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
    All permits and plans shall be approved only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of the state and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
    The floodplain administrator shall require copies of all necessary permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state law requires approval. 
    The City of Beckley shall keep on file in perpetuity, in a location safe from natural hazards, all information supplied to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-803. - Application procedures. 
    Application for a permit and/or site plan approvals shall be made, in writing, on the forms supplied by the City of Beckley and shall include all information required under section 4-708 of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-804. - Changes. 
    After the issuance of a permit or site plan approval by the floodplain administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any of the plans, specification or other documents submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-805. - Permit placards. 
(a)  The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit placard, which shall be prominently displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator. 
(b)  In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to install a temporary electrical utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected or rebuilt until a placard has been issued by the floodplain administrator indicating that the development has applied for a permit and agreed to the requirements of this local law or, in the case of development occurring outside of the identified flood hazard area, a certificate of compliance has been issued. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-806. - Start of construction. 
    Work on the proposed construction shall begin within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. All work on the proposed construction must be completed within twelve (12) months of permit issuance, at which time the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is granted in writing by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-807. - Stop work orders, inspections and revocations. 
(a)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  The floodplain administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a "Stop Work Order Notice" for any development found ongoing without having obtained a permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 4-812 of this article, or other penalties imposed by federal, state, or municipal law. 
(2)  The floodplain administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a "Stop Work Order Notice" for any development found non-compliant with the provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 4-812 of this article, or other penalties imposed by federal, state, or municipal law. 
(b)  Inspections and revocations. 
(1)  During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(2)  If the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall issue a "Stop Work Order Notice" revoke the permit and request a temporary injunction. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-808. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to occupy, or to permit the use or occupancy, of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, installed, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the floodplain administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to install a permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the floodplain administrator stating that the development conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. 
(c)  In areas of flood hazard, no address shall be issued to any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected or rebuilt until a certificate of compliance or permit has been issued by the floodplain administrator stating that the development conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood hazard. 
(e)  Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted as prescribed in this article or local administrative procedures, and any finished construction elevation certificate, hydraulic data, flood proofing certificate, or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a condition of permit approval. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-809. - Fees. 
(a)  Floodplain determination fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable to the City of Beckley shall be assessed on all proposed development. 
(b)  A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to the City of Beckley shall be charged for completion of a special flood hazard determination form for real estate, loan or insurance purposes. 
(c)  Application for a permit for proposed development determined to be occurring in a flood hazard area regulated by this article shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the City of Beckley, based upon the estimated value of the proposed construction as determined by the floodplain administrator at the following rates: 
Type of Development Fee One- and two-family dwelling $1.00/per thousand Any other structures 1.00/per thousand Site plans, grading and filling (additional fee) 100.00/acre or part thereof Floodway development reviews (additional fee) 5.00/per thousand  
(d)  In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the City of Beckley for any additional costs for services necessary for review and/or inspection of proposed development. Services include, but are not limited to, professional engineering and surveying. The floodplain administrator may require up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) as a deposit towards these additional costs. Additional costs may include reimbursement for contracted services. 
(e)  There is created in the City of Beckley a special revenue fund, administered by the recorder-treasurer, designated the "Floodplain development fund". This fund is not part of the general revenue fund of the City of Beckley. All fees collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited into the floodplain development fund. The floodplain development fund shall contain all fees or penalties collected pursuant to this article, any appropriations to the fund, and any gifts, grants or contributions received. 
(f)  The City of Beckley is restricted to, and shall distribute funds from, the floodplain development fund only for administrative costs associated with management of floodplain development, the maintenance or creation of maps and studies used to administer floodplain development and other activities which will promote and enhance floodplain management issues generally. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-810. - Appeals. 
    Whenever any person is aggrieved by a decision of the floodplain administrator with respect to the provision of this ordinance, it is the right of that person to appeal to the City of Beckley Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall be known as the appeals authority. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within thirty (30) days after notification of the decision. Upon receipt of such appeal, the appeals authority shall set a time and place not less than ten (10) nor more than sixty (60) days for the purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to all parties at which time they may appear and be heard. The determination by the appeals authority shall be final in all cases. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-811. - Appeal review criteria. 
(a)  All appeals contesting only the permit fee, the cumulative substantial damage requirement, the floor protection setback requirement, or the freeboard requirements, may be handled at the discretion of the appeals authority. 
(b)  All decisions on appeals to all other provisions of this ordinance shall adhere to the following criteria: 
(1)  Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the appeals authority upon: (i) A showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the appeal would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of an appeal will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinance. 
(2)  An affirmative decision shall be issued only upon determination that it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. Financial hardship, as a sole criterion, shall not be considered sufficient justification to grant an appeal. 
(3)  An affirmative decision shall be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(4)  The appeals authority shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that: (i) The issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, (ii) such construction below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property. Such notifications shall be maintained with a record of all decisions as required by the City of Beckley. 
(5)  The appeals authority shall: (i) Maintain a record of all decisions including justification for their issuance, and (ii) report such decisions issued in its biannual report to the federal insurance administration. 
(6)  An affirmative decision shall not be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-812. - Penalties. 
    Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this ordinance or direction of the floodplain administrator or any other authorized employee of the community shall be in violation of this ordinance and shall be referred to the city solicitor or his designee who shall prosecute all such violators in the City of Beckley Municipal Court. A violator shall, upon conviction, pay a fine to the City of Beckley of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) plus cost of prosecution. Each day during which any violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this ordinance. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or non-compliance with, this ordinance shall not excuse the violation or non-compliance with the ordinance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or non-compliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in non-compliance with this ordinance may be declared by the City of Beckley to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-813. - Municipal annexation. 
(a)  The county floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(b)  All plats or maps of annexation shall show the floodplain boundaries, base flood elevation and location of the floodway where determined. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-814. - Permits for government entities. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted by law, all public utilities, county, and state agencies are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 4-815. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect and for this purpose the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Sec. 14-816. - Liability. 
    The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision or development plan in an identified flood-prone area, shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the City of Beckley, floodplain administrator, or by any official or employee thereof, or the board of zoning appeals, of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the floodplain administrator, the City of Beckley, or any official or employee thereof or the board of zoning appeals. The City of Beckley urges all applicants proposing development in or near a flood hazard area to locate all development as far away from, and as high above, all flooding sources as possible. 
(Ord. of 9-26-06) 
Secs. 4-817-4-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Note- See editor's note to Ch. 4, Art. IV. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 8. 

Sec. 4-901. - Intent. 
    The City of Beckley declares every substandard building or structure as herein defined to be a public nuisance and subject to repair, vacation, or demolition to abate such nuisance as herein provided in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-902. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article the following buildings or structures shall be deemed "substandard": 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside to the middle third of the base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three (33) per cent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty (50) per cent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting, enclosing, or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have floors or roofs which are overloaded, have improperly distributed loads, or have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other cases so as to have become dangerous to life, health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or the public. 
(5)  Those which are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants. 
(6)  Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants. 
(7)  Those having inadequate stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of egress in case of emergency. 
(8)  Those having any piece, part, or attachment so insecurely fixed as to be in danger of falling or being dislodged by the elements and injuring persons or property. 
(9)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(10)  Those existing in violation of any provision of the building code, fire code, or other ordinances of this city. 
(11)  Any swimming pool, septic tank, or other inground structure which endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(12)  Those used in violation of the laws relating to prostitution, lewdness, gambling, controlled dangerous substances, or stolen property. Two (2) or more criminal convictions for such violations which have occurred on two (2) or more occasions within a two-year period prior to the issuance of a notice pursuant to section 4-904 shall be presumptive evidence that the building or structure is substandard and a public nuisance. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the term "party (or parties) concerned" shall mean the owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, mortgagee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in a building or structure as shown by the land records of the clerk of the county commission of Raleigh County. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-903. - Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition. 
    The building inspector and the city engineer shall use the following standards in ordering the abatement of a public nuisance by repair, vacation, or demolition of substandard buildings or structures: 
(1)  If the building or structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. An order to repair may include a requirement to close and secure any or all exterior openings. 
(2)  If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of its occupants, or if deemed necessary for the abatement of the nuisance, it shall be ordered vacated. 
(3)  If the building or structure is damaged, decayed, or deteriorated to such a degree that it is not feasible to repair such building or it is not structurally safe, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, shall be ordered demolished. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-904. - Duties of the building official. 
    The building official, or his designee, shall: 
(1)  Inspect any building or structure for the purpose of determining whether conditions exist which render such place substandard within the terms of section 4-902. Cause for inspection may be based on any of the following: 
a.  A complaint filed by any person. 
b.  A departmental report made pursuant to section 4-906. 
c.  General information or knowledge about the building or structure. 
(2)  Provided written notice, sent by registered mail, personal service, or by posting the property and publishing said order in a newspaper of general circulation in Raleigh County for three (3) successive weeks, or a combination thereof, to all parties concerned of any building or structure found to be substandard. Such notice shall contain the following: 
a.  The street address and legal description of the property on which the building or structure is located. 
b.  A description of the building or structure deemed substandard. 
c.  A statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is substandard. 
d.  An order requiring abatement of the public nuisance within the standards set forth in section 4-903 within a reasonable time period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
e.  A statement that the city shall have the right to abate the public nuisance as provided by this article without further notice if the order is not complied with within the required time period. 
f.  A statement that failure to comply with the order subjects the party concerned to the penalties provided in section 4-907. 
g.  A statement of the right to request a hearing before the municipal court. The filing of a request for a hearing stays all proceedings except emergency action under section 4-906. A written request for a hearing must be filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of notification from the building inspector as provided herein. 
(3)  Report to the common council or mayor any non-compliance with an order issued pursuant to section 4-905. 
(4)  Appear at all hearing conducted by the municipal court as provided in Section 4-905 and testify as to the condition of substandard buildings and structures. 
(5)  Post a notice on any building or structure found to be substandard indicating that it has been so found, that the notice shall remain posted until the nuisance has been abated, and any additional information and warnings deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-905. - Duties of the municipal court. 
    The municipal court shall: 
(1)  Upon timely receipt of a request for a hearing, give written notice to the parties concerned of the time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  Hold a hearing and hear all competent testimony offered by the building official or his designee, and any party concerned relative to the substandard building or structure. 
(3)  Make written findings of fact as to whether or not the building or structure in question is substandard within the terms of section 4-902. 
(4)  If the building or structure is found to be substandard and a public nuisance, issue an order directing the appropriate party or parties concerned to abate the nuisance by repair, vacation, or demolition of the building or structure, as the facts may warrant under the standards provided in section 4-903, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(5)  If the party or parties concerned fail(s) to comply with the order provided herein, cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished as the facts may warrant under the standards provided in section 4-903. 
(6)  Cause the cost of such work performed by the city to be charges as a tax lien against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated and to assess a fine against the said party or parties in accordance with section 4-907. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-906. - Emergencies. 
    Where it reasonably appears that immediate action to repair, vacate, or demolish a substandard building or structure is necessary to protect life or property, the municipal court shall cause such immediate repair, vacation, or demolition and charge the costs to the property owner as provided in section 4-905. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-907. - Penalties. 
    A party concerned who violates any provision of this article by failure to comply with any notice or order authorized herein or by removal, destruction, or defacement of a notice posted as provided by section 4-904 or section 4-905 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this article shall preclude the city attorney from enforcing city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-908. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, or application thereof, of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provision of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Sec. 4-909. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective upon passage. 
(Ord. of 7-27-93) 
Chapter 5 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5-1. - Voter qualification. 
    Every person qualified by law to vote for members of the legislature of the state and who possess the other qualifications prescribed by the Code of West Virginia, Chapter 3, for voting in municipal elections, shall be entitled to vote at municipal elections held in the city for the election of municipal authorities and on questions authorized by law to be determined by popular vote. 
(Code 1971, § 7-1; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
Charter reference- Voter qualifications, § 9. 
Sec. 5-2. - Permanent registration system adopted; authorized registration records. 
    For the conduct of all municipal elections, the system of permanent registration of voters prescribed by the Code of West Virginia, Chapter 3, Article 2, is hereby adopted, and the use of the registration records established in such system is hereby authorized for all municipal elections. 
(Code 1971, § 7-2; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
Sec. 5-3. - Duty of recorder-treasurer to procure and return county registration books. 
    At least three (3) days prior to each municipal election, it shall be the duty of the Recorder-Treasurer to procure from the office of the clerk of the county court the municipal registration books necessary for the conduct of the municipal election. Such records shall, within ten (10) days after the date of the municipal election, be returned to the clerk of the county court by the recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 7-3; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
Sec. 5-4. - Certificate of candidacy-Required; form and contents; verification. 
    Any person who is eligible to hold a city elective office may file with the recorder-treasurer of the city a certificate declaring person's self a candidate for the nomination for such office. Such certificate shall in form or effect as follows: 
"State of West Virginia ] County of Raleigh ] ss: City of Beckley ]  
    I, ____________ , hereby certify that I am a candidate for the Office of ____________ and desire my name printed on the official ballot to be voted at the municipal election to be held on the ____________ ; that I am a legally qualified voter of the City of Beckley, County of Raleigh, State of West Virginia, that my residence is number ____________ of ____________ Street, in the City of Beckley, West Virginia, in Raleigh County in said State, that I am eligible to hold the said office; that I am a candidate of said office in good faith. 
(Signature of Candidate) 
    Signed and acknowledged before me this ;daterule; day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 
Fees- Mayor: $15.00 
Council: $10.00 
_____
(Signature of Person Before Whom Signed) 
_____
(Official Title) 
    My commission expires the ;daterule; day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    (Fee must accompany certificate of announcement either in cash, by certified check, or money order.)" 
    Such announcement shall be signed and acknowledged before some officer qualified to administer oaths, who shall certify thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 7-4; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
Sec. 5-5. - Municipal (city) elections for the offices of mayor, council member at-large, and ward council members; deadline for filing; drawing for candidate ballot placement; time for candidate withdrawal. 
(a)  Municipal (city) elections for the offices of mayor, council member at-large, and ward council member shall be held on the second Tuesday in May, 2011, and the next election for the same city offices shall be held on the second Tuesday in May, 2016, and on such day in each fourth year thereafter at the voting places in each of the election wards of the city. Starting on the second Tuesday in May, 2016, the municipal elections for the City of Beckley offices stated herein shall be held on the same date and time as the regular State of West Virginia Primary Elections for the Offices of Governor of West Virginia and President of the United States. 
    Any eligible person desiring election for any municipal elected office to be filled at such election shall file the certificate prescribed in section 5-4 together with payment of the filing fee prescribed, which certificate and filing fee must be received by the recorder-treasurer at City Hall during regular working hours of the period beginning on the second Monday of January next preceding the municipal election and ending at the end of regular working hours on the last Saturday in January next preceding the municipal election; or, if mailed, the certificate and filing fee must be mailed through the United States Postal Service and must be postmarked during the period described above beginning on the second Monday in January and ending at midnight on the last Saturday in January next preceding the election. 
(b)  Drawing for candidate ballot placement will be held on the second Friday in February following the end of the candidates filing date prescribed in section (a) above at 9:00 a.m. in Common Council Chambers. Candidates wishing to withdraw must withdraw on or before the first Friday in February by filing a signed and notarized statement of withdrawal with the recorder-treasurer of the city. If such statement of withdrawal is received not later than the second Friday in February following the end of the candidates filing date prescribed in section (a) above, the name of the candidate who files that statement of withdrawal may not be printed on the ballot. No candidate who files a statement of withdrawal after that time may have his or her name removed from the ballot. 
(Code 1971, § 7-5; Ord. of 9-10-02; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
Sec. 5-6. - Same-Filing fees. 
    Every person who becomes a candidate for election to office in any municipal election shall, at the time of filing the certificate of announcement as in this chapter required, pay a filing fee as follows: 
(1)  A candidate for the office of mayor-Fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(2)  A candidate for the office of council member at-large-Ten dollars ($10.00). 
(3)  A candidate for the office of ward council member-Ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Code 1971, § 7-6; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
Sec. 5-7. - City wards. 
    The wards of the city, as heretofore established by the council and as they presently exist, are hereby continued until changed by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 7-7; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
Charter reference- Division of city into wards, §3. 
Sec. 5-8. - Voting precincts and polling places; publication of list prior to each city election. 
(a)  The council shall, for the purpose of all city elections, provide by ordinance for making the city voting precincts coincide, as nearly as possible, to the boundaries of the voting precincts established by the county court for all state and county elections; provided, that the city voting precincts as heretofore established by the council and as they are presently exist are hereby continued in existence until changed by the council. 
(b)  Before each city election, the council shall secure in each voting precinct in the city a suitable room or building in which to hold the election, and cause such room or building to be suitably provided with voting booths, tables, and other furniture and equipment as may be necessary for the conduct of the election; and the council shall cause to be published in at least one newspaper published in the city, within two (2) to seven (7) days prior to each city election, a complete list of voting precincts and the designation and address of the polling place in each precinct. 
(Code 1971, § 7-8; Ord. of 9-28-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, §§ 3-1-6, 3-1-23. 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency ambulance service, § 9-300 et seq. 
State Law reference- Provisions as to emergency services, W. Va. Code, § 15-5-1 et seq.; duty of council to establish a local organization for emergency services, § 15-5-8. 

Sec. 6-1. - "Emergency services" defined. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the term "emergency services" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, air raid, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuations of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for the carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1971, § 6-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Policy and purpose of chapter. 
(a)  In view of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes, and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally to provide for the emergencies and to protect the public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary: 
(1)  To create a city emergency services organization; 
(2)  To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities within the state, and if necessary and only under a compact approved by the governor, the neighboring cities and counties of another state; and 
(3)  To cooperate with the state government with respect to carrying out emergency services functions. 
(b)  It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of this city that all emergency services functions of this city be coordinated to the maximum extent with the state government, including its various departments and agencies, with other cities and localities, and with private agencies of every type, to the end that most effective preparation and use may be made of this city's manpower, resources and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur. 
(c)  It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of this city to organize emergency services organization in conformity with the state emergency services plan as directed by the Code of West Virginia, section 15-5-8. 
(Code 1971, § 6-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - City emergency services organization established. 
    Pursuant to authority contained in the Code of West Virginia, section 15-5-8 there is hereby established the city emergency services organization, which shall be subject to the regulations and exercise the powers set out in this chapter, and which shall be subject to all applicable provisions of law and regulations and orders issued pursuant to law. 
(Code 1971, § 6-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Emergency services council-Established; composition; bipartisan character; appointment and term of members. 
(a)  There is hereby established the city emergency services council, which shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, not more than three (3) of whom shall be members of the same political party. Except for the initial appointees, members of the city emergency services council shall serve for a term of two (2) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  Initially, three (3) members of the city emergency services council shall be appointed to serve for a term of two (2) years, and each two (2) years thereafter three members shall be appointed; and two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one year, and each two (2) years thereafter two (2) members shall be appointed. 
(Code 1971, § 6-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Same-Chairman; compensation of members; duties. 
    The mayor shall serve as chairman of the city emergency services council and the members thereof shall serve without compensation. The city emergency services council shall be responsible for and have general direction and control of emergencies in the city and have such other powers as are granted and conferred by this chapter and by law. 
(Code 1971, § 6-5) 
Sec. 6-6. - Director of emergency services-Appointment; powers and duties in general. 
(a)  The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint a director of emergency services, who shall perform such duties as are imposed by this chapter, and as may lawfully be delegated by competent authority. 
(b)  The director of emergency services shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency services within this city and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with the emergency services agencies and organizations within the state and within the state government. When such authority is delegated by the mayor, such director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training, equipment and operation of the city organization for emergency services, subject to the direction and control of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1971, § 6-6) 
Sec. 6-7. - Same-Specific powers and duties. 
(a)  In performing the duties under this chapter, the director of emergency services is authorized to cooperate with the state government, with other cities and counties, and with private agencies in all matters pertaining to the emergency services of the city and of the state. 
(b)  In performing the duties under this chapter, and to effect its policy and purpose, the director of emergency services is further authorized and empowered: 
(1)  To make, amend and rescind the necessary orders, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this chapter within the limits of the authority conferred, with due consideration of the plans of the state government; 
(2)  To prepare a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency services of this city, such plan and program to be integrated into and coordinated with the emergency services plans of the state government, and of other cities and counties within the state to the fullest extent; 
(3)  In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency services of this city, to procure supplies and equipment, to institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all other preparatory steps including the partial or full mobilization of the emergency services organization in advance of actual disaster, to insure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces of emergency services personnel in time of need; 
(4)  To make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this city as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the city for emergency services, and to plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof; 
(5)  On behalf of this city, to enter into mutual aid arrangements with other cities and counties within this state, and also, with the approval of the governor, with emergency services agencies or organizations of other states, for reciprocal emergency services in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted; 
(6)  To delegate any administrative authority invested under this chapter, and to provide for the sub-delegation of any such authority; and 
(7)  To cooperate with the governor and with the state office of emergency services and with officials and agencies of other cities and counties within the state, in matters pertaining to the emergency services of the city and state. 
(Code 1971, § 6-7) 
Sec. 6-8. - Mutual aid arrangements. 
(a)  The director of emergency services may, in collaboration with other public and private agencies within this state, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal emergency services in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency services plan and program, and in time of emergency, it shall be the duty of the city organization for emergency services to render assistance in accordance with mutual aid agreements. 
(b)  The director of emergency services may, subject to the approval of the governor, enter into mutual aid arrangements with emergency services agencies or organizations in other states for reciprocal emergency services in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. 
(Code 1971, § 6-8) 
Sec. 6-9. - Authority to accept services, gifts, grants and loans. 
(a)  Whenever the federal or state government or any agency or officer thereof shall offer to this city services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan for the purpose of emergency services, the city, acting with the consent of the governor and through the mayor, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance, the mayor may authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city, and subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations if any of the agency making the offer. 
(b)  Whenever any person shall offer to this city any services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or loan for purposes of emergency services, the city, acting through the mayor, may accept such offer, and upon such acceptance, the mayor may authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city, and subject to the terms of the offer. 
(Code 1971, § 6-9) 
Sec. 6-10. - Utilization of existing services, personnel and facilities. 
    In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the director of emergency services of civil defense is directed to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the director of civil defense and to the city emergency services organization upon request. 
(Code 1971, § 6-10) 
Sec. 6-11. - Political activity prohibited. 
    No organization for emergency services established under the authority of this chapter shall participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes. 
(Code 1971, § 6-11) 
Sec. 6-12. - Loyalty of emergency services personnel; oath required. 
    No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the city emergency services organization who advocates or has advocated a change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the government of the United States or of this state, or of the city, or the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or who has been convicted of or is under indictment or information charging any subversive act against the United States. Each person who is appointed to serve in this organization for emergency services shall, before entering upon such duties, take an oath in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in this state, which oath shall be substantially as follows: 
    "I, ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the constitution of the United States, and the constitution of the State of West Virginia, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; and I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation for purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. 
    "And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States, or of this state, by force or violence; during such time as I am a member of this emergency services organization, I will not advocate or become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States, or of this state, by force or violence." 
(Code 1971, § 6-12) 
Sec. 6-13. - Obedience to and enforcement of rules and orders of director. 
    It shall be the duty of the city organization for emergency services and of the officers thereof to execute and enforce such orders, rules and regulations as may be made by the director of emergency services under authority of this chapter. Such organization shall have available for inspection at its offices all orders, rules and regulations made by the director of emergency services under such director's authority. 
(Code 1971, § 6-13) 
Chapter 7 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to provide against fire danger, etc., § 21(7), (25), (28), (38), (56)-(59), (61), (68), (78); chief of fire department, § 24. 
Cross reference- Fire limits, § 4-5; false alarms, § 10-5; storage of flammable materials, § 8-208; crossing fire hose, § 14-549; following fire apparatus, § 14-548. 
State Law reference- Authority of council to provide for the prevention and extinguishment of fires, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-12-5(15), 8-15-1; authority of state fire marshal to promulgate rules relative to fire safety, § 29-3-12 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Bureau of fire prevention-Established; designation of chief. 
    The bureau of fire prevention is hereby established within the fire department. The chief of the fire department shall be ex officio chief of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1971, § 9-12) 
Sec. 7-2. - Same-Personnel; inspectors; as part of fire department. 
    The chief of the fire department may detail for duty as inspectors in the bureau of fire prevention such members of the fire department as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department may from time to time recommend to the mayor and the council the temporary employment of technical inspectors. All of the full time personnel of the bureau of fire prevention shall be or become members of the fire department. For all staff and fiscal purposes, the bureau of fire prevention shall be considered an integral part of the fire department. 
(Code 1971, § 9-13) 
Cross reference- Inspections by building official and electrical inspector, §§ 4-4, 4-302. 
Sec. 7-3. - Same-Administration and enforcement of codes. 
    The codes adopted in this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1971, § 9-23) 
Sec. 7-4. - Same-Annual report. 
    A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the mayor as soon as practicable following the end of each calendar year. Such annual report shall contain a record of all its proceedings under this article, including proceedings under the codes adopted in this chapter, with such statistics as the chief of the bureau may wish to include therein; and the chief of the bureau shall also recommend any amendments to the codes which, in such chief's judgment, may be desirable. 
(Code 1971, § 9-14) 
Sec. 7-5. - Tampering with and damage to fire hydrants, firefighting and fire prevention apparatus and equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage or render ineffective any city fire hydrant, or to obstruct the ready access to any city fire hydrant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage or render ineffective any city fire-fighting or fire prevention apparatus or equipment. 
(Code 1971, § 9-15) 
Sec. 7-6. - Open burning-Restricted. 
    The open burning of debris, garbage, rubbish, leaves and refuse for the purpose of volume reduction, elimination or product recovery or for any other purpose by any person is prohibited except as follows: 
(1)  Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and training of public and industrial employees in the methods of fighting fires, provided that written approval to conduct such burning is received from the fire chief or the fire chief's duly authorized representative; 
(2)  Open burning of construction and demolition wastes, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  There is no practical alternate method for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
(b)  The health, safety, comfort and property of persons are protected from the effects of such burning; 
(c)  Such burning shall not be conducted for salvage purposes; and, 
(d)  Written approval to conduct such burning is received from the chief or the fire chief's duly authorized representative; 
(3)  The open burning of vegetation and related waste materials shall be permitted on those days and during such hours as may be authorized by a resolution duly adopted by the council of the city, and upon public notice by advertising as a Class I legal advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(4)  Special permission requests for outside burning for times other than those set by resolution as provided in subsection 7-6(3) will require the following in writing to be submitted to the fire chief: 
Address of property; 
Name of owner; 
Phone number of owner; 
Name of person in charge of burning and phone number; 
Reason why special permission is needed. 
Please address all requests to: 
Fire Chief 
Beckley Fire Department 
P. O. Drawer AJ 
Beckley, West Virginia 25802-2832 
The fire chief or designated representative will process the requests. Permission will be granted or denied in writing and will be made in accordance with applicable standards of the state, federal, and city codes, and such considerations will include whether there are alternate methods of disposal of the materials to be burned, and whether or not the health, safety, comfort, and property of persons and the city are protected from the effects of such burning. 
(5)  Prior to all open burning of vegetation as provided in this section, including open burning as permitted by resolution in subsection 7-6(3) or by special permission under subsection 7-6(4), the owner of the property upon which burning will take place must notify the City of Beckley Fire Department. If an open burning is determined to not meet the requirements of this section, the fire department is authorized to order the open burning to cease. 
(6)  All open burning shall be in such a manner as to not affect the health, safety, comfort, and property of any person. If the open burning is determined to not meet this criteria, then the fire department is authorized to order the open burning to cease. 
(Code 1971, § 9-1; Ord. of 10-12-99) 
State Law reference- Forest fire seasons, W. Va. Code, § 20-3-5. 
Sec. 7-7. - Same-Burning leaves, etc., on paved streets and sidewalk areas. 
    No person shall ignite, burn or set fire to any leaves, debris, garbage or rubbish on any paved street or sidewalk area. 
(Code 1971, § 22-24) 
Sec. 7-8. - Unauthorized turning on of water from fire hydrants, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, not duly authorized, to turn on or to cause water to flow from any fire hydrant, valve, plug or other fixture of the municipal water supply system. 
(Code 1971, § 9-5) 
Sec. 7-9. - Fireworks and other explosives-Kinds prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, explode, use, transport or manufacture any of the following explosives in any quantity: Liquid nitroglycerine; high explosives containing over sixty (60) per cent of nitroglycerine (except gelatin dynamite); high explosives having an unsatisfactory absorbent or one that permits leakage of nitroglycerine under any conditions liable to exist during transportation or storage; nitrocellulose in a dry and uncompressed condition, in quantity greater than ten (10) pounds in one exterior package; fulminate of mercury in bulk in a dry condition, and fulminate of all other metals in any condition, except as a component of manufactured articles not hereinafter forbidden; explosives containing an ammonium salt and chlorate; or except as permitted under the laws of the state, firecrackers, torpedoes or other fireworks of like kind and character. 
(Code 1971, §§ 9-17, 9-19) 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate, § 21(22). 
Cross reference- Vehicles transporting explosives, § 14-713; parking of vehicles laden with explosives or flammable liquids, § 14-810. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate keeping of gunpowder and other combustibles, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(14); use of explosives in coal mines, §§ 22-2-29; authority of state fire marshal to grant permits for public displays of fireworks, to seize fireworks held in violation of law, Ch. 29, Art. 3. 
Sec. 7-10. - Same-Duration and display of permit. 
    Every explosive permit granted under the provisions of this article shall be for such period as the chief of the bureau of fire prevention may determine not to exceed one year. Such permit must at all times be kept on the premises designated therein, and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any officer of the fire department or police department. 
(Code 1971, § 9-18) 
Sec. 7-11. - Tobacco smoking restrictions-Inspection of piers, warehouses, etc.; posting signs. 
    The bureau of fire prevention is hereby empowered and authorized to inspect all warehouses, stores, piers, wharves, industrial establishments and any building, structure or open spaces in which combustible materials are handled, stored, manufactured or sold. Where conditions found justify the prohibition of smoking, the bureau shall order the owner or occupant in writing to post suitable signs or placards in each room, building, structure or place in which such prohibition of smoking shall be enforced. All such signs or installations shall read "By Order of the Bureau of Fire Prevention." 
(Code 1971, § 9-37) 
Sec. 7-12. - Same-Designation of rooms, etc., for smoking. 
    The chief of the bureau of fire prevention may designate special rooms or portions of structures in which smoking, under such restrictions as such chief may designate may be permitted. 
(Code 1971, § 9-38) 
Sec. 7-13. - Same-Carrying lighted pipe, etc., considered as smoking. 
    The term "smoking" shall include the carrying of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarettes or tobacco in any form. 
(Code 1971, § 9-39) 
Sec. 7-14. - Same-Removal of placard; smoking in placarded place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any placard or to smoke in any properly placarded place. 
(Code 1971, § 9-40) 
Sec. 7-15. - Limits established wherein bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gasses restricted. 
    The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which bulk storage of any liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, shall be all residential and commercial districts as designated on the zoning map of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 9-28) 
Sec. 7-16. - Limits established wherein storage of explosives and blasting agents prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, shall be all residential and commercial districts as designated on the zoning map of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 9-29) 
Secs. 7-17-7-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODES 

Sec. 7-200. - Fire Prevention Code-Adopted; purpose. 
    There is hereby adopted, by reference, insofar as is not inconsistent with the laws of the State, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions. 
    Hazardous to life or property from fire or explosion, the State Fire Code as promulgated by the West Virginia Fire Commission pursuant to West Virginia CSR 87-1-1 and further it is hereby adopted by reference those certain National Standards and Codes known as the 2015 edition of The National Fire Codes and the 2015 National Fire Codes Supplement; but not included or adopted are any standards and requirements directed to the operation or staffing of local fire departments. The provisions of the referenced codes and standards are hereby incorporated in, and made a part hereof, as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this Section shall take effect, the provisions of such Codes and Standards shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City; except as hereinafter modified or amended. A copy of the Fire Prevention Code, certified by the Mayor, shall be maintained on file in the Office of the Fire Prevention Bureau and shall there be available to the public for inspection and use during all regular business hours. 
    Information regarding the purchase of the National Fire Codes or separate volumes of the Codes may be obtained by writing the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts. 
(Code 1971, § 9-21; Ord. of 7-24-90; Ord. of 5-13-03, § 2; Ord. of 7-11-06; Ord. of 6-11-13; Ord. of 6-28-16(3)) 
Cross reference- Building Code, § 4-9. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt fire prevention code by reference, W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4(b). 
Sec. 7-201. - Same-Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings herein set out: 
(1)  BOCA refers to the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60477-5795. 
(2)  CABO refers to the Council of American Building Officials, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041. 
(3)  Fire marshal means the West Virginia State Fire Marshall and/or his designated representatives. 
(4)  City of Beckley Fire Prevention Code means the entire contents of Chapter 7, the referenced codes as adopted in section 7-200 of the Code of the City of Beckley, the State Fire Code as promulgated and codified in WV CSR 87-1-1, and all the referenced national codes. 
(5)  ANSI means American National Standards Institute, 11 West 42nd St. New York, NY 10036 
(6)  ASTM means American Society of Testing and Materials. 
(7)  Fire Code means all aspects of establishing and enforcing standards necessary for a reasonable level of fire safety and property protection from the hazards created by fire or explosion. 
(8)  ICC or International means International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041-3401. 
(9)  NFPA means National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy, MA 02269-9101. 
(10)  City or local jurisdiction means the City of Beckley. 
(Code 1971, § 9-21; Ord. of 5-13-03, § 2) 
Sec. 7-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted on July 11, 2006, repealed § 7-202 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to national fire codes and derived from Code 1971, §§ 9-30 and 9-31. 
Sec. 7-203. - Fire Prevention Code-Duties and powers of chief of bureau of fire prevention, inspectors. 
    The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall enforce the provisions of this code. The chief may designate personnel as inspectors to be responsible for administration and enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code. The inspectors shall be report to the fire chief and are responsible to render interpretations of this code and adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. The interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. The policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code, unless upon written application by the owner or lessee presenting strict proof that there are practical and substantiated difficulties in the carrying out the strict letter of the codes and that the spirit of the codes can be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The policies and procedures adopted shall be entered upon the records of the bureau and be available for public inspection. The fire chief and inspectors are empowered to enforce the code and to cite for any fire code violations upon observations or proof of each such offense. 
(Code 1971, § 9-24; Ord. of 5-13-03, § 2) 
Sec. 7-204. - Amending procedure. 
    The mayor, the chief of the bureau of fire prevention and the recorder-treasurer shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the codes adopted in this article. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in such chief's office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons, and thereupon the mayor shall recommend to the council at its next meeting following the giving of such notice that the particular code be amended so as to include such new materials, processes or occupancies. 
(Code 1971, § 9-26) 
Sec. 7-205. - Violations; penalties; injunctive relief upon violation. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of any of the codes adopted in this article or to fail to comply therewith, or to violate or fail to comply with any order made or notice given thereunder, or to build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or to fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the bureau of fire prevention or the appeal board or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed therein. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all violators shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate a provision of the City of Beckley Fire Prevention Code, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. The application or enforcement of any penalty for a violation shall not be construed to prevent the enforced removal or injunction of prohibited conditions or practices. 
(c)  Injunction. In the case of any unlawful acts, the mayor or such person as the mayor may designate is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and maintain a suit to restrain by injunction the violation of the fire code notwithstanding the penalty for the violation thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 9-27; Ord. of 5-13-03, § 2) 
Sec. 7-206. - Appeals from administrative decisions. 
    Whenever the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of any of the codes adopted in this article do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention to the Beckley Building Code Appeal Board (Chapter 4 of this Code) within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed, and the decision of the Beckley Building Code Appeal Board shall be final. 
    Parties may appeal the decision of the board to the Circuit Court of Raleigh County, West Virginia, provided however, that such appeal must be taken within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision of the board. 
(Code 1971, §§ 9-25, 9-32, 3-35; Ord. of 5-13-03, § 2) 
Secs. 7-207-7-299. - Reserved. 
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Substandard buildings and structures, § 4-901 et seq.; sewage disposal, § 9-200 et seq; spitting or urinating in public, § 10-14. 
State Law reference- Promulgation of rules and regulations by state director of health, W. Va. Code, § 16-1-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - City health officer-Designated. 
    The city health officer shall be such person as is so designated by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-15) 
Sec. 8-2. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The city health officer shall administer and enforce all health and sanitation provisions of the West Virginia Code, the rules and regulations of the state director of health, the administrative regulations of the county board of health, and all provisions of this Code and other ordinances relating to health and sanitation where no other administering and enforcement authority is designated; provided, that this section shall not be construed to relieve police officers and other law enforcement officers from any of their normal enforcement duties. 
(Code 1971, § 2-16) 
Charter reference- Qualifications and duties of city health officer, § 26; authority to establish a board of health, § 21(43). 
Sec. 8-3. - Offensive odors or substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, maintain or occupy any dwelling, building, structure or place which, because of its noxious, noisome or offensive smell, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public. 
(b)  No person shall cause or allow to exist on such persons premises any offensive odors or substances. 
(Code 1971, § 14-30) 
Cross reference- Excessive smoke and gas, § 14-712. 
Sec. 8-4. - Abandoned airtight containers; other conditions dangerous to children; dangerous conditions on private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on premises under such person's control, in a place accessible to children, any refrigerator, freezer, icebox or other airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity sufficient to contain a human being and which has a door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such door or lid. This subsection shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator, freezer or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman and which is not accessible to children. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, tenant or person having control of property within the city directly or indirectly to create or allow any dangerous condition to exist on such person's premises. "Dangerous condition," as used in this subsection, shall include, but not be limited to, any open, unguarded or unprotected excavation, high wall, swimming pool or building which when abandoned or left open or otherwise unprotected will likely prove dangerous to life or limb, or an abandoned, open, uncovered or otherwise unprotected well, cesspool, cistern or catch basin. 
(c)  In the event any property owner, lessee or occupant, in violation of the provisions of this section, fails to remove or cause to be moved any refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container such as mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, or directly or indirectly creates or allows any dangerous condition to exist on such person's premises as mentioned in subsection (b) of this section, the city shall give five (5) days' notice to such owner, lessee or occupant to remove the container or to abate the dangerous condition. In the event that such owner, lessee or occupant fails to comply with the notice as directed by the city, the street department shall be authorized to remove such container or abate such dangerous condition at the expense of such property owner, lessee or occupant, and the expense thereby incurred, together with the costs, shall be recovered by the city and shall constitute a lien upon the premises, which may be foreclosed against the lot, parcel of land or building on which or within which the offense occurs. 
(Code 1971, § 14-1) 
Sec. 8-5. - Dangerous activities and instruments on public or park property; permits required. 
    No person shall, on any public property or municipal park, conduct or participate in any activity, undertaking, program or act involving any instrument or device which may be considered hazardous or dangerous and of such a character to be detrimental to the life and health of any individual, unless a special permit therefor shall have first been duly issued by the recorder-treasurer in the case of municipal parks, or the council in the case of other public properties. 
(Code 1971, § 14-9(a)) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to provide for prevention of injury or annoyance to individuals, § 21(21). 
Cross reference- Use of trail bikes, etc., in parks, § 11-6. 
Sec. 8-6. - Watercourses and drainage-Improper drainage of premises. 
    It shall be unlawful at any time for the owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot or parcel of ground to cause or permit water to accumulate thereon or in the abutting gutter and sidewalk area and become stagnant; to permit culverts, drains or natural watercourses thereon to become obstructed; or to cause or permit any putrid or unsanitary substances to accumulate thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 14-43) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to require property owners to properly drain their premises, § 21(9), (50). 
Sec. 8-7. - Same-Diverting watercourse; permits. 
    No person shall divert the surface water flowing over any land or permit it to be diverted to and upon any land belonging to such person, from its natural or usual course in such a way that such surface water will be caused to flow in unnatural or unusual quantities, or in an unnatural or unusual manner upon any public street, sidewalk, park or alley within the city, unless permission to do so shall be granted by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 14-44) 
State Law reference- Provisions as to drains and obstructions in watercourses, W. Va. Code, §§ 19-21-41, 61-3-47. 
Sec. 8-8. - Same-Enclosure of watercourse near property line; permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dam up, enclose or otherwise encase a natural watercourse without first obtaining a permit to do so from the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1971, § 14-45) 
Sec. 8-9. - Noises-Declaration of policy. 
    This section is enacted to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens of Beckley or degrade the quality of life. It is not the intent of this section to interfere unduly with the freedoms of speech or religion. 
(Ord. of 9-9-97; Ord. of 3-8-16) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 9, 1997, amended former §§ 8-9-8-11 in their entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment former §§ 8-9-8-11 pertained to noises and derived from the 1971 code, §§ 14-25-14-27. 
Charter reference- Authority of council to prohibit annoying noise-making instruments, § 21(11); boisterous conduct, § 21(36). 
Cross reference- Sirens and exhaust whistles prohibited on vehicles, § 14-708; cutouts, mufflers, racing motors, etc., § 14-709; permit to use sound apparatus on vehicles, § 14-710; mufflers on motorcycles, § 14-711; disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace, § 10-11. 
Sec. 8-10. - Same-Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    City means the jurisdictional limits of the City of Beckley, West Virginia. 
    Dwelling means a residence or abode, including, but not limited to, a house, condominium, apartment or other structure used as a home. 
    Dynamic braking system means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes, which devices are commonly referred to as "Jacob's brakes" or "Jake brakes." 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, excluding a tractor. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle including passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, recreational vehicles, campers and racing vehicles. 
    Muffler means a properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound of such character, level or duration: 1) which may be injurious to human health or welfare; or 2) which unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the city or in any portion thereof; or 3) which disturbs the good order or quiet of the community; or 4) which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
    Public property means any real property owned or controlled by the City of Beckley or any other governmental entity. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, or alley. 
    Real property boundary means the property line along the ground surface, and its vertical extensions, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
    Residential has reference to one-family districts, general residential district, multiple-family district, mobile home district, multiple-family high-rise district, and elderly high-rise district of the zoning district classification (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6, pursuant to Chapter 15 of this Code). 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity, and frequency. 
(Ord. of 9-9-97; Ord. of 3-8-16) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 8-9. 
Sec. 8-11. - Noise disturbances-Prohibited generally. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor and a public nuisance for any person to willfully make, permit, continue, or cause to be made, permitted, or continued any noise disturbance. 
(Ord. of 9-9-97; Ord. of 3-8-16) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 8-9. 
Sec. 8-12. - Same-Specific prohibitions. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided in section 8-13, any of the following acts, or the causing or permitting thereof, among others, is declared to be a noise disturbance constituting a misdemeanor and a public nuisance, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive nor to limit the scope or application of the general prohibitions as provided in section 8-11: 
(a)  Noise disturbance prohibited; dwelling. No person, occupying a dwelling within the city shall amplify from within the dwelling the sound produced a radio, tape player, television or other mechanical sound making device or instrument used for the purposes of entertainment, including but not limited to musical instruments and drums, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 20 feet or more from the dwelling. 
(b)  No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of radio, tape or CD player, television or any other mechanical sound making device or instrument used for the purposes of entertainment, including but not limited to musical instruments and drums, so that the sound is heard across a residential real property boundary. 
(c)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling, or singing between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. so as to create a noise disturbance on a public right-of-way or public property, or at any time or place in such a manner as to permit sound to be heard across a residential real property boundary, or to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office hotel or motel. 
(d)  Noise disturbance prohibited; motor vehicles and motorcycles. 
(1)  All motor vehicles and motorcycles shall be operated as quietly as possible at all times within the city. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle in such a manner so as to cause unnecessary noise within the city. 
(2)  No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street or highway shall amplify from within the motor vehicle the sound produced by a radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument used for entertainment, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 20 feet or more from the motor vehicle. 
(3)  No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle operated within the city. 
(4)  No person shall operate, or permit the operation within the city of any motor vehicle or motorcycle without factory installed mufflers or their equivalent; provided that if no factory installed or equivalent muffler was present at the time of manufacture of the motor vehicle or motorcycle, then sound emanating from the motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be effectively muffled in a reasonable manner by equipment so constructed and used to muffle sound. 
(5)  No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle or motorcycle operated within the city. 
(6)  No person in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the city shall use a dynamic braking system unless said use is necessary to prevent or avoid an accident that may cause property damage, injury, or loss of life. This provision shall not apply to fire trucks or other emergency vehicles equipped with dynamic braking system. 
(Ord. of 9-9-97; Ord. of 3-8-16) 
Sec. 8-13. - Same-Exceptions. 
[(a)  Generally.] 
1)  The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
a.  Noise resulting from emergency or necessary maintenance work as performed by the City of Beckley, State of West Virginia or its political subdivisions, or public utility companies, including, but not limited to, any work of any kind on roads, streets, bridges, alleys, rights-of-way or government owned property; 
b.  Noise resulting from any emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency, or during training exercises and maintenance; 
c.  Noise from emergency signaling devices so long as in compliance with terms set forth in subsection (f)(1)(d) below; 
d.  Sound which is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the health, safety, life or limb of any person. 
e.  Noise from a burglar or fire alarm installed on any building, motor vehicle or other property so long as the alarm terminates its operation within five minutes of its activation; provided that that it shall be deemed reasonable for an activated alarm to continue to operate if a crime or fire is in progress at or near the property and/or until law enforcement or other emergency personnel have responded to a legitimate call for assistance related in any way to the property at which the activated alarm is located; 
f.  Noise from domestic power tools, landscaping and yard maintenance equipment, and agricultural equipment when operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and legal holidays. 
g.  Noise from commercial or industrial power tools, landscaping and yard maintenance equipment, and agricultural equipment on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential property line when operated on commercial or industrial property, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and legal holidays; 
h.  Noise from church bells and chimes when used as part of a religious observance or service or for national celebrations or public holidays, and those bells and chimes that are presently installed and in use, provided said use is reasonable and for a church related purpose; 
i.  Noise generated during the normal course of business by any properly licensed commercial or industrial enterprise operating lawfully within an area properly zoned for said enterprise, unless or until said lawful business use is deemed abandoned as a matter of law or fact; 
j.  Noise from construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavating, or demolition activity provided all motorized equipment used in such activity is equipped with function mufflers; 
k.  Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers, and snow plows when operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal; 
l.  Noise generated in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
m.  Noise generated from city sponsored or approved celebrations or events, including, but not limited to, parades, outdoor concerts, and athletic events; 
n.  Noise generated from secondary school and higher education sponsored or approved celebrations or events, including but not limited to, outdoor concerts or band festivals and outdoor athletic events and practices; 
o.  Noise produced by a governmental body or employee in the performance of a governmental function; 
p.  Noise generated from athletic events or practices; 
q.  Noise generated from events at the YMCA Soccer Complex which are sponsored or approved by the YMCA of Southern West Virginia; 
r.  Noise generated from railroads within the city; 
s.  Noise generated from events at the Beckley-Raleigh County Convention Center; 
t.  Noise generated from fireworks authorized by the city; and 
u.  Noise generated from events promoted by the City of Beckley. 
(2)  For purposes of the exemptions contained in subsections (f)(1)l. and f(1)m. above., all celebrations and events held at Word Park and Shoemaker Square, and on Main and Neville Streets and on property owned and operated by West Virginia University are presumed to be city sponsored or approved and secondary school and higher education approved. Chili Night and Uptown Car Shows are also presumed to be city sponsored or approved and are specifically exempt from the foregoing prohibitions. The list of presumed city sponsored or approved and secondary school and higher education approved celebrations and events listed under this subsection is not intended to be exclusive. 
(b)  Enforcement. Any person found guilty of violating this ordinance as defined herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as follows: $100.00 dollars for the first offense within a 24-month period; $200.00 dollars for a second offense within a 24-month period; $300.00 dollars for a third offense within 24-month period; $400.00 dollars for a fourth offense within a 24-month period and $500.00 dollars for the fifth offense and each subsequent offense within a 24-month period. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense. 
(c)  Severability. 
(1)  If any provision or portion of a provision of this section is held to be unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the section shall not be invalidated. 
(2)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are materially inconsistent with any provisions of this section are hereby repealed as to the extent of any such material inconsistency. 
(Ord. of 9-9-97; Ord. of 3-8-16) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, W. Va. Code § 61-6-1b. 
Sec. 8-14. - Additional remedy injunction for noise violations. 
    As an additional remedy, making, permitting, or continuing any noise disturbance in violation of any provision hereof or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 9-9-97) 
Secs. 8-15-8-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES, GARBAGE, TRASH, JUNK AND WEEDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for removal of waste material from private property, § 21(7); authority to prohibit dumping refuse in watercourses, § 21(50). 
Cross reference- Burning of refuse, §§ 7-6, 7-7; permit required to encumber sidewalks with trash, § 12-16; junk dealers, § 13-100 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit accumulation and require disposal of garbage, refuse and trash, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(10). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-200. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Garbage: All waste accumulations of animal, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the dealing in, storing, cooking and serving as food, of the flesh of such animals, fish, fowl, fruits and vegetables, including kitchen swill and kitchen and table refuse of every kind; decayed and unsound fruits and vegetables; offal; putrid, tainted or unclean flesh or carcasses of fish, fowl and animals of all kinds; waste, grease and oil from shops, garages, machinery and other origins, as well as all other kinds of putrid or decayed matter and substances liable to cause the spread of disease germs. 
    Nuisance: Any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which may be considered as a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the public or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located, This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises, of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash or debris; 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. 
    Rubbish: All ashes, cinders, sweepings, dirt, empty tin cans, broken or discarded crockery, glassware, kitchenware and utensils; waste or discarded rags, boxes, pieces of wood and other refuse or waste materials, or matter from dwellings, shops, garages, mills, machinery stores and other retail and wholesale establishments; fallen leaves and twigs, and dead shrubbery, weeds and garden plants and vines not to be used as food; and all other refuse and waste materials of all kinds not included within the definition of the term "garbage". 
(Code 1971, §§ 14-48(a), 19-1) 
Sec. 8-201. - Nuisances generally. 
    No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 14-48(b)) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to define and abate nuisances, § 21(27). 
Cross reference- Permit to encumber streets, § 12-16. 
Sec. 8-202. - Enforcement of article generally. 
    Enforcement of this article may be accomplished by the city in any manner authorized by law, and in addition, any person who by reason of another's violation of any provision suffers special damage different from that suffered by other property owners throughout the city generally, may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation. 
(Code 1971, § 14-48(d)) 
Sec. 8-203. - Exemptions as to automobiles. 
    The provisions of this article relating to junked automobiles shall not apply with regard to any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place, other than in a residential district, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or maintenance of such vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or with regard to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or any other public agency or entity. 
(Code 1971, § 14-48(c)) 
Cross reference- Impoundment of vehicles, § 14-13. 
Sec. 8-204. - Unlawful scattering or deposit of refuse and other materials. 
(a)  Wind-blown refuse: It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered or cause clouds of dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to permit the escape of soot, ashes or other solid products or results of combustion so as to be wind-blown or scattered. 
(b)  Deposit of grass and rubbish in public streets: It shall be unlawful to dump or deposit, or cause to be dumped or deposited, any grass, leaves, branches or any other thing in the roadway or gutter of any public street or alley in the city. 
(c)  Deposit of refuse or garbage on private premises: It shall be unlawful to place, deposit, leave or dump any trash, ashes, broken articles, garbage, junk, refuse or waste material of any kind on any premises in the city. For the purpose of this section, vehicles or parts of vehicles not in condition for normal use shall be construed as junk or trash. 
(d)  Debris on sidewalks or abutting premises: It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any building to permit the accumulation of any dirt, ashes, rubbish, tin cans, garbage, old junk cars, washing machines, refrigerators, bed springs or other debris on any sidewalk or on the premises abutting such building or in the yards or vacant ground forming a part of the premises in the city. 
(e)  So as to become offensive: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited any garbage, rubbish, offal, animal carcass, paper or any flammable material, or other refuse which may become offensive, noxious, or dangerous to the public health or safety, on such person's own premises or any premises under such person's control, or deposit any such matter in any back lot, public ground, vacant lot, park, alley, street or areaway, or in any other place within the city except as is otherwise provided by this article or by law. It shall be the responsibility of any violator of this section to remove such matter immediately. 
(Code 1971, §§ 19-2, 19-11) 
Sec. 8-205. - Storage and removal of garbage-Type of receptacle required for storage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to bury, throw out, deposit or place any garbage upon any street or private property, whether owned by such person or not, or to deposit garbage anywhere within the city except in a vessel, can or tank which is watertight and kept in such condition, and which is fitted with covers so closely fitted that no odor can escape therefrom; such tops not to be removed except long enough to put such garbage into such vessel, can or tank and replaced immediately thereafter. Such receptacles shall be fitted with bails and handles and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) gallons in capacity. 
(Code 1971, § 19-3) 
Sec. 8-206. - Same-Manner of storage; duty of persons to arrange for regular removal. 
    It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee or occupant of any building or apartment within the city, or of any place of business of any kind where garbage accumulates, and of the proprietors, owners and operators of every hotel, motel, boarding house or restaurant to provide and at all times to keep within such building or appurtenant lot on which the building is situated suitable and sufficient garbage cans or tanks as required by section 8-205, for receiving and holding without leakage or odor, and in accordance with the requirements of this article, all the garbage that may accumulate between the times of the collection thereof. It shall be the duty of such tenant, lessee or occupant, proprietor, owner or operator to make proper arrangements for the removal of such garbage at regular intervals and to provide for the removal at such person's own cost. 
(Code 1971, § 19-4) 
Sec. 8-207. - Same-Where receptacles to be kept; duty to empty and clean receptacles. 
    All garbage receptacles shall be kept in the rear of any building or in the basement or other area where they will not constitute a nuisance or be offensive to the public or occupants of the property on which they are located, and where they will not permit the gathering of flies. All garbage receptacles shall be emptied and their contents removed to an approved dumping area not less frequently than once a week. Whenever any such garbage receptacles become foul, they shall be replaced or treated with some disinfecting solution to be approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1971, § 19-5) 
Sec. 8-208. - Manner of storing rubbish and flammable wastes; duty of persons to arrange for regular rubbish removal. 
    All rubbish may be kept in receptacles such as those wherein garbage is authorized by this article to be kept, or otherwise shall be kept in a separate box, barrel or other receptacle into which shall be deposited all articles of rubbish, and the owner shall have all such rubbish hauled to the city dump whenever such receptacle shall be within six (6) inches of full. All ashes and cinders, and all rubbish which is flammable and which is kept within the city shall be kept in a metal container which shall have a lid of metal if stored within thirty (30) feet of any building. All other rubbish and all flammable rubbish, ashes and cinders not stored within thirty (30) feet of a building, shall be kept in a box or other container. However, empty cardboard or wooden boxes, except for pieces broken therefrom, may be stored in neat piles in a manner approved by the fire chief and not within thirty (30) feet of a furnace if within a furnace room. It shall be the duty of the owners, tenants, lessees and occupants of all buildings, whether within the fire limits or not, to make proper arrangements for the removal of all rubbish at regular intervals and to provide for removal at their own cost. 
(Code 1971, § 19-6) 
Sec. 8-209. - Unsheltered storage of unused items-Generally. 
    Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, which hereinafter are collectively described as "such personalty," for a period of thirty (30) days or more (except in licensed junk yards) within the corporate limits of this city, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety. 
(Code 1971, § 14-49(a)) 
Sec. 8-210. - Same-Maximum period for automobiles. 
    No person in charge or control of premises, whether owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle to remain on such property longer than ten (10) days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than ten (10) days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. 
(Code 1971, § 14-48(c)) 
Sec. 8-211. - Abatement generally. 
(a)  The owners, tenants, lessees and occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this city upon which a nuisance exists, and also the owners and lessees of any personalty involved in such nuisance (all of whom are hereinafter referred to collectively as "owners"), shall jointly and severally abate said nuisance by the prompt removal of any personalty into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise to remove it to a location without said corporate limits, or otherwise to remedy any nuisance condition. 
(b)  If said owners allow said nuisance to exist or fail to abate such nuisance, each of them, upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which said nuisance is permitted to exist. 
(c)  Whenever said owners fail to abate said nuisance, the city shall remove such personalty to a location of its selection, or take other remedial action, the expenses therefor to be billed to said owners, jointly and severally, said bill to be recoverable in a suit at law. 
(d)  When such personalty has been removed and placed in storage by the city, as provided for herein, such personalty shall be sold by the city after the lapse of such time as is provided by law. If the proceeds of such sale are insufficient to pay the costs of abatement said owners shall be liable to the city for the balance of the costs, jointly and severally, to be recoverable in a suit at law. If the proceeds are in excess of costs the balance shall be paid to said owners, or deposited in the city treasury for their use. 
(Code 1971, § 14-49(b), (c), (d)) 
Sec. 8-212. - Removal by city of prohibited accumulations; debris; notice to offender; expense of removal constitutes lien on property. 
    In the event any owner, lessor, lessee, occupant or other person in violation of any provision of this article fails to remove or cause to be moved any accumulation of dirt, ashes, rubbish, tin cans, garbage or other debris, the city shall give ten (10) days' notice to such owner, lessor, lessee, occupant or other person to remove such accumulation. In the event that the person so notified fails to remove such accumulation as directed by the city, the department of public works shall be authorized to remove such accumulation at the expense of such property owner, lessor, lessee, occupant or other person, and such expense, together with costs, shall be recoverable by the city and shall constitute a lien upon the premises, and such lien may be foreclosed against the lots, parcel of land or building on which or within which the offense occurs. 
(Code 1971, § 19-12) 
Sec. 8-213. - Garbage and rubbish vehicle permits-When required; duration. 
    No person shall for compensation haul or remove, in any vehicle of any kind, any rubbish or garbage from the premises of another, or engage in the business of hauling or removing such rubbish or garbage, without first obtaining a city permit to operate such vehicle for such purposes. Such permit shall commence on the date of the issuance thereof and shall continue until the thirtieth day of June thereafter, inclusive. 
(Code 1971, § 19-7) 
Sec. 8-214. - Same-Fees; authority granted; permit year; numbering; display on vehicles. 
    A permit for a vehicle for the hauling of garbage shall authorize the permittee to haul therein, in accordance with the terms of the permit, either garbage or rubbish, and the permit fee for each such vehicle shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per annum. A permit for a vehicle for the hauling of rubbish shall authorize the owner or operator to haul therein only rubbish and not garbage, and the permit fee for each such vehicle shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per annum. All permits issued for vehicles for the hauling of garbage shall, during each permit year, be numbered consecutively in the order in which they are issued, and shall be designated prior to such number with the letter "G." All permits for vehicles for the hauling of rubbish shall, during each permit year, be numbered consecutively in the order in which they were issued, and shall be designated prior to such number with the letter "R." The permit year shall commence July first of each year and shall end on the thirtieth day of the following June. Each permit shall be for a particular vehicle and the permittee shall cause to be printed or painted conspicuously on each side and at the rear of the vehicle using such permit the name of the owner, the words, "Beckley Permit No. ____________ ," and the number of the permit, including the letter of designation, "G" or "R." Such printing shall be in letters at least three (3) inches high and readable at a distance of thirty (30) feet. 
(Code 1971, § 19-8) 
Sec. 8-215. - Same-Conditions under which issued; applicant to be approved; type of vehicles and maintenance thereof. 
(a)  Garbage vehicles: The recorder-treasurer is authorized to issue a permit to any responsible person for the use of any vehicle to haul garbage under the terms of this article, provided such vehicle has been inspected and approved by the city health officer and the applicant has been approved by both the health officer and the mayor. No permit for the hauling of garbage under the terms of this article shall be issued for any vehicle unless the body of such vehicle in which such garbage shall be hauled shall be a metal, watertight container, with an airtight metal cover. Such metal body shall be otherwise constructed so as to prevent any garbage or slops therein from leaking or spilling upon the streets. Such metal body shall be kept closed at all times, except during loading and unloading, and shall always be kept in a good state of repair, and free from odors. No vehicle shall be approved by the health officer unless it shall be in accordance with the foregoing provisions. 
(b)  Rubbish vehicles: The recorder-treasurer is authorized to issue a permit to any responsible person for the use of any vehicle to haul rubbish under the terms of this article, provided such vehicle has been inspected and approved by the health officer and the applicant has been approved by both the health officer and the mayor. No permit for the hauling of rubbish under the terms of this article shall be issued for any vehicle unless the body of such vehicle in which such rubbish shall be placed shall be of substantial construction, and the walls and the floor thereof shall be metal or boards so fitted together that no dirt, ashes or other portion of such rubbish can escape through the walls or floors thereof upon the streets of the city. Such vehicle shall have, as a permanent part of its equipment, a substantial cover of metal, wood or heavy canvas covering the whole top of the container in which rubbish is hauled. If such vehicle shall have an end gate, such gate shall be of such construction that when closed it will be so tightly fitted that no rubbish can escape along the edges thereof, and such end gate shall always be so closed except when loading and unloading. No vehicle shall be approved by the health officer unless it shall be in accordance with the foregoing provisions. 
(Code 1971, § 19-9) 
Sec. 8-216. - Same-Revocation; right of permittee to hearing. 
    If any person holding a permit for any vehicle under the terms of this article shall fail to comply with this article in any particular, or shall fail to keep the vehicle in a good state of repair, such person shall, upon due notice, have such person's license revoked by the health officer. At least twenty-four (24) hours shall be given by the health officer to such person of the intention to revoke such license, which notice shall designate a time and place for a hearing before the health officer, at which time and place the permittee may show cause, if any there be, why such permit shall not be revoked. 
(Code 1971, § 19-10) 
Sec. 8-217. - Noxious weeds prohibited; height limits prescribed. 
    No owner of any lot or parcel of land within the city, or agent of such owner, shall permit on such lot or parcel of land, other than wooded lots, any noxious, deleterious or unhealthful growth of vegetation, weeds or grasses. No weeds or grasses or vegetation shall be permitted to exceed the height of eighteen (18) inches above the ground surface. 
(Code 1971, § 24-4; Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-218. - Notice to cut or destroy. 
    The code enforcement department is hereby directed to notify, in writing, by certified mail restricted delivery to addressee only, the owner, or agent of such owner of any lot or parcel of land in the city, to cut and destroy any noxious, unhealthful, or deleterious growth of vegetation and any weeds or grass that exceed eighteen (18) inches in height. Such notice shall be sent to the last known address of the owner, or the agent of the owner, of such lot or parcel. If said notice is refused or returned, the city shall attempt to serve the notice on the owner of said lot in accordance with Rule 4 of the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1971, §§ 24-5; Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-219. - Removal by city. 
    Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of the owner or agent notified under section 8-218 to cut and destroy any noxious, unhealthful, or deleterious growth of vegetation or any weeds or grasses in excess of eighteen (18) inches within seven (7) days after the receipt of such notice or of service of the notice as provided for in section 8-218, the city is hereby authorized to cut and destroy said growth, weeds, or grasses by using city forces. 
(Code 1971, § 24-6; Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-220. - Fines and fees. 
    The failure of any owner or agent of such owner so notified under section 8-218 to comply with such notice and/or order to cut and destroy any such vegetation, weeds, or grasses within the prescribed time period is an offense that shall be punished by a fine of a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the actual cost expended by the city in cutting or destroying of said growth, weeds, or grasses as provided for in section 8-219, whichever is greater. Each day of noncompliance with such order is a separate offense. 
(Code 1971, § 24-7; Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-221. - Growth of weeds, grass, or vines on the sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow on the sidewalk abutting any lot of ground or any part thereof which such person may have control, any growth of weeds or grass or vines whatever. 
(Code 1971, § 24-8; Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-222. - Removal when cut. 
    All weeds, grass, and vines, when cut down, must be removed and disposed of in such manner as not to create a nuisance. 
(Code 1971, § 24-9; Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-223. - Wooded lot defined. 
    A "wooded lot" as used in this section is a lot that is unimproved and naturally occurring vegetation and trees have not been altered. This does not exclude the growth of noxious, deleterious, or unhealthful growth within ten (10) feet of a public right-of-way on what is otherwise considered a wooded lot. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-224. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article which shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 8-225. - Citations to abate public nuisances. 
    City of Beckley Code Enforcement Officers are hereby granted authority to issue citations for certain violations of the City Code in order to eliminate hazards to public health and safety, and abate or cause to be abated public nuisances. The citations may be issued for violations extending to sanitation, drainage, sidewalks in disrepair, high weeds, grass or both, graffiti, exterior garbage accumulation and open storage in residential districts. 
    The citations may be issued to the owner, lessee, sub-lessee, tenant, occupant, or agent or manager thereof, presently having control over the property in question. 
    The citations may be issued on the spot to the responsible party. The party receiving the citation may contest the citation in the City of Beckley Municipal Court within ten (10) days of its issuance. 
    If the violation is a first offense and is corrected within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the citation is issued, the code enforcement officer shall convert the citation to a warning. 
    The fine for each violation shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid within ten (10) days. If not paid within ten (10) days, the fine shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day until the violation is corrected. Court costs may be added to the fine by the municipal judge. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15) 
Secs. 8-226-8-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HAZARDOUS WASTE 

Sec. 8-250. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    Disposal: The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any hazardous or solid waste, sludge or septage into or on any land, water, sanitary or storm drainage system so that the hazardous or solid waste, sludge or sewage or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air, or discharged into any waters, including ground waters. 
    Generator: A person whose activity results in the generation of waste which is or may be hazardous. 
    Hazardous waste: Any chemical substances or materials, gas, solid or liquid, designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the United States Resource Recovery and Conservation Act, Public Law 94-580 and amendments to the Act or designated hazardous by the act or its amendments. 
    Oil: Any of a class of substances typically unctuous, viscous, combustible, liquid at sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit and soluble in ether or alcohol but not in water. 
    Storage: The placement of material in drums, tanks or other structures intended to retain the materials for subsequent use or disposal. 
    Waste oil: Discarded oil generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial or agricultural sources or oil recovered from spills. 
Sec. 8-251. - Methods of disposal of hazardous waste. 
(a)  No person shall dump, dispose of, or store hazardous waste except by those methods approved by state or federal regulations. Hazardous waste, properly packaged and labeled identifying the waste, may be stored in quantities of one hundred (100) kilograms (220.46 pounds) or less only upon written approval of the appropriate officer of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of hazardous waste by the landfill method. 
(b)  A generator may accumulate hazardous waste in excess of one hundred (100) kilograms (220.46 pounds) on the site of its generation for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days upon written approval of the appropriate officer of the city subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All such waste is shipped off-site in ninety (90) days or less. 
(2)  The waste is placed in containers in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. 
(3)  The date upon which each period of accumulation begins is clearly marked and visible for inspection on each container. 
(4)  Each container is properly labeled and marked as specified by local, state and federal regulations. 
(5)  The generator complies with all the requirements for owners or operators as outlined in local, state, and federal regulations. 
Sec. 8-252. - Storage of waste oil. 
    No person shall dump or dispose of any waste oil, except that waste oil may be stored in quantities up to one thousand (1,000) gallons. Notwithstanding the foregoing, waste oil may be stored in quantities greater than one thousand (1,000) gallons upon written approval of the appropriate officer of the city. 
Sec. 8-253. - Penalty. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this division shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8 for each offense; each day during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
Secs. 8-254-8-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 8-300. - Findings. 
    The common council finds that many citizens desire a recycling program in order to conserve limited natural resources, reduce litter, recycle valuable materials, extend the useful life of solid waste landfills and reduce the need for new landfills. 
    The common council further finds that the identification and recreation of a local market for recyclable materials are necessary for the implementation of effective recycling programs. 
    The common council further finds that this recycling program can most successfully be established by encouraging the source separation of solid waste and the subsequent curbside collection [of] recyclables. 
    It shall be the policy of the City of Beckley to require recycling of recyclable materials to the fullest extent economically feasible. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-301. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section. 
    Aluminum cans shall mean cans used to hold beverages that are of a nonferrous nature. 
    Ferrous cans shall mean any steel or tin-coated cans. 
    Newspapers shall mean newsprint grade paper, the common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and distributed. This does not include magazines, slick paper, or telephone books. 
    Multi-family dwelling means any place of residence with three (3) or more dwelling units, including apartments, cooperatives, condominiums, group houses, rooming houses, boarding houses, dorms, or other such residences. 
    Occupier of land means any residential dwelling, commercial establishment, or nonprofit organization which shall hold title to or shall be in possession of any property in the City of Beckley, whether as owner, lessee, or tenant. 
    Recyclable materials means any type of refuse designated by the City of Beckley within this division to be separated for recycling. 
    Recycling receptacle means any unattended bin, box, container, structure, or device, whether owned by the city, its agent, or a nonprofit organization, with the purpose of serving as a container for the collection of recyclable materials. This includes receptacles located on the premises of occupiers of land and well as receptacles placed at city collection facilities. A recycling receptacle must be clearly labeled with the term "recycling receptacle" and the name of the recyclable material to be collected in the receptacle. 
    Refuse means all solid waste generated by occupiers of land within the City of Beckley, whether recyclable or non-recyclable materials. 
    Residential dwelling means any housing structure with at least one unit, including, but not limited to, single-family homes, mobile homes, and multifamily dwellings. 
    Commercial establishment means any nonresidential building or establishment, for profit or nonprofit, including, but not limited to, those used for retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing, dining, offices, professional services, automobile service, hotels and motels, restaurants, or shipping and receiving areas. 
    Corrugated cardboard means paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface (alternating ridges and grooves) and is placed between two (2) flat surfaces for the sake of strength and which is commonly used to form cartons. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-302. - Mandatory separation of recyclable materials. 
    On and after the effective date of this division, it shall be mandatory for each occupier of land in the City of Beckley to separate all designated recyclable materials from other refuse, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-303. - Collection of recyclable materials. 
(a)  The materials designated for recycling in section 8-305 shall be placed in a recycling receptacle or bag in a way to keep them contained and protected from the weather. 
(b)  Recyclable material shall be placed at a curbside or other designated spot on the occupier of land's premises for collection on days specified by the City of Beckley. Collections shall be made by the city, or its agent, on those days. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-304. - Scavenging and unauthorized collections. 
(a)  Recyclable materials placed at curbside for collection or in any recycling receptacle placed by the city are the property of the City of Beckley or its authorized collection agent. It is a violation of this division for any person unauthorized by the city to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials or receptacles. 
(b)  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any occupier of land from donating or selling recyclable materials from its own refuse. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-305. - Recyclable materials. 
(a)  The following types of refuse shall be designated as recyclable materials for residential dwellings by the City of Beckley. It shall be unlawful for any occupier of land to dispose of recyclable materials in violation of this division. These materials shall be separated from other refuse and placed in recycling receptacles, bags, or taken to collection facilities in the manner described: 
(1)  Aluminum cans shall be rinsed prior to placement in receptacles or bags. 
(2)  Ferrous cans shall be rinsed and the labels removed prior to placement in receptacles or bags. 
(3)  Newspapers shall be separated from all other types of paper and placed in a receptacle, bag, or bundled securely. 
(b)  The following types of refuse shall be designated as recyclable materials for nonresidential generators of waste by the city. It shall be unlawful for any occupier of land to dispose of recyclable materials in violation of this division. These materials shall be separated from other refuse and placed in recycling receptacles, bags, or taken to collection facilities in the manner described. 
(1)  Aluminum cans shall be rinsed prior to placement in receptacles or bags. 
(2)  Ferrous cans shall be rinsed and the labels removed prior to placement in receptacles or bags. 
(3)  Corrugated cardboard shall be flattened, bundled, tied with cord, and placed in a receptacle, paper bag, or in a bundle. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-306. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city police department, sanitation board, and public works department are hereby authorized to enforce all provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any occupier of land who violates any provision of this division, or any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a monetary fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-307. - Effective date. 
    This division shall take effect October 1, 1993. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-308. - Severance clause. 
    The provisions of this division are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this division shall, for any reason be held invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this division to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this division. 
(Ord. of 10-13-92) 
Sec. 8-309. - Prohibiting dumping of waste in recycling containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally place into recycling containers any item other than the designated recyclable materials. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95) 
Sec. 8-310. - Establish rates for the recycling of miscellaneous goods. 
    The City of Beckley will pick up, from the residences of the City of Beckley, the following items: 
(1)  Refrigerators. 
(2)  Freezers. 
(3)  Stoves. 
(4)  Washers. 
(5)  Dryers. 
(6)  Hot water tanks. 
(7)  Dishwashers. 
(8)  Air conditioning units. 
    The rate charged for this service will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per item. 
(Ord. of 11-27-01) 
Chapter 9 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities tax, § 13-1000 et seq.; damaging fire hydrants, § 7-5. 

ARTICLE I. - SEWER USE AND INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 9-1. - Purpose and policy; objectives; scope of article and authority of the Beckley Sanitary Board. 
(a)  General . This article sets forth the uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributions into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with the Clean Water Act of 1972 as amended, the United States Environmental Protection Agency Pretreatment Regulations, Title 40 CFR (Part 403), West Virginia NPDES program (47CSR10) and other applicable state or federal laws. compliance with these procedures does not relieve any user from complying with other requirements of the local, state or federal government. 
(b)  Objectives . 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into a wastewater facility and/or system of the Beckley Sanitary Board which will interfere with the operation of the system, contaminate resulting sludge, or lead to a violation of the WV/NPDES permit and/or the water quality standards requirements. 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into a wastewater facility and/or system of the board which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or be incompatible with the system. 
(3)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into a wastewater facility and/or system of the board which will result in a risk to worker health and safety. 
(4)  To allow the board to produce a high quality effluent and sludge to meet all requirements of state and federal regulations. 
(5)  To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of operating the wastewater system. 
(c)  Scope of article and authority of the Beckley Sanitary Board. 
(1)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain users and through enforcement of general requirements for users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that an existing customer's capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(2)  This article shall apply to any person, user, firm, corporation or other entity, either within the city or outside the city, who are, by contract, permit or agreement with the city, users of the city's publicly owned treatment works (POTW), or who otherwise contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
(3)  The Beckley Sanitary Board is hereby authorized to adopt rules, regulations, forms, procedures, permit applications, and local limits necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this article. Any administrative rules, regulations, forms, permit applications, local limits, or procedures adopted by the sanitary board shall be incorporated into the Beckley Sanitary Board Pretreatment Program Manual. The manual shall be available for public inspection and kept at the offices of the sanitary board. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the general manager of the sanitary board shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following words, terms, or phrases used in this article shall be as defined in this section: 
    Act or the Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority: The State of West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. 
    Bi-monthly: Once every other month. 
    Bi-weekly: Once every other week. 
    Board: Beckley Sanitary Board 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Bypass: The intentional diversion of wastes from any portion of a treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S.EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand): The laboratory determination of the oxygen equivalent expressed in milligrams per liter of that portion of the organic matter that is susceptible to oxidation by the standard dichromate reflux method. 
    Composite sample: A combination of individual samples of water or wastewater taken in proportion to flow or time which ensures that a representative sample is obtained. 
    Control authority: The Beckley Sanitary Board. 
    Cooling water: 
(1)  Noncontact: Water used for cooling purposes only, which has no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate, or final product and which does not contain a level of contaminants detectable higher than that of the intake water. 
(2)  Contact: Water used for cooling purposes only, which may become contaminated either through the use of water treatment chemicals used for corrosion inhibitors or biocides, or by direct contact with process materials and/or wastewater. 
    Daily maximum: The highest allowable value for a daily discharge. 
    DEP: West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. 
    Domestic sewage, domestic waste: Waterborne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA): The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Garbage: Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Grab sample: An individual sample collected at a randomly selected time over a period not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks, such as, but not limited to, industrial waste, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
    Industrial user (IU): Any source of non-domestic discharge to the POTW. 
    Industrial wastes: Any non-domestic liquid or solid waste. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit: The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment process or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of the board's NPDES permit or of the prevention of the sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), (including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Monthly average: The arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples collected over the monthly monitoring period. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES): The program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits known as WV/NPDES permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources, pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    National pretreatment standard: Means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which applies to Industrial Users. This term includes general and prohibition discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Non-domestic discharge, non-domestic waste: Any waste other than domestic waste. 
    Ordinance: The sewer use ordinance of Beckley, West Virginia 
    Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into the receiving waters in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the board's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Permit: An industrial wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to the ordinance. 
    Permittee, permitted industrial user: A user to whom an industrial wastewater discharge permit has been issued by the board. 
    pH: The negative logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The hydrogen ion concentration shall be measured by an acceptable pH meter. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven-point-zero (7.0); values higher than seven-point-zero (7.0) denote increasing alkalinity; and values lower than seven-point-zero (7.0) indicate increasing acidity. 
    Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity, odor). 
    POTW: Publicly owned treatment works. 
    Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes, or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards: Prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Process wastewater: Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
    Rules and regulations: The rules and regulations in the sewer use ordinance of Beckley, West Virginia. 
    Sewage: The water-carried human wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places together with such industrial wastes, underground, surface, storm, or other water, as may be present. 
    Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU): Means a wastewater source that either: 
(1)  Is a categorical industry under federal regulations; or 
(2)  Has a flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day per average workday of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) except those industrial users which have met the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) to be declared a nonsignificant user; or 
(3)  Has a flow that makes up five (5) per cent or more of the average dry weather flow hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant receiving the waste except those Industrial Users which have met the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) to be declared a nonsignificant user; or 
(4)  Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts; or 
(5)  Has significant impact, either singularly, or in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or on the quality of its effluent; or 
(6)  Has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant non-compliance (SNC): Violations which meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) per cent or more of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) per cent or more of the measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the board believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of board personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment and has resulted in the board's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report non-compliance. 
(8)  Any other violation(s) that the board determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 9-5(b)(2) of this article or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
    Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. EPA under the provision of section 307(a) of the Federal Act, or other accepted acts. 
    Upset: Means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with technology based permit effluent limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, excluding such factors as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, or improper operation and maintenance or lack thereof. 
    User: Means any person, firm or other entity who contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater: A combination of water-carried waste from residential, commercial, institutional and industrial establishments, together with such unintentional ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or works: A plant owned and operated by the board under conditions prescribed in a WV/NPDES permit system. It has devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the board for the purpose of storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater. This includes elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities and any works, including site acquisition of land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. 
    Weekly average: The arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples collected over a period of seven (7) consecutive days. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01; Ord. of 6-28-05, ¶ 1) 
Sec. 9-3. - Permitting of industrial dischargers. 
(a)  Overview. This section prescribes the procedures associated with the issuance of permits to industrial dischargers. 
(b)  Permits required. Any significant industrial user (or other user the board deems applicable) proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the POTW must first make application and obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit prior to any discharge to the sewer system. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which the discharge will begin. All industrial users must reapply within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of their permit or written permission to discharge. The board shall have the authority to deny a permit application if it is in the best interest of the POTW to do so. 
(c)  Permit application requirements All industrial users seeking a permit shall complete and file with the board and/or its authorized agents a completed application form containing, at a minimum, the following information where appropriate: 
(1)  All information required by section 9-4(d)(8) of this article; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the general manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision. 
(d)  Permit contents. The contents of permits shall include, at a minimum, the following conditions: 
(1)  The average and maximum permissible concentration, mass, or other measure of wastewater constituents; 
(2)  Limits on rate and time of discharge, or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(3)  Right of entry for inspection, flow metering, sampling, and copying of reports; 
(4)  Pretreatment of industrial wastewater before discharge; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency, method, and type of sampling, flow metering, number, types and standards for tests, and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater constituents; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of periodic reports to include information concerning volume, rate of flow, constituent concentrations, peak flow rates, hours of operation, number of employees, or other information; 
(8)  Requirements for the protection of the sewage system; 
(9)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the approval authority to ensure compliance with 40 CFR 403.6, National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; 
(10)  Compliance schedule; 
(11)  Requirements for notification to the board for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or the character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the system; 
(12)  Requirements for notification of accidental discharges; 
(13)  Notification requirements; 
(14)  Pollutants to be monitored; 
(15)  Penalties statement; 
(16)  Statement of duration; 
(17)  Statement of non-transferability; 
(18)  Record keeping requirements. 
(e)  Processing and issuance of permits. The board shall evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluating the permit application and any other available information, the industrial user shall be classified in one of two (2) categories. The first category is an industrial user who is not required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit but who is required to obtain the board's written permission to discharge prior to discharging. The second category is an industrial user who is classified as a significant industrial user. Those industrial users classified in this second category shall be required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit. A draft permit shall be delivered to the industrial users requiring permits within sixty (60) days after all data has been furnished and accepted by the board. The industrial user shall be allowed a thirty-day comment period to respond and pay the permit fee. On or before the end of the comment period, the board shall issue or deny a permit. Issuance of the permit with stated conditions shall not relieve the industrial user of any other laws, regulations or ordinances of the board or other governmental agencies. Permits are issued solely to control waste discharges into the board's treatment systems. 
(f)  Duration of permits. Permits shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed five (5) years. The industrial user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of change. 
(g)  Transfer of permits. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific industrial user for a specific operation. Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only with the prior, written approval of the general manager (see section 9-4(b)(7) for conditions). 
(h)  Modification of permits. The terms and conditions of any permit may be subject to modification and change by the board during the life of the permit (See section 9-4(b)(4) for conditions to be considered in modification of a permit). Permit holders shall be informed of any proposed changes in their respective permits at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of change, and shall be allowed a comment period relating to any of the proposed changes in their permits within the first thirty (30) days after issuance of such proposed changes by the board. Unless otherwise required by emergency or governmental regulations, the board shall allow a discharger sixty (60) days to comply with any changes in the permit required by the board when construction is not essential to meet the new permit requirements. If construction is necessary, then the discharger shall be allowed up to nine (9) months to comply with any changes in the permit required by the board. Nothing in the rules and regulations is intended to preclude the board from taking immediate action to temporarily modify a permit when there is imminent risk of injury to the sewerage system or to the health and welfare of the public or to the environment. 
(i)  Separate permits required. A separate permit shall be required for each wastewater connection discharging, directly or indirectly, into the sewerage system. For each discharger having multiple connections at a single plant or facility, a single permit shall be required which may set forth specific effluent limitations and conditions for discharge from each separate connection. 
(j)  Confidential information. 
(1)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public, or other governmental agency, without restriction unless the user specifically requests at the time of submittal, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the board, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. The physical and/or chemical characteristics of a user's wastewater will, however, not be recognized as confidential information or as a trade secret. 
(2)  When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-4. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Overview. This section prescribes the specific items that are contained in a permit. 
(b)  General requirements 
(1)  Duty to comply . The permittee shall comply, with all conditions of the permit. Failure to comply with the requirements of the rules and regulations may be grounds for administrative action, or enforcement proceedings including injunctive relief and termination of service. 
(2)  Duty to mitigate . The permittee shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or correct any adverse impact on the environment resulting from noncompliance with the permit, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the non-complying discharge. 
(3)  Right of entry . The board may inspect the facilities of any permittee to ascertain whether the provisions of the rules and regulations are being met and to determine compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements. The permittee shall allow authorized board representatives, upon the presentation of credentials: 
a.  To have ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the permittee's premises for purposes of inspection and/or sampling in the performance of any of their duties. 
b.  To have access to and copy at reasonable times any records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of the permit; 
c.  To inspect at reasonable times any facilities, equipment (including monitoring equipment and control equipment), practices, operations or monitoring method regulated or required in the permit; or 
d.  To sample or monitor at reasonable times, for the purposes of assuring permit compliance, any substances or parameters at any location; 
e.  Inspect any production, manufacturing, fabricating or storage area where pollutants, regulated under the permit, could originate. 
f.  Where the permittee has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the board will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(4)  Permit modification . The permit may be modified for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
b.  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance; 
c.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
d.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the board's POTW, board personnel or the receiving waters; 
e.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit; 
f.  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting; 
g.  Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
h.  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit; or 
i.  To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition. 
(5)  Permit revocation . Permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to notify the board of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the board of changed condition; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the board timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the ordinance. 
Permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All permits are voidable upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. 
(6)  Property rights . The issuance of the permit does not convey any property rights in either real or personal property, or any exclusive privileges, nor does it authorize any injury to private property or any invasion of personal rights, nor any infringement of federal, state, or local laws or regulations. 
(7)  Transfer of ownership or control Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of the general manager: 
(a)  The permittee must give at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the general manager. 
(b)  The notice must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which: 
1.  States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
2.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
3.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. 
(8)  Dilution . The permittee shall not increase the use of potable or process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the permit. 
(9)  Adverse impact . The permittee shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse impact on the wastewater treatment plant resulting from noncompliance with any effluent limitations specified in the permit, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the non-complying discharge. The permittee shall immediately notify the board of slug discharges, spills that may enter the public sewer, or any other significant changes in operations, wastewater characteristics and constituents. (See section 9-6(c) for reporting requirements) 
(10)  Pretreatment . Permitted industrial users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established herein before discharging to the POTW. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to meet the requirements of the rules and regulations shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating and maintenance procedures shall be submitted to the board for review, and must be acceptable to the board before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operation and maintenance procedures shall in no way relieve the permitted industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility, as necessary, to produce an effluent acceptable to the board under the provisions of the rules and regulations. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operations shall be reported to the board before their implementation. These changes shall be acceptable to the board. 
(11)  Slug discharge control plan . Upon submission of an application for discharge permit and every two (2) years thereafter, the board shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. (See section 9-5(b)(2)for prohibition of slug discharges). The need for a slug discharge control plan shall be evaluated based upon criteria such as the industrial user's potential for slug discharges, history of slug discharges, presence of stored chemicals, whether stored chemicals are in diked storage areas, and the proximity of floor drains to those stored chemicals. 
If a slug discharge control plan is required, it shall contain at least the following elements: 
(1)  A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharge. 
(2)  A description of stored chemicals. 
(3)  Procedures for promptly notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a specific prohibition under section 9-5(b) of this article. 
(4)  Procedures to prevent the adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
The slug discharge control plan shall be signed and certified in accordance with the requirements of section 9-6(g). 
(c)  Industrial user monitoring and record keeping. 
(1)  Monitoring frequency. Monitoring frequency will be outlined in each industrial user's permit. 
(2)  Samples and analysis methods. 
a.  Samples and measurements taken as required shall be representative of the volume and nature of the monitored discharge. All samples shall be taken at the monitoring points specified in the permit and unless otherwise specified, before the effluent joins or is diluted by other waste streams, body of water or substances (see section 9-4(b)(8) concerning dilution). Monitoring points shall not be changed without notification to and the approval of the board. 
b.  To demonstrate compliance with the permit, the sampling and analysis program shall conform to the discharge limitations listed in the IU's discharge permit. Sampling shall be representative of daily operations. A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow - proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. 
c.  The permittee shall record for all samples: 
1.  The date, exact place, time and methods of sampling preservation techniques or procedures; 
2.  Who performed the sampling or measurements; 
3.  The date(s) the analyses were performed; 
4.  Who performed the analyses; 
5.  The analytical techniques or methods used; and 
6.  The results of such analyses. 
d.  Test procedures for the analysis of pollutants shall conform to those analytical procedures as approved by EPA as listed in 40 CFR 136 or an EPA approved method. 
e.  Sample analyses collected in conformance with section 9-4(c)(2)a shall be performed by laboratories certified by the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. 
f.  The permittee shall periodically calibrate and perform maintenance procedures on all monitoring and analytical instrumentation at intervals to ensure accuracy of measurements. (See section 9-4(c)(6)for records retention requirements) 
(3)  Flow measurements . If flow measurement is required by the permit, the appropriate flow measurement devices and methods consistent with approved scientific practices shall be selected and used to ensure the accuracy and reliability of measurements of the volume of monitored discharges. The devices shall be installed, calibrated and maintained to ensure that the accuracy of the measurements are consistent with the accepted capability of that type of device. Devices selected shall be capable of measuring flows with a maximum deviation of +/- ten (10) per cent from true discharge rates throughout the range of expected discharge volumes. 
(4)  Additional monitoring by permittee . If the permittee monitors any pollutant designated in the permit more frequently than required by this permit, using approved analytical methods as specified in section 9-4(c)(2)d above, the results of such monitoring shall be reported in the periodic discharge report. Such increased frequency shall also be indicated. 
(5)  Monitoring facilities . The board may require a permitted industrial user to construct at said industrial user's expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the industrial user's waste streams, and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the industrial user's expense. 
(6)  Retention of records. 
a.  The permittee shall retain records of all monitoring information, including all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by the permit, and records of all data used to complete the application for this permit, for a period of at least three (3) years from the date of the sample, measurement, report or application. This period may be extended by request of the board at any time. 
b.  All records that pertain to matters that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the board, approval authority, or EPA shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(7)  Falsifying information . Knowingly making any false statement on any report or other document required by the permit or knowingly rendering any monitoring device or method inaccurate, may result in punishment under criminal law proceedings as well as being subjected to injunctive relief. 
(d)  Reporting requirement 
(1)  Reporting frequency. Permitted industrial users shall make periodic reports on wastewater quality to the board. The industrial user's permit shall specify the frequencies. 
(2)  Report contents . The reports required by section 9-4(d)(1) shall contain a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants as indicated in the monitoring requirements of section 9-4(c). Sampling and analyses shall be performed as per the requirements of section 9-4(c)(2). 
(3)  Change in discharge . The permittee shall give notice to the board ninety (90) days prior to any facility expansion, production increase, or process modifications which results in new or substantially increased discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. 
a.  If such changes will not violate the discharge limitations, specified in the permit, the permit may be modified to specify and limit any pollutants not previously limited. 
b.  If such changes violate the discharge limitations, specified in the permit, the permit shall become void and a new permit application must be submitted. 
(4)  Anticipated noncompliance . The permittee shall give advance notice to the board of any planned changes in the permitted facility or activity which may result in noncompliance with permit requirements. The notification procedures identified for anticipated bypass section 9-4(e)(3)c.1 shall be followed. If a noncompliance of the permit actually occurs the reporting requirements of section 9-4(d)(7) shall be followed. 
(5)  Duty to provide information . The permittee shall furnish to the board, within a reasonable time, any information which the board may request to determine whether cause exists for modifying, revoking and reissuing, or terminating the permit, or to determine compliance with the permit. The permittee shall also furnish to the board, upon request, copies of records required to be kept by the permit. 
(6)  Signatory requirements . All applications, reports or information submitted to the board shall be signed and certified in accordance with the requirements of section 9-6(g). 
(7)  Reporting requirements for known violations other than accidental discharges or slug load . If for any reason the permittee does not comply with the limitations of the permit, the permittee shall notify the board within twenty-four (24) hours by telephone and follow in writing within five (5) days a description of the violations and the reason or explanation for said violations. The written notification shall also address the steps taken to assure compliance and to eliminate chance of reoccurrence. The permittee shall resample, retest, and submit new test results within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of violation. 
(8)  Reporting requirements for industries subject to national categorical standards . All industrial users subject to national categorical standards shall submit the following reports to the board. 
a.  Categorical industries baseline monitoring report (BMR) . Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under either 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4) or section 47-10-15 DEP OWR NPDES program, whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW shall submit to the board a report which contains the information listed in the following paragraphs 1. through 7. When reports containing this information have already been submitted to the board, the industrial user will not be required to submit this information again. New sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of applicable categorical standards, shall submit to the board a report at least ninety (90) days before commencing discharge to the POTW which contains the information listed in the following paragraphs 1. through 5. and the methods of treatment to be used in meeting applicable standards. New sources may estimate concentration, flow and production data required information is as follows: 
1.  Identifying information . The industrial user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners; 
2.  Permits . The industrial user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
3.  Description of operations . The industrial user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification (SIC) code of the operation carried out by such industrial user. This description shall include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
4.  Flow measurement . The industrial user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow in gallons per day to the POTW from regulated process streams; and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). The board may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows when justified by cost or feasibility consideration. 
5.  Measurement of pollutants 
i.  The industrial user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
ii.  The industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, or mass, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration, or mass, where required shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations; 
iii.  A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, composite samples must be obtained. The composite sampling technique will be specified in each significant industrial user's permit. The different techniques will include the time period required for sampling, and whether the samples will be obtained flow-proportional, time-proportional, or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples. The industrial user will demonstrate which method provides a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
iv.  The industrial user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile those data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
v.  Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the industrial user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula found in 40 CFR Part 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. When an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR Part 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the board; 
vi.  Sampling and analysis procedures shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136. When 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or when it is determined that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods approved by the EPA; 
vii.  The board may allow the submission of a baseline monitoring report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provide information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
viii.  The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
6.  Certification . The industrial user shall submit a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
7.  Compliance schedule . If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance are required to meet the pretreatment standards; the industrial user shall submit the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
i.  When the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by the combined waste stream formula regulated under 40 CFR 403.6(e) and/or a fundamentally different factors variance, the information required by paragraphs 9-4(d)(8)a. 4 and 5 pertain to the modified limits. 
ii.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by the combined waste stream formula and/or a fundamentally different factors variance after the industrial user submits the report required by paragraph 9-4(d)(8)a, any necessary amendments to the in formation requested by paragraphs 9-4(d)(8)a.4 and 5 shall be submitted by the industrial user to the board within sixty (60) days after the modified limit is approved. 
iii.  The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by paragraph 9-4(d)(8)a.7 above: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. No increment of this schedule shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(b)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the board including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on that date and if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the, industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the board. 
b.  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline . Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the board a report containing the information described in paragraphs 9-4(d)(8)a.4 through 6. Industrial users subject to production based standards must submit actual production rate data for the appropriate sampling period. 
c.  Periodic reports on continued compliance . Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of that pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the board during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the board, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards, and a reasonable measure of the industrial users long term production rate. If an industrial user is subject to categorical standards with only production based limits, actual average production rate data for the reporting period must be given. In addition, this report shall include a record of measurements of estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported in paragraph 9-4(d)(8)a.4 except that the board may require more detailed reporting of flows. at the discretion of the board and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the board may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(e)  Operation and maintenance of pollution controls. 
(1)  Proper operation and maintenance . The permittee shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the permittee to achieve compliance with the conditions of the permit. Proper operation and maintenance includes but is not limited to: effective performance; adequate funding; adequate operator staffing and training; and, adequate laboratory and process controls, including quality assurance/quality control procedures. This provision requires the operation of backup or auxiliary facilities or similar systems only when necessary to achieve compliance with the conditions of the permit. 
(2)  Duty to halt or reduce activity . Upon reduction, loss, or failure of the industrial user's pretreatment facility, the permittee shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with its permit, control production of all discharges or both until operation of the pre-treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies, for example, when the primary source of power of the pretreatment facility fails or is reduced. It shall not be a defense for a permittee in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the conditions of this permit. 
(3)  Bypass of pretreatment facilities 
a.  Bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage or no feasible alternatives exist. 
b.  The permittee may allow bypass to occur which does not cause effluent limitations to be exceeded, but only if it also is for essential maintenance or to assure efficient operation. 
c.  Notification of bypass: 
1.  Anticipated bypass . If the permittee knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass to the Beckley Sanitary Board, 301 South Heber Street, Beckley, WV 25801, Attention: General Manager. 
2.  Unanticipated bypass . The permittee shall immediately notify the Beckley Sanitary Board and submit a written notice to the POTW within five (5) days of becoming aware of the bypass. 
3.  Notification of bypass shall contain the following information: 
i.  Description of the discharge or slug load, the cause(s) thereof and the discharge's or slug load's impact on the permittee's noncompliance status; 
ii.  Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur; 
iii.  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such discharge, slug load or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(4)  Removed substances . Solids, sludge, filter backwash, or other pollutants removed in the course of treatment or control of wastewaters or intake waters shall be disposed of in accordance with section 405 of the Clean Water Act and Subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and shall not enter the public transport/treatment works. 
(f)  Other conditions. 
(1)  State and federal laws . Nothing in the permit shall be construed to preclude the institution of any legal action or relieve the permittee from any responsibilities, liabilities, or penalties to which the permittee is or may be subject to under any applicable state or federal law. 
(2)  Special conditions . Special conditions may be added to a permit at any time by the board. 
(3)  Appeals 
a.  Appeals committee . The members of the board shall serve as the appeals committee. 
b.  Permits . The permittee may petition the board to reconsider the terms of this permit within thirty (30) days of its issuance. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. In its petition, the permittee must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit. The effectiveness of this permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. If, the board fails to act with thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit, or not to modify a permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. the permittee seeking judicial review of the final administrative permit decision must do so by filing a compliant with the Circuit Court of Raleigh County within sixty (60) days. 
c.  Enforcement actions. The permittee has the right to appeal enforcement actions. Notice of appeal should be given in writing to the board general manager within thirty (30) days of the order. Failure to file within the time limit shall be considered a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(g)  Charges, fees, surcharges, fines, and civil penalties 
(1)  Regular service charge . The permittee shall pay all water and sewer charges on a prompt basis as bills are received and in accordance with board policy. 
(2)  Permitting fees . When submitting an application for discharge permit, the applicant shall also pay a permit fee based upon the applicant's expected or actual wastewater discharge rate. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid for all applicants with a wastewater discharge flow of up to ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day. Thereafter the applicant shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) for each five thousand (5,000) gallons per day flow increment, or portion thereof, over ten thousand (10,000) gpd (e.g., for an applicant with a wastewater; discharge rate of twenty-nine thousand five hundred (29,500) gallons per day the application fee is three hundred dollars ($300.00). A maximum application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be charged for flows in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons/day. 
(3)  Surcharge . As a result of violations in permit limits for conventional pollutants, the permittee shall be responsible for surcharges described as follows: 
a.  BOD, TSS, and ammonia: 
S.C. = Surcharge in dollars for excess B.O.D. or C.O.D. (whichever dollar figure is higher) 
TSS and Ammonia for the billing period. S.C. (BOD+TSS+NH3) = V [W (BOD-SCC BOD ) + 
Y (TSS-SCC TSS ) + 
Z (NH 3 -SCC NH3 )] S.C. (COD+TSS+NH3) = V [X (COD-SCC COD ) + 
Y (TSS-SCC TSS ) + 
Z (NH 3 -SCC NH3 )] V = Volume in million gallons (MG) for a specific user billing period W = cost to treat BOD per part per million gallons X = cost to treat COD per part per million gallons Y = cost to treat TSS per part per million gallons Z = cost to treat NH 3 per part per million gallons SCC BOD = The surcharge threshold concentration for BOD 
(parts per million) (by weight) SCC COD = The surcharge threshold concentration for COD 
(parts per million) (by weight) SCC TSS = The surcharge threshold concentration for TSS 
(parts per million) (by weight) SCC NH3 = The surcharge threshold concentration for ammonia 
(parts per million) (by weight) BOD = Biological oxygen demand at five (5) days at 20°C as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million) (by weight). COD = Chemical oxygen demand as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million) (by weight). TSS = Total suspended solids as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million) (by weight). NH 3 = Ammonia as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million) (by weight).  
b.  Oils and grease: The permittee shall pay for the cost of disposal for oil and grease discharges over permitted limits. (under no circumstances can categorical standards for oil and grease be exceeded nor can the discharge violate prohibited standards.) 
c.  pH: The permittee shall pay for the cost of restoring the wastewater treatment plant and facilities to normal operations. 
The permittee shall be responsible for any other special surcharges that may be described in the permit. 
(4)  Fines . As a result of violations in permit limits for incompatible pollutants, the permittee shall be fined at least the amounts to cover the cost of: 
a.  Properly disposing of any contaminated sludge. 
b.  Restoring the wastewater treatment plant and facilities to normal operations. 
(5)  Other charges . The permittee shall be responsible for costs of additional sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, special or additional equipment and labor as the result of any violation of the permit. 
(h)  Duty to reapply. If the permittee wishes to continue an activity regulated by the permit after the expiration date of the permit, the permittee must apply for and obtain a new permit. The application must be submitted at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of the current permit. 
(i)  Continuation of expired permits. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if: 
(1)  The permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit. 
(2)  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the permittee. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01; Ord. of 6-28-05, ¶ 1) 
Sec. 9-5. - Discharge requirements. 
(a)  Overview. This section prescribes limitations and prohibitions on the quantity and quality of sewage or wastewater which may be lawfully discharged into the board's wastewater treatment system by any industrial user or other user. Pretreatment of some discharges may be required to achieve the goals established by the rules and regulations and the national pretreatment standards. The specific limitations set forth herein, and other prohibitions and limitations of the rules and regulations, are subject to change as necessary to enable the board to: 
(1)  Provide efficient wastewater treatment; 
(2)  Protect the public health, the environment, the beneficial uses of the receiving waters; and, 
(3)  Enable the board to meet requirements contained in its NPDES permit. 
(b)  General and specific prohibitive standards. 
(1)  General prohibitions . No industrial user or other user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirement. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions . Furthermore, no industrial user or other user may contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
a.  Pollutants which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the municipal wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less that 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
b.  Any wastewaters having a pH less than five (5) or more than ten (10) or otherwise causing corrosive damage to the POTW or equipment or endangering board personnel. 
c.  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
d.  Any wastewater which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C). 
e.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
f.  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems 
g.  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the board. 
h.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
i.  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment plant process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the board's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten (10) per cent from any seasonally established norm for aquatic life, should a limit be established. 
j.  Any wastes containing any radioactive materials or isotopes except as specifically approved by the general manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
k.  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
l.  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the general manager in a wastewater discharge permit. 
m.  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
n.  Any discharge of fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin is limited to one hundred (100) mg/L. 
o.  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage, with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
p.  Any substance which will cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with the sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under section 405 of the act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the solid waste disposal act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
q.  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
r.  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a industrial user knows or has reason to know will cause interferences to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
s.  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the board general manager. 
Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. If a pretreatment facility is required, all floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW. 
(c)  Limitations on wastewater quality 
(1)  Local limits. The board has established the following technically based local limits for allowable industrial pollutant concentrations: 
Parameter Concentration 
mg/l Ammonia-Nitrogen 95.0 Arsenic 0.016 BOD 5 3500 Cadmium 0.040 Chromium 0.500 COD Monitor Only Copper 0.400 Cyanide 0.200 Lead 0.140 Mercury 0.001 Nickel 0.400 Oil & Grease 100 Silver 0.040 TSS 3500 Zinc 1.600 pH 5.0-10.0 S. U.  
These limits shall be re-evaluated as required by the WV/NPDES permit and the SIU permits shall be modified to include the regulatory changes. 
(2)  National standards . As established by national pretreatment standards, the limitations contained in those standards shall apply unless a more stringent standard has been established by the board or state. 
Certain significant industrial users are subject to national categorical standards promulgated by the U.S. EPA. The EPA may specify quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the board's wastewater treatment system. All industrial users subject to a national pretreatment standard shall comply with all requirements of such standard, and shall also comply with any additional or more stringent limitations contained in these rules and regulations. Existing sources subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard are subject to that categorical standard as soon as that standard is effective and must be in compliance with the categorical standard by the compliance date set within the standard. New sources subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard already in effect must be in compliance with that standard as soon as discharge of wastewater from the new source commences. 
Except where expressly authorized by an applicable national pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall increase the use of the process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with such standard. 
(3)  State limitations . State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations, or those contained in this chapter. The board reserves the right to establish by rules and regulations more stringent limitations or requirements for discharges to a wastewater treatment facility if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives stated at the beginning of this chapter. 
(d)  Construction and interpretation. The omission of any particular waste from the standards outlined in the rules and regulations does not imply that discharge of such waste to the sanitary sewer system will be permitted. Any liquid waste of peculiar character and volume, or of toxic or unusual nature shall be subject to review by the board and standards deemed applicable established by the board. The requirements as set forth by the rules and regulations are generally applicable, but not absolutely fixed. Such requirements may be made more restrictive and more stringent by the board if a survey of the sewer system and/or analyses of wastewater treatment plant operating data, or standards set by the West Virginia DEP for receiving streams indicate that such action is necessary for the protection of the sewerage system. 
(e)  Acceptance of trucked or hauled pollutants and septic tank wastes. Industrial waste, non-domestic waste, domestic waste, or pollutants from sites not served by the public sewerage system may be considered for disposal on a case by case basis. Any person requesting such disposal shall first obtain a waste haulers permit from the board. A separate request must be made for each discharge unless it can be demonstrated that the wastes are routinely produced and of such quality that individual consideration can be waived. The permit issued to haulers of industrial waste, non-domestic waste, domestic waste, or pollutants shall be subject to all the provisions of the industrial waste discharge permit. The conditions of the waste haulers permit may include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Maximum permissible composite concentration of wastewater constituents; 
(2)  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation; 
(3)  Requirements for inspection and sampling; 
(4)  Requirements for recording, maintaining and reporting information concerning the origin of each tank truck load and identification of contributor(s); 
(5)  Prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater constituents; 
(6)  Incompatible waste shall not be accepted by the board at any of its POTW's; 
(7)  Time and date to be discharged; and 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the board to insure compliance with the rules and regulations. 
Trucked or hauled pollutants and septic tank wastes shall only be discharged at locations designated by the board. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01; Ord. of 6-11-02; Ord. of 6-28-05, ¶ 1) 
Sec. 9-6. - General requirements for all industrial users. 
(a)  Overview. In addition to the discharge requirements of section 9-5 by which all industrial users must comply, this section prescribes minimum requirements which apply to all industrial users. 
(b)  Protection from accidental discharge. 
(1)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by the rules and regulations. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the board for review, and shall be acceptable to the board before construction of the facility. 
(2)  The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary against accidental discharge. 
(c)  Reporting of accidental discharges or slug load. The industrial user responsible for any accidental or potentially detrimental discharge or slug load to a wastewater treatment system shall notify the board by the following methods: 
(1)  Telephone notification: Any industrial user causing or suffering any discharge whether accidental or not, which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health, and welfare of persons, to the environment, or which is likely to cause interference with the wastewater treatment system serving the industrial user, shall notify the board immediately by telephone. 
(2)  Written report: Within five (5) days following such occurrence, the industrial user shall provide the board with a detailed written report describing the cause of the accidental discharge or slug load and corrective measures taken by the industrial user. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, or damage to the board's wastewater treatment system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, or other liability which may be imposed by the rules and regulations or other applicable law. The written report shall specify: 
a.  Description of the discharge or slug load, the cause(s) thereof and the discharge's or slug load's impact on the industrial user's noncompliance status; 
b.  Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur; 
c.  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such discharge, slug load or other conditions of noncompliance. 
A documented and verified accidental discharge or slug load shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought against the industrial user for violations attributable to the upset event. 
(3)  Notice to employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent location advising employees whom to call in the event of accidental discharge or slug load. Employers shall ensure that all employees who would be responsible to make calls and take appropriate actions if such an accidental discharge or slug load were to occur are advised of the "emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Right of entry. The board reserves the right to inspect the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the provisions of the rules and regulations are being met and all requirements are being complied with. The industrial user shall allow authorized board representatives, upon the presentation of credentials: 
(1)  To have ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the industrial user premises for purposes of inspection and/or sampling in the performance of any of their duties; 
(2)  To sample or monitor at reasonable times, for the purposes of assuring compliance with the rules and regulations, any substances or parameters at any location; 
(3)  Inspect any production, manufacturing, fabricating or storage area where pollutants could originate. 
Where the industrial user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the board will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Unreasonable delays shall be deemed a violation of the user's permit and can result in penalties subject to the provisions contained in section 9-7(d). 
(e)  Reporting of hazardous waste. 
(1)  All industrial users must notify the board, the EPA regional waste management division director, and the West Virginia Division of Waste Management in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. The written notification must include: 
a.  The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261. 
b.  The EPA hazardous waste number. 
c.  The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). 
(2)  If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known: 
a.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes. 
b.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month. 
c.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. 
(3)  All notifications shall take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge of the hazardous waste. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). 
(4)  Users are exempt from the requirements of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires the one-time notification described in this section of the rules and regulations. 
(5)  In the case of new regulations under Section 3001 of Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, RCRA, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the board, the EPA Regional waste management division director, and the West Virginia Division of Waste Management of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. When such a notification is made the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume or toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(f)  Change in discharge. The industrial user shall give notice to the board ninety (90) days prior to any facility expansion, production increase, or process modifications which results in new or substantially increased discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. A ten (10) per cent increase in discharge flow and / or an increase in a pollutant's concentration shall constitute a substantial increase. Those conditions stated in section 9-4(c) shall apply to permitted industrial users. 
(g)  Signatory requirements. All applications, reports or information submitted to the board shall be signed and certified in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All permit applications shall be signed: 
a.  For a corporation: by a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president. 
b.  For a partnership or sole proprietorship: by a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
(2)  All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports shall be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized representative of that person. A person is a duly authorized representative only if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by a person described in section 9-6(g). 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent, or position of equivalent responsibility. 
(3)  Certification. Any person signing a document under this section shall make the following certification: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who managed the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of civil penalties for knowing violation." 
(4)  Any change in signatures shall be submitted to the board in writing within thirty (30) days after the change. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-7. - Enforcement response plan. 
(a)  Purpose. The following enforcement response plan prescribes how the board may respond to violations of the ordinance or rules and regulations. 
(b)  Principles of the enforcement response plan. The Beckley Sanitary Board Enforcement Response Plan has been developed based on information contained in the USEPA "Guidance For Developing Control Authority Enforcement Response Plans". The plan is based on the following basic principles. 
(1)  Source inventory . The Beckley Sanitary Board maintains a complete and accurate source inventory. The inventory contains appropriate basic information concerning each discharger, such as name, location, permit number, discharge limit, compliance dates, and other permit requirements and effluent data. The pretreatment coordinator maintains the inventory using the industrial user inventory form. The pretreatment coordinator will review industrial users semiannually to update the list of significant industrial users. In addition, pretreatment coordinator will maintain and update the master file of industrial users. This file shall consist of industrial waste survey forms and permit applications for all industrial users. The industrial waste survey form shall be considered updated for permitted users when the initial permit application is submitted and then renewed every three (3) years. For industrial users who are not permitted, the pretreatment coordinator or his designee shall update the industrial waste survey form every five (5) years. In addition, the general manager or his designee shall monitor the building permits issued on a monthly basis to detect possible changes in processes that are unreported by industrial users. The information will be made available to appropriate local, state and federal officials. 
(2)  Information flow . Any information obtained from the discharger or other governmental agencies will be collected and disseminated in an orderly, efficient manner. The pretreatment coordinator is responsible for the repository for all the information. Requests for information shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator in writing. A response to the request for information will be provided within thirty (30) days of the request for information. Section 9-3(j) deals with confidential information. 
(3)  Pre-enforcement screening . The pre-enforcement screening is accomplished by reviewing information as soon as it is received. The pretreatment coordinator will evaluate user discharge monitoring reports to determine required enforcement actions within five (5) days of receipt using the compliance screening checklist for monitoring reports. The pretreatment coordinator will maintain a log of due dates for all reports. Section 9-7(d) identifies the steps that will be taken if non-compliance is identified. In addition to the above procedures to identify non-compliance the pretreatment coordinator will track previous noncompliance. Section 9-7(d) also identifies the steps that will be taken if non-compliance is continued. 
(4)  Formal enforcement evaluation . Once the need for an enforcement response has been determined by the pre-enforcement screening, the selection of an appropriate initial action will be based on the enforcement responses identified in section 9-7(d). 
(5)  Formal enforcement action and follow-up . The enforcement measures/activities available to the board are described in section 9-7. The range of appropriate responses is described in section 9-7(d). The general manager will monitor each enforcement action being pursued. Section 9-7(d) contains time frames in which action will be taken against non-complying significant industrial users. Section 9-7(c) discusses the board officials who will take actions indicated in enforcement responses set forth in section 9-7(d). 
(6)  Demand monitoring and inspections . Demand sampling and industrial inspections are usually performed in response to a complaint or an emergency situation. In addition, demand sampling and inspections will be initiated if board personnel notice changes in the influent characteristics of the POTW. Any discharge that reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to health or safety of the public or board personnel, or appears to be causing interference or pass through at the POTW will be considered as an emergency situation. 
If board personnel determine that an emergency condition exists, appropriate additional board personnel will be notified so that steps can be taken to minimize the impact of the emergency condition. Board personnel will conduct an investigation to determine the cause of the emergency condition. Using information on file, an attempt to identify the likely source(s) of the discharge casing the emergency condition will be made. If necessary, board personnel will visit the location of the suspected discharge to conduct an inspection and sampling. The objective of the inspection and sampling is to: determine the nature, duration, and hazard of the discharge; obtain samples to verify the source and constituents of the discharge; ascertain the necessary corrective actions needed to be taken to contain or halt the discharge; initiate corrective action, if needed; document information needed for follow-up compliance or enforcement activities. Once the source of the discharge causing the emergency condition is identified, the procedures identified in the ordinance will be followed. 
(7)  Periodic ERP evaluation . The effectiveness of the enforcement response plan will be assessed on an annual basis as part of the yearly report submitted to the DEP. 
(c)  Responsible board officials. Board officials who will take actions indicated in enforcement responses set forth below are as follows: 
(1)  Issuance of notice of violation (NOV) will be done by the general manager or his designee(s). 
(2)  Issuance of administrative compliance orders (AO), administrative show cause orders (SCO) and the institution of judicial proceedings shall be done by the board general manager. 
(d)  Enforcement responses. 
(1)  Type of violations. Violations of pretreatment requirements by IUs fall into five (5) categories: 
a.  Limits and prohibited discharges; 
b.  Sampling; 
c.  Analysis; 
d.  Reporting; and 
e.  Compliance schedules and regulatory deadlines. 
The IU is liable for each instance of non-compliance and is subject to enforcement action as hereinafter provided. 
The board shall provide, at least annually, public notification of the IU's violations (SNC) in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality in which the POTW is located. These IU violations will note the significant violations, which occurred during the previous twelve (12) months of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. 
(2)  Key to abbreviations. 
AO Administrative compliance order. Directs industrial user to take a certain action within a specified period of time. IU Industrial user JA Judicial action. When included with the term "including penalties" shall include criminal prosecution. May also include a suit for injunctive relief if necessary. NOV Notice of violation. Notifies industrial user of specified violations and requires an explanation and statement of planned corrective action within ten (10) days. POTW Publicly owned treatment works SCO Administrative show cause order. Directs industrial user to appear at a hearing before the board general manager to show cause why a specified enforcement action should not be taken against it. SNC Significant non-compliance. As defined in section 9-2 definitions.  
(3)  Enforcement responses-Listed violations. 
a.  Violations in relation to sampling, monitoring, and reporting 
Non-compliance Circumstances Range of Response Failure to sample, monitor report, (routine reports, BMRs) Isolated or infrequent Notice of violation (NOV) requiring a report within ten (10) days. If no response is received, issue an administrative compliance order (AO). Failure to sample, monitor, report or notify IU fails to respond to two (2) or more letters; does not follow through on written agreements or is a frequent violator SNC.** AO or judicial action including penalties if no response is received. Action to be taken immediately upon determination of non response by pretreatment coordinator. Failure to notify of effluent limit violation or slug discharge.* Isolated or infrequent. No known effects. Phone call followed by NOV. If no response within ten (10) days issue an SCO.*** Failure to notify of effluent limit violation or slug discharge.* Two or more violations in a six-month period or continued violation-SNC SCO after second violation, AO or JA, including penalties. Failure to notify of effluent limit violation or slug discharge.* Known environmental or POTW damage results - SNC Immediate JA including penalties upon discovery. Sewer ban. Minor sampling, monitoring or reporting deficiencies (computational or typographical errors). Isolated or infrequent NOV upon receipt of deficient report. Corrections to be made on the next submittal. AO if repeated five (5) or more times. Major or gross sampling, monitoring or reporting deficiencies (missing information, late reports). Isolated or infrequent NOV or AO. Corrections to be made on the next submittal. Major or gross reporting deficiencies If continued over three (3) monitoring periods. Remains uncorrected thirty (30) days or more. SNC AO or JA including penalties  
b.  Violations of compliance schedules (Construction phases or planning) 
Non-compliance Circumstances Range of Response Reporting false information Any instance JA including penalties within five (5) days; sewer ban. Missed interim date. Will not cause late final date or other interim dates NOV five (5) days after date Missed interim date. Will result in other missed interim dates. Violation for good or valid cause. NOV or AO five (5) days after date Missed interim date. Will result in other missed interim dates. Violation for no good or valid cause. NOV, AO, or JA including penalties within five (5) days of date Missed final date Violation due to force majeure (strike, act of God, etc.) Contact permittee and require documentation of good or valid cause; SCO Missed final date Ninety (90) days or more outstanding. Failure or refusal to comply without good or valid cause. AO or JA including penalties Failure to install monitoring equipment Continued - SNC. AO to begin monitoring (using outside contacts if necessary) and install equipment within five (5) days. Temporary sewer ban.  
c.  Violations of effluent limits 
Non-compliance Circumstances Range of Response Exceeding final limits (categorical, local or prohibited) Infrequent or isolated minor violations. NOV within ten (10) days of receipt of report Exceeding final limits Infrequent or isolated major violations exceed the limits by TRC of a single effluent limit. NOV, AO within ten (10) days of receipt of report. JA including penalties if environmental harm resulted. Exceeding final limits Violation(s) that are SNC. AO or JA including penalties within ten (10) days of receipt of report. Exceeding interim limits (categorical or local ) Without known damages. NOV or AO within ten (10) days of receipt of report. Exceeding interim limits Results in known environmental or POTW damage - SNC AO or JA including penalties within ten (10) days of receipt of report. Reported slug load Isolated with known damage. SNC SCO or AO within ten (10) days of receipt of report. Reported slug load Isolated with known interference, pass-through, or damage - SNC. AO or JA including penalties within ten (10) days of receipt of report. Reported slug load Recurring - SNC JA including penalties within ten (10) days of receipt of report. Sewer ban.  
d.  Discharge without permit or approval 
Non-compliance Circumstances Range of Response Discharge without a permit or approval One time without known environmental or POTW damage. AO within five (5) days after discovery. Discharge without a permit or approval One time that results in environmental damage or continuing violation. - SNC AO or JA including penalties within five (5) days of discovery. Discharge without a permit or approval Continuing violation with known environmental or POTW damage - SNC AO or JA including penalties within five (5) days of discovery. Disconnect sewer.  
e.  Non-compliance detected through inspections or field investigations 
Non-compliance Circumstances Range of Response Minor violation of analytical procedures. Any instance NOV issued contemporaneous with discovery. Major violation of analytical No evidence of intent. NOV or AO issued within ten (10) days of discovery. Major violation of analytical Evidence of negligence or intent - SNC. AO or JA including penalties within ten (10) days of discovery. Minor violation of permit condition No evidence of negligence or intent NOV. Correction within ten (10) days. Minor violation of permit condition Evidence of negligence or intent - SNC. AO or JA including penalties within ten (10) days of discovery. Major violation of permit condition Evidence of negligence or intent - SNC. AO or JA including penalties within ten (10) days of discovery. Sewer ban  
f.  Timeframes for responses. 
1.  All violations will be identified and documented within five (5) days of receiving compliance information. 
2.  Initial enforcement responses [including contact with the industrial user and requesting information on corrective or preventive action(s)] will occur within fifteen (15) days of violation detection. 
3.  Follow up actions for continuing or reoccurring violations will be taken within sixty (60) days of the initial enforcement response. For all continuing violations, the response will include a compliance schedule. 
4.  Violations which threaten health, property or environmental quality are considered emergencies and will receive immediate responses such as halting the discharge or terminating service. 
5.  All violations meeting the criteria for significant noncompliance will be addressed with an enforcement order within thirty (30) days of the identification of significant noncompliance. 
*  Revised regulations of 10/18/1988 40 CFR 403 to the general pretreatment regulations include a requirement to repeat effluent analysis after each violation and provide the information to the control authority within thirty (30) days. 
**  SNC. This denotes that the circumstances of a particular violation are severe enough to meet the criteria specified for significant noncompliance (SNC). The Board shall provide, at least annually, public notification of the IU's violations (SNC) in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality in which the POTW is located. These IU violations will note the significant violations, which occurred during the previous twelve (12) months of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. 
***  Whenever a letter of violation is issued that requires a response and the industrial user fails to respond the board should issue an administrative order to require the industrial user to respond and return to compliance immediately. If appropriate, a show cause order may be issued instead of an AO. 
_____
(e)  Board personnel responsibilities. The responsibilities of the board personnel for all enforcement related activities are described as follows: 
(1)  Sanitary board: 
a.  Determines policy by authorizing rules and regulations. 
b.  Sets levels for charges, fees, surcharges, and fines. 
(2)  Board general manager: 
a.  Responsible to board for implementing the rules and regulations. 
b.  Makes recommendations to board for initiating civil and judicial actions. 
c.  Reviews reports from pretreatment coordinator. 
d.  Authorizes suspension or revocation of permit. 
e.  Authorizes penalties. 
f.  Advises board and makes recommendations for policies. 
g.  Makes informal warnings, issues notices of violation (NOV's), issues administrative show cause order, and issues administrative compliance orders (AO's). 
h.  Issues industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
i.  Approves NOV's issued by designee(s). 
j.  Conducts show cause hearings. 
k.  Assesses industrial user for charges, fees, surcharges, and fines. 
(3)  Pretreatment coordinator: 
a.  Maintains industrial user inventory file. 
b.  Maintains report files for: 
1.  Baseline monitoring reports. 
2.  Compliance schedules and reports. 
3.  Board inspection reports. 
4.  Compliance screening checklists. 
c.  Evaluates industrial user discharge reports within five (5) days of receipt to determine required enforcement actions. 
d.  Makes recommendations to board general manager for permit suspensions, permit revocations, or judicial actions. 
e.  May issue NOV's to the violator of the rules and regulations. 
f.  Notifies the board general manager of required penalties and fees to be assessed on an industrial user as set forth in the rules and regulations. 
g.  Submits industrial pretreatment yearly report to DEP. 
h.  Review industrial users semiannually to update list of significant industrial users. 
i.  May make informal warnings. 
j.  Annually publishes name(s) of industrial users found to be in significant non-compliance and their cases of non-compliance in a local newspaper of general circulation within the board's service area. 
k.  Provides schedule of frequency and purpose of required board inspections. 
l.  Maintains and updates master file of industrial users. This file shall consist of industrial waste survey forms and permit applications for all industrial users. The industrial waste survey form shall be considered updated for permitted users when the initial permit application is submitted and then renewed every three (3) years. For industrial users who are not permitted, the pretreatment coordinator shall update the industrial waste survey form every five (5) years. In addition, the general manager, or his designee, shall monitor the building permits issued on a monthly basis to detect possible changes in processes that are unreported by industrial users. 
m.  Shall annually review 40 CFR Sections 405-471 to ensure compliance with promulgated standards and requirements. 
n.  Reviews newly promulgated CFR updates. 
(4)  Inspector/field personnel: 
a.  Conducts sampling and inspection of industrial users using forms provided by the board. 
b.  Reviews industrial user discharge monitoring reports within five (5) days of receipt to detect for noncompliance. Completes compliance screening checklist based on review and submits to pretreatment coordinator. 
c.  Reports conditions of non-compliance and recommends action to pretreatment coordinator. 
d.  Makes informal warnings for non-compliance when required by section 9-6(c). 
(5)  Board attorney: 
(1)  Advises board on legal issues concerning the rules and regulations. 
(2)  Advises board on enforcement matters. 
(3)  Coordinates judicial enforcement responses. 
(4)  Conducts civil litigation on behalf of board. 
(f)  Inspections and testing by board personnel. 
(1)  Frequency . Inspectors/field personnel shall make facility inspections and perform wastewater testing of permitted industrial users at the following indicated minimum frequencies. 
User Discharge Rate Facility Wastewater GPD Inspections Testing 0-100,000 1/year 1/year >100,000 1/year 1/year  
For those industrial users who do not have an industrial wastewater discharge permit but who are discharging with the board's written permission to discharge, only wastewater testing shall be conducted unless a possible discharge violation is detected in which case a facility inspection may be conducted. Wastewater testing for this category of industrial user shall typically be conducted on an annual basis unless special or unusual circumstances indicate a different frequency is more appropriate. 
(2)  Facility inspections. Facility inspections shall be conducted by inspectors using the checklist provided by the board. The purpose of the facility inspections is to verify overall compliance with the provisions of the rules and regulations. 
(3)  Wastewater testing. Wastewater testing shall be done by field personnel taking composite and/or grab samples. The purpose of wastewater testing is to determine compliance with the permit limits. The results of the testing shall be recorded on the form provided by the board. 
a.  Sampling and monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with 40 CFR 136, or an EPA approved method. 
b.  Samples shall be taken in clearly labeled, standard containers for samples. A chain-of-custody document shall be maintained with each container. A signature and date shall be required whenever the custody of the sample changes from one person to another. 
c.  At a minimum, the samples shall be tested for the significant pollutants discharged by the industrial user identified through the industrial waste survey or permit application and for the pollutants specified in the industrial user's permit. 
d.  Sampling bottles and equipment along with copies of board generated forms shall be maintained in one location to facilitate quick response sampling and analysis. 
(g)  Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the board's wastewater collection, treatment, and/or disposal systems contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of the board, the board attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Circuit Court of Raleigh County, Municipal Court, or any other court having competent jurisdiction. 
(h)  Penalty. The criminal misdemeanor penalties within this article shall be enforced by the issuance of a summons from the municipal court, the circuit court of Raleigh County, or any other court having competent jurisdiction, upon a complaint filed therein by the general manager. The court shall add to said fines the appropriate cost for issuance and service of said summons. 
(1)  Civil penalty. Whoever violates an order of the board or has failed to comply with any provisions of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the board may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. Such actions for relief shall be brought by the board in the circuit court of Raleigh County, municipal court, or any other court having competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Criminal prosecution . Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. 
(3)  Falsifying information . Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsified, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(4)  Administrative fines . Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any industrial user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, or permits and orders issued hereunder, may be fined not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur, or continue, shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments shall be payable to the board. Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines shall file a request for the general manager to reconsider the fine within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where the general manager believes that the request has merit, he may convene a show cause hearing with the industrial user. Should an industrial user ultimately refuse to pay any such administrative fine, the board shall have the authority to initiate legal proceedings in the circuit court of Raleigh County, municipal court, or any other court having competent jurisdiction for collection of the same. 
(i)  Show cause hearing. 
(1)  The board may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the board regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(2)  The board may itself conduct the hearing and take evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the board to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the board notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
b.  Take the evidence; 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the board for action thereon. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, shall be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the actual cost thereof. 
(4)  After the board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-8. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater collection, treatment, and/or disposal systems if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 9-1. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Secs. 9-9-9-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Dec. 11, 2001, amended Art. II of this chapter in its entirety as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 9-200-9-203, 9-220-9-234, 9-240-9-248, 9-260-9-270, 9-280-9-296 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1971 Code, §§ 20-01, 20-1-20-3.1, 20-7-20-8.1, 20-9-20-28, 20-31-20-36, 20-38, 20-40-20-45, 20-47-20-57; and ordinances adopted Nov. 22, 1983, and Sept. 23, 1997. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-200. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them by this section: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the waste discharge from other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, which begins five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
    Combined sewer: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
    Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Floatable oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. 
    Garbage: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
    General manager: The manager of wastewater facilities and/or works, and/or of water pollution control by the city, or such manager's authorized deputy, agent, or representative, designated as provided by section 9-225. 
    Industrial wastes: Any non-domestic liquid or solid waste. 
    pH: The negative logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The hydrogen ion concentration shall be measured by an acceptable pH meter. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven-point-zero (7.0); values higher than seven-point-zero (7.0) denote increasing alkalinity; and values lower than seven-point-zero (7.0) indicate increasing acidity. 
    Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility, including the city sanitary board. 
    Sanitary board: The sanitary board of the city established pursuant to W. Va. Code, ch. 16, art. 13. 
    Sanitary sewer: A sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions. 
    Sewage: The water-carried human wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places together with such industrial wastes, underground, surface, storm, or other water, as may be present. 
    Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU): Means a wastewater source that either: 
(1)  Is a categorical industry under federal regulations; or 
(2)  Has a flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day per average workday of process wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) except those industrial users which have met the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) to be declared a nonsignificant user; or 
(3)  Has a flow that makes up five (5) per cent or more of the average dry weather flow hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant receiving the waste except those industrial users which have met the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) to be declared a nonsignificant user: or 
(4)  Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts; or 
(5)  Has significant impact, either singularly, or in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or on the quality of its effluent; or 
(6)  Has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Slug load: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 9-5(b)(2) or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer"): A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Unpolluted water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Wastewater: A combination of water-carried waste from residential, commercial, institutional and industrial establishments, together with such unintentional ground, surface and storm water as may be present. 
    Wastewater treatment plant, facilities, or works : A plant owned and operated by the board under conditions prescribed in a WV/NPDES permit system. It has devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the board for the purpose of storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater. This includes elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities and any works, including site acquisition of land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. 
    Watercourse: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 12-11-02) 
Sec. 9-201. - Rules of public service commission apply. 
    In addition to the rules and regulations promulgated in this article, the rules and regulations for sewer utilities prescribed by the Public Service Commission of the state apply to the operation and services of the sewer system of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-202. - City not liable for damage. 
    The city shall not be liable to any customer as such for any damage resulting from bursting or breakage of any line, main, pipe, valve, equipment or part or from discontinuance of the operation of any part of the system or from failure of any part thereof for any cause whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-203. - Penalty; liability in damages for negligence. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, unless otherwise specified, be punished as provided in section 1-8 and each day's continued violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty imposed under this article violators shall be liable to the city for any damage to the sewer system or damage caused by reason of their negligence. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the sanitary board to determine violators of the article and any resulting fire or judgment for damages shall be a lien on the property so found in violation. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Secs. 9-204-9-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY BOARD 

Sec. 9-220. - Established; composition; eligibility of city officers and employees; bond of members. 
    Pursuant to the W. Va. Code, § 16-13-18, there is hereby established the sanitary board of the city, which shall be composed of the mayor and two (2) persons appointed by the council. Other than the mayor, no officer or employee of the city, whether holding a paid or unpaid office, shall be eligible to appointment on the sanitary board until at least one year after the expiration of the term of such person's public office. No bond shall be required of the members of the sanitary board except the treasurer, if the treasurer is a member, in which case such treasurer shall be bonded as provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-221. - Bond of treasurer. 
    The treasurer of the sanitary board shall give a bond in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties as such treasurer and the faithful accounting for all moneys which may come into such treasurer's hands as such treasurer, and otherwise conditioned as required by law; with surety to be approved by the council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-18. 
Sec. 9-222. - Term of members; vacancies. 
    Members of the sanitary board who are appointed by the council shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for any unexpired term which may occur, in the same manner as the original appointment. In the month of June, 1969, and every three (3) years thereafter, one member shall be appointed; and in the month of June, 1970, and every three (3) years thereafter, one member shall be appointed. Members so appointed shall take office on the first day of July next succeeding their appointment. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-18. 
Sec. 9-223. - Officers. 
    The mayor shall act as chairman of the sanitary board, which shall elect a vice-chairman from its members. The sanitary board shall also designate a secretary and a treasurer (but the secretary and the treasurer may be one and the same), either of whom may or may not be a member of the sanitary board. The vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer shall hold office as such during the will and pleasure of the sanitary board. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-18. 
Sec. 9-224. - Cashier; collection and deposit of funds; liability upon official bonds; additional duties of recorder-treasurer. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall perform the duties of cashier for the sanitary board, and as such shall receive and be responsible for all collections for all moneys legally or properly collectable by the sanitary board, and shall deposit them in the appropriate accounts in the respective banks designated as depositories for funds of the city. The recorder-treasurer shall be liable under such officer's official bond as recorder-treasurer for all such collections; but this shall not be taken and considered as relieving the treasurer of the sanitary board for any liability upon such treasurer's official bond as such. The recorder-treasurer shall perform such other duties in connection with the operation of the office of the sanitary board as the sanitary board or its chairman may from time to time require. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-225. - General manager and purchasing agent. 
    The sanitary board shall designate a general manager who shall hold office as such during the will and pleasure of the sanitary board and whose duties shall consist of supervision of all other employees of the board other than its officers, and supervision over all new construction authorized by the board and all maintenance of existing facilities. The general manager shall also act as purchasing agent for the sanitary board, but such general manager's duties shall in no way include any of the duties set up in section 9-224. The purchasing agent for the sanitary board shall comply with the purchasing procedures for the City of Beckley established by section 2-501 through 2-508, 9-229, and the rules promulgated by the recorder-treasurer for the procurement of goods. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-226. - Salaries of officers and members as fixed. 
    The council shall establish and may at its will and pleasure change the amount of the salary of the members of the sanitary board, or any one or more of its officers. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, source of funds, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-18. 
Sec. 9-227. - Powers, duties; limitations thereon; obligation and expenditure of funds; employees. 
(a)  The sanitary board shall have the supervision and control of the custody, administration, operation and maintenance of all works for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage which are now owned or may hereafter be acquired by the city. The sanitary board shall have power to take all steps and proceedings and to make and enter into all contracts or agreements necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties and the execution of the powers granted to it by law, and shall have all of the powers granted to such sanitary board under and by virtue of the W. Va. Code, ch. 16, art. 13, and shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations contained therein as well. 
(b)  The management, control, and operation of the stormwater drainage and sewer system of the city shall be vested in the Beckley Sanitary Board. The board shall have full and complete supervision, management, and control of the stormwater drainage system, including the maintenance, operations, improvements, and extension thereof. All assets and liabilities of the stormwater system, including accounts receivable and accounts payable, shall be under the management and control of the board. 
(c)  The sanitary board may employ engineers, architects, inspectors, managers, collectors, attorneys and such other employees as in its judgment may be necessary in the execution of its powers and duties, and may fix their compensation, all of whom shall do such work as the board shall direct. All such compensation and all expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of W. Va. Code, ch. 16, art. 13 shall be paid solely from funds provided under the authority of that article, and the sanitary board shall not exercise or carry out any authority or power given it so as to bind the board of the city beyond the extent to which money shall have been or may be provided under the authority of the aforesaid article 13. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01; Ord. of 6-26-07) 
Sec. 9-228. - Construction, etc., of works; management of works; authority to promulgate rules and regulations. 
    The construction, acquisition, improvement, equipment, custody, operation and maintenance of any works for the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage and the collection of revenues therefrom for the service rendered thereby shall be under the supervision and control of the sanitary board. After the construction, installation and completion of the works, the sanitary board shall operate, manage and control such works and may order and complete any extensions, betterments and improvements of and to the works that the board may deem expedient if funds therefore are available or made available as provided by law, and shall establish rules and regulations for the use and operation of the works and of other sewers and drains connected therewith so far as they may affect the operation of such works, and do all things necessary or expedient for the successful operation thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-229. - Advertisement for bids; acceptance and rejection of bids. 
(a)  Small purchases . The purchasing agent shall establish procedures for purchases of goods and labor involving the estimated expenditure of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) of public money. These procedures shall require that competition be sought and written records adequate to document the competition be maintained in order to properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the small purchases made. 
(b)  Purchases based on formal bids . Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no contract for the purchase of goods and labor involving the estimated expenditure of five thousand ($5,000.00) or more of public money shall be awarded unless the provisions of this section are complied with. 
(1)  Proposals shall be invited by advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The advertisement shall state the time and place where specifications may be obtained and the time and place for opening of the bids. At least seven (7) full days must pass between the day the advertisement appears and the day of the bid opening. The advertisement shall state that the sanitary board reserves the right to reject any or all of the bids. 
(2)  The purchasing agent may require that bid deposits be submitted with each bid. if bid deposits are required, they shall be in an amount equal to five (5) per cent of the amount of the bid and may be submitted in the form of (a) cash, (b) a cashier's check, (c) a certified check by a bank or trust company insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, (d) a bid bond or other form of bid security deemed sufficient by the city attorney. The bid bond requirement, including the form in which bonds or other forms of bid security may be submitted, shall be included in the specifications. 
(3)  Bids shall be sealed. The purchasing agent shall establish rules regarding the acceptance of bids by facsimile, and such rules shall comply with the state code and be on file with the recorder-treasurer's office. 
(4)  All bids shall be opened in public and the purchasing agent shall make a record of the bids received. the record and the bids received shall be subject to public inspection after the bid opening in the manner prescribed by law. 
(5)  The purchasing agent may require the successful bidder to furnish a performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all the terms of the contract. The performance bond shall be in the form approved by the city attorney, and the form of the bond shall be made available with the description of the goods and labor to which reference is made in subsection (b)(1) of this section. The sanitary board may reject the bond of any bidder if they find it to be unacceptable for any reason. 
(6)  Upon receipt of the bids, the sanitary board shall review and recommend award of the contract as they may determine. All contracts to which this section applies shall be subject to approval by the sanitary board. The sanitary board may reject any and all bids. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to the purchase of goods or labor when: 
(1)  A good is available from only one source of supply; 
(2)  A special emergency exists involving the health and safety of the people or their property. 
    The purchasing agent shall prepare and submit to the sanitary board a written report concerning any purchase to be made pursuant to this section, and all such purchases shall be subject to approval or ratification by the sanitary board. The sanitary board shall keep a record of all purchases made pursuant to this section, and these records shall be subject to public inspection in the manner provided by law. 
(d)  Award; credit for local merchants. Purchases shall be made from, and contracts shall be awarded to, the lowest responsible bidder meeting bid specifications; provided, that, in determining the lowest responsible bidder, a competitive advantage of five (5) per cent shall be afforded to the bidders with mercantile establishments situated within the city and who pay a city business and occupation tax and are current in its accounts to the city as provided in Article II, Chapter 13, of the City Code, with such five (5) per cent competitive advantage to be based upon the gross amount of the bid received from the local merchant. 
(e)  Waiver based on other government purchases . When the purchasing agent determines that it is in the best interest of the city, the requirements of this section may be waived for the purchase of goods from any person or entity that has, within the previous twelve months, after having completed a public, formal bid process substantially similar to that prescribed in section 2-510, contracted to furnish the goods to: 
(1)  The United States of America or any federal agency; or 
(2)  This state or any agency or political subdivision of this state. 
    Provided the person or entity is willing to furnish the goods at the same or more favorable prices, terms, and conditions as those described under the contract with the other unit or agency. Any purchase made under this section shall be approved or ratified by the sanitary board at a meeting of the sanitary board. 
(f)  Procurement; professional services. Except as may be required by subsections (g) and (h), for the purpose of procuring the services of accountants, clergy, physicians, lawyers, dentists, industrial hygienists, appraisers, or other professionals, professional service contracts shall be the responsibility of the mayor and the sanitary board. The sanitary board may contract for such services without competitive procedures and without requiring a performance surety. The purchasing agent may promulgate procedures for the procurement of professional services. 
(g)  Contracts for architectural and engineering services; selection process where total project costs are estimated to cost two hundred fifty thousand dollars or more . In the procurement of architectural and engineering services for projects estimated to cost two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more, the purchasing agent shall encourage such firms engaged in the lawful practice of the profession to submit an expression of interest, which shall include a statement of qualifications and performance data and may include anticipated concepts and proposed methods of approach to the project. All such jobs shall be announced by public notice published as a Class II legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, ch. 59, art. 3 (§ 59-3-1 et seq.). The sanitary board shall evaluate the statements of qualifications and performance data and other material submitted by interested firms and select a minimum of three (3) firms which, in their opinion, are best qualified to perform the desired service. Interviews with each firm selected shall be conducted, and the committee shall conduct discussions regarding anticipated concepts and proposed methods of approach to the assignment. The sanitary board shall then rank, in order of preference, not less than three (3) professional firms deemed to be the most highly qualified to provide the services required. The mayor shall commence scope of service and price negotiations with the highest qualified professional firm or the architectural or engineering services or both, which agreement shall be approved by the sanitary board before the city may enter into a binding contract. Should the mayor be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified at a fee determined to be fair and reasonable, price negotiations with the firm of the second choice shall commence. Failing accord with the second most qualified professional firm, the mayor shall undertake price negotiations with the third most qualified professional firm. Should the mayor be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with any of the selected firms, then the committee shall select additional professional firms in order of their competence and qualifications, and the mayor shall continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is reached. 
(h)  Contracts for architectural and engineering services; selection process where total project costs are estimated to cost less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars . In the procurement of architectural and engineering services for projects estimated to cost less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), competition shall be sought by the city. The mayor shall conduct discussions with three (3) or more professional firms solicited on the basis of known or submitted qualifications for the assignment prior to the awarding of any contract: provided, that if a judgment is made that special circumstances exists and that seeking competition is not practical, the mayor may, with the prior approval of the council, select a firm on the basis of previous satisfactory performance and knowledge of the city's facilities and needs. After selection, the city and firm shall develop the scope of services required and negotiate an agreement which shall be approved by the sanitary board before the city may enter into a binding contract. 
(i)  Tie bids . In the event of a tie, ties shall be resolved by the flip of a coin performed during a meeting of the sanitary board. 
(j)  Non-discrimination policy . In every case, all contracts shall be made and purchases shall be awarded without regard to race, religion, political affiliation, sex, handicap, or national origin. 
(k)  Reservations . Whether or not expressly set forth in the notice of solicitation for bidding, the sanitary board shall be privileged and hereby reserves the right to reject any and all bids and further reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to determine whether a bidder is responsible based upon past performance and the best information available at the time of the awarding of the contract or purchase order. 
(l)  Intergovernmental agreements, contracts with other governmental agencies . If the sanitary board enters into an intergovernmental agreement or contract with another governmental agency as permitted by state law, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply unless the agreement or contract contains express provisions for the procurement of goods, in which case, if the intergovernmental agreement or contract was adopted by ordinance as required by W. Va. Code § 8-11-3(10), the procurement terms of the agreement or contract shall apply. 
(m)  Receipt of federal or state funds . If any requirement of the provisions set forth in this section jeopardizes the receipt of federal or state funds, then such requirement or provision shall be void and of no force or effect for that specific project. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-230. - Sanitary board operating account. 
    There is created a fund to be designated as "City of Beckley Sanitary Board Operating Account", into which account shall be placed and deposited all funds derived from the issuance of permits under Division 4 of this article. Such fund shall be used only for making new construction or extensions of the city sewer system or works, and for transfers made as hereinafter provided in this division to the account designated as "City of Beckley Sewage Bond Interest and Redemption Fund." No part of such account shall be used for maintenance of the sewer system. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-231. - Sanitary board revenue account. 
    There is created a fund to be designated as "City of Beckley Sanitary Board Revenue Account", into which shall be placed and deposited all funds derived from rates or charges for service to the users of the system under and by virtue of Division 3 of this article, as well as all miscellaneous receipts from whatever source derived. All expenses of maintenance and operation of the system or works, including the salaries of all officers and employees of the sanitary board as such, shall be paid out of the fund, and the sanitary board may from time to time spend out of such funds so much thereof as it may deem proper for new construction and extensions of the sewer system or works; and the sanitary board shall from time to time make transfers from this fund to the fund designated as "City of Beckley Sewage Bond Interest and Redemption Fund", as established in this division. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-232. - Sewage bond interest and redemption fund-continued; purpose; transfers to any payments from; required balance. 
    The fund, designated as "City of Beckley Sewage Bond Interest and Redemption Fund," is continued in existence. No payments shall be made from this fund except payments upon the interest of the sewer revenue bonds heretofore issued by the city, and for the retirement of those bonds, or for the purchase of such bonds for retirement in advance of the time of their maturity. Transfers may be made from other funds under the supervision and control of the sanitary board to this fund, which shall be made and kept to not less than the full amount required by law and by the ordinance authorizing and directing the issuance of said sewage revenue bonds. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
State Law reference- Provisions as to covenants with bond holders, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-22g. 
Sec. 9-233. - Same-method of making payments therefrom. 
    No payment shall be made from the sewage bond interest and redemption fund unless authorization shall be made for such payment by the sanitary board by an order made at a regular or special meeting and entered upon the minute book thereof, and unless made by a check or draft issued upon such fund, signed by the mayor as chairman of the sanitary board, and if the mayor shall be treasurer thereof, also as treasurer, and also signed by the treasurer of the sanitary board if the treasurer be other than the mayor, and countersigned by the recorder-treasurer of the city as such. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-234. - Funds of board are city funds; deposit of funds. 
    All of the funds under the supervision and control of the sanitary board shall be taken and considered as funds of the city, and shall be deposited in the respective funds designated in this division, in such banks in the city as shall qualify from time to time as depository banks of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Secs. 9-235-9-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 9-240. - Schedules for services inside city. 
(a)  (1)  Initial rates and charges (January 1, 2008 through December 31, 2008). There is established a schedule of just and equitable rates or charges, exclusive of industrial waste or unusual user charges, for the use of, and service rendered by, the municipal sewer system which shall be paid by the owner of each lot, parcel of real estate, or building connected with, or using, such sewer system which schedule shall be in effect from January 1, 2008 and expire December 31, 2008. Sewer charges, based upon water consumption, shall be as follows: 
a.  First two thousand (2,000) gallons used per month, seven dollars and sixty cents ($7.60) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
b.  Next three thousand (3,000) gallons used per month, seven dollars and thirteen cents ($7.13) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
c.  Next twenty thousand (20,000) gallons used per month, six dollars and fifty-two cents ($6.52) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
d.  All over twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons used per month, five dollars and eighty-five cents ($5.85) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
e.  Minimum charge-No bill will be rendered for less than fifteen dollars and twenty cents ($15.20) per month. 
f.  Unmetered users residential-A flat fee of thirty-three dollars and three cents ($33.03) based on four thousand five hundred (4,500) gallons of water usage per month will be charged for all unmetered customers. 
(a)  (2)  Rates and charges (January 1, 2009 through December 31, 2009). There is established a schedule of just and equitable rates or charges, exclusive of industrial waste or unusual user charges, for the use of, and service rendered by, the municipal sewer system which shall be paid by the owner of each lot, parcel of real estate, or building connected with, or using, such sewer system which schedule shall be in effect from January 1, 2009 and expire December 31, 2009. Sewer charges, based upon consumption, shall be as follows: 
a.  First two thousand (2,000) gallons used per month, eight dollars and thirty-two cents ($8.32) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
b.  Next three thousand (3,000) gallons used per month, seven dollars and eighty-one cents ($7.81) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
c.  Next twenty thousand (20,000) gallons used per month, seven dollars and fourteen cents ($7.14) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
d.  All over twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons used per month, six dollars and forty-one cents ($6.41) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
e.  Minimum charge-No bill will be rendered for less than sixteen dollars and sixty-four cents ($16.64) per month. 
f.  Unmetered users residential-A flat fee of thirty-six dollars and seventeen cents ($36.17) based on four thousand five hundred (4,500) gallons of water usage per month will be charged for all unmetered customers. 
(b)  Final rates and charges (January 1, 2010 and thereafter). There is established a schedule of just and equitable rates or charges, exclusive of industrial waste or unusual user charges, for the use of, and service rendered by, the municipal sewer system which shall be paid by the owner of each lot, parcel of real estate, or building connected with, or using, such sewer system which schedule shall be in effect on and after January 27, 2010. Sewer charges, based upon water consumption, shall be as follows: 
(1)  First two thousand (2,000) gallons used per month, eight dollars and ninety-five cents ($8.95) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(2)  Next three thousand (3,000) gallons used per month, eight dollars and forty cents ($8.40) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(3)  Next twenty thousand (20,000) gallons used per month, seven dollars and sixty-eight cents ($7.68) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(4)  All over twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons used per month, six dollars and ninety cents ($6.90) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(5)  Minimum charge-No bill will be rendered for less than seventeen dollars and ninety cents ($17.90) per month. 
(6)  Unmetered users residential-A flat fee of thirty-eight dollars and ninety cents ($38.90) based on four thousand five hundred (4,500) gallons of water usage per month will be charged for all unmetered customers. 
(c)  Multiple occupancy. In apartment buildings, shopping centers, mobile homes, mobile home courts, or other multiple occupancy situations, each unit shall be required to pay not less than the minimum monthly charge provided above. 
(d)  Sewer connection charges. The sewer connection fee will be three hundred dollars ($300.00), or the actual cost of the connection, if higher than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Such actual cost will include payroll, materials, and machine time. 
(e)  Classification of users. All users are to be classified by the sanitary board or its duly authorized representative either by assigning each one (1) to the "user classification" category according to the principal activity conducted on the user's premises, by individual user analyzation, or by a combination thereof. The three (3) user classifications shall be: 
(1)  For residential service; 
(2)  For commercial service; and 
(3)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
    The purpose of such collective and/or individual classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharges based on wastewater constituents and characteristics to provide an effective means of source control, and to establish a system of charges and fees which will insure an equitable recovery of Beckley's cost. 
(f)  Delayed payment penalty. On all accounts, not paid in full within twenty (20) days of the billing date, a penalty of ten (10) percent will be added to the net current sewer amount unpaid. 
(g)  Rates outside the City of Beckley. The rates set forth herein shall apply to all users of the municipal sewer system within the City of Beckley, and the rates or charges for all users of the sewers located outside the city whose premises are connected with the interceptor lines of the system, or otherwise, shall be the same as the rates provided herein, unless otherwise provided. 
(h)  Schedule of charges for treatment of residential septage, sludge and leachate. There is established a rate of five cents ($0.05) per gallon of residential septage, sludge or leachate discharged into the City of Beckley sewer system. 
(i)  Returned check charge. A service charge equal to the actual bank fee assessed to the sewer utility up to a maximum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank due to insufficient funds. 
(j)  Reconnection charge. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) reconnection fee shall be assessed against each customer for each instance of disconnection of water service for delinquent sewer charges. Water service shall not be restored until all amounts in arrears, including penalties, have been paid. 
(k)  Leak adjustment. When a bill reflects unusual water consumption, which can be attributed to eligible leakage on customer's side of meter, a leak adjustment rate of one dollar and three cents ($1.03) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water will be used. This rate shall be applied to all such consumption above the customer's historical average usage. 
(l)  Security deposit. A security deposit shall be collected from each applicant or customer equal to one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the annual estimated charge for residential service and one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the annual estimated charges for other users. 
(m)  Surcharge formula to be applied in the cases of users producing unusual waste. The charge for the treatment of unusual waste will be calculated on the basis of the following formula: 
Ci= VoVi + BoBi + SoSi 
Ci = charge to unusual users per year 
Vo = average unit cost of transport and treatment chargeable to volume, in dollars per gallon 
Vi = volume of wastewater from unusual users in gallons per year 
Bo = average unit cost of treatment, chargeable to biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), in dollars per pound 
Bi = weight of BOD from unusual users, in pounds per year 
So = average unit costs of treatment (including sludge treatment) chargeable to total solids, in dollars per pound 
Si = weight of total solids from unusual users, in pounds per year 
    When an unusual user is to be served, a preliminary study of its wastes, and the costs of transport and treatment thereof, will be made. The total cost of any such study preformed shall be borne entirely by the unusual user. Waste containing materials which, in the judgment of the utility should not be introduced into the sewer system, will not be accepted. The results of the preliminary study will be used to determine the feasibility of the proposed sewer service and the charge therefore, based upon the formula set out above. 
    Thereafter, unusual sewage will be monitored on a regular basis and at the conclusion of each fiscal year, based on the investigation aforesaid and audit of the utility records, new cost figures will be calculated for use in the above formula. The cost of establishing the monitoring facilities shall be paid by the unusual user. Based on these audited figures, additional billings covering the past fiscal year will be made for payment by each unusual user, or refund given by the utility, as the case may be. Such audited figures will then be used for the preliminary billing for the next fiscal year, at the end of which an adjustment will be made as aforesaid. 
(n)  Surchage formula to be applied for permittees of the industrial pretreatment program for excessive conventional pollutants. The following surcharges shall apply for permittees of the industrial pretreatment program for excessive conventional pollutants: 
(1)  BOD, COD, TSS, and ammonia: 
S.C. = Surcharge in dollars for excess B.O.D. or C.O.D., TSS and Ammonia for the billing period. 
S.C.( BOD+TSS+NH3 ) = V[W(BOD-SCC BOD ) + Y(TSS-SCC TSS ) + Z(NH3-SCC NH3 )] 
S.C.( COD+TSS+NH3 ) = V[X(COD-SCC COD )+Y(TSS+SCC TSS )+Z(NH3-SCC NH3 )] 
V = Volume in million gallons (MG) for a specific user billing period 
W = Cost to treat BOD per part per million gallons 
X = Cost to treat COD per part per million gallons 
Y = Cost to treat TSS per part per million gallons 
Z = Cost to treat NH 3 per part per million gallons 
SCC BOD = The surcharge threshold concentration for BOD (parts per million)(by weight) 
SCC COD = The surcharge threshold concentration for COD (parts per million)(by weight) 
SCC TSS = The surcharge threshold concentration for TSS (parts per million)(by weight) 
SCC NH3 = The surcharge threshold concentration for Ammonia (parts per million)(by weight) 
BOD = Biological oxygen demand at five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million)(by weight) 
COD = Chemical oxygen demand as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million)(by weight) 
TSS = Total suspended solids as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million)(by weight) 
NH 3 = Ammonia as determined by wastewater treatment plant laboratory analysis or user data (parts per million)(by weight) 
(2)  Oils and grease: The permittee shall pay for the cost of disposal for oil and grease discharges over permitted limits. 
(3)  pH: The permittee shall pay for the cost of restoring the wastewater treatment plant and facilities to normal operations. 
    The permittee shall be responsible for any other special surcharges that may be described in the permit. 
(o)  Surcharge formula to be applied in cases where surface drainage is connected to the city's sanitary sewer system. Whenever Beckley has discovered that a customer's roof drain, downspouts, storm sewer, or other similar facilities conducting surface water have been connected to Beckley's sewer system, and such customer has failed to take appropriate action, within thirty (30) days of receipt of a demand by Beckley in accordance with the Rules of the Public Service Commission, to eliminate such connection, a surcharge will be imposed upon the customer calculated on the basis of the following formula: 
S = A × R × .0006233 × C 
S = The surcharge in dollars; 
A = The area under roof and/or the area of any other water collection surface connected to the sanitary sewer, in square feet; 
R = The measured monthly rainfall, in inches; 
.0006233 - A conversion factor to change inches of rain x square feet of surface to thousands of gallons of water; 
C = The city's approved rate per thousand gallons of metered water usage. 
    Beckley shall not impose the surcharge unless, and until, the customer has been notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery, that it has been established by smoke testing, dye testing, or on-site inspection that rain or other surface water is being introduced into the sanitary sewer at the customer's location, and that the customer has not acted within thirty (30) days from receipt of such notice to divert the water from the sanitary sewer system. 
    Said surcharge shall be calculated and imposed for each month that said condition continues to exist. Failure to pay the surcharge and/or correct the situation shall give rise to the possible termination of water service in accordance with the Rules of the Public Service Commission of West Virginia. 
    The initial rates and charges provided in section 9-240 shall be effective March 15, 2004; the final rates and charges shall be effective January 27, 2005. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01; Ord. of 1-27-04, § 2; Ord. of 11-13-07, § 2) 
Secs. 9-241, 9-242. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Jan. 27, 2004, § 2, deleted former §§ 9-241, 9-242 of the Code, which pertained to rates outside the city and industrial waste recovery charge, respectively, and both derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 11, 2001. 
Sec. 9-243. - Charges constitute liens; enforcement of liens; attorney fees. 
    All rates or charges imposed by this article, shall, as provided by law, constitute a lien upon the premises served by the sewer works of this city. If any such service rate or charge shall not be paid within thirty (30) days after due, the sanitary board shall proceed to collect the amount thereof, together with the penalty of ten (10) per cent hereinbefore provided for in this division and a reasonable attorney's fee in a civil action in the name of the city, and in connection with such action such lien may be foreclosed against such lot, parcel of land and building, in accordance with the laws relating thereto. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Case Law annotation- For a case sustaining demurrer to motion for judgment by City of Beckley, acting through its sanitary board, to recover under city ordinance for sewer charges and penalties for nonpayment, because relationship of sanitary board to the city sewage system, the method of service rendered by that system and the right of the sanitary board to charge for the use of, and service rendered by, that system did not appear, see Beckley v. Craighead, 125 W. Va. 484. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-16. 
Sec. 9-244. - Free service prohibited. 
    The city will not render or cause to be rendered any free services of any nature by the system nor any of the facilities; and in the event that the city or any department, agency, officer or employee thereof should avail itself of the services or facilities of the system, the same fees, rates and charges applicable to other customers receiving like services under similar circumstances shall be charged; such charges shall be paid as they accrue, and revenues so received shall be deposited and accounted for in the same manner as other revenues of the system. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-245. - Reconnection charge. 
    A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) reconnection fee shall be assessed against each customer for each instance of disconnection of water service for delinquent sewer charges. Water service shall not be restored until all amounts in arrears, including penalties, have been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Secs. 9-246-9-248. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Jan. 27, 2004, § 2, deleted former §§ 9-246-9-248 of the Code, which pertained to schedule of charges of treatment of residential septage, surcharge formula to be applied in cases where surface drainage is connected to the city's sanitary sewer system, and bad check charge, respectively, and both derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 11, 2001. 
Secs. 9-249-9-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 9-260. - Use of sewer facilities mandatory-General; failure to connect deemed public nuisances; illegal dumping of sewage; privy prohibition. 
(a)  The mandatory use of the sewage collection facilities is essential and necessary for the protection and preservation of the public health, comfort, safety, convenience and welfare and the economy of the inhabitants of the city and in order to assure the rendering harmless of sewage and waterborne waste matter produced or arising within the territory served by the sewer facilities. Accordingly, every owner, tenant and occupant of every lot, parcel and tract of land which abuts on a street, alley or other public way in which any sewer line, main or facility is located, or which is located within a reasonable distance thereof, not exceeding three hundred (300) feet, and reasonably accessible thereto, and upon which lot, parcel or tract a building or other habitable structure has been or shall be erected for residential, commercial or industrial use, shall connect the waste or sewage lines of such building or structure with the sewer facilities of the system immediately upon completion of the sewer project if sewage will flow by gravity from such building or structure into such sewer facilities, and shall thereupon and thereafter refrain from using and shall cease to use any other method for the disposal of sewage or water-borne waste matter and shall pay all charges, fees and rates provided herein. 
(b)  Any such building or structure from which emanates sewage or water-borne waste matter and not so connected with the system is hereby declared and found to be a hazard to the health, safety, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and a public nuisance which shall be abated to the extent permitted by law and as promptly as possible by proceedings in the circuit court of the county or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  No person shall dump any sewage into the streets or public grounds of this city, nor in or upon any private grounds or premises so that such sewage shall or may become unsanitary or dangerous to the health of any person. No person shall maintain any privy on any property in the city that is within three hundred (300) feet of a public sewer. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-261. - Same-Authority and procedure to compel properties to be connected. 
    The council may require the owner of any property abutting upon any street in which a public sewer belonging to the city has been laid or placed, to connect a sewer leading from such person's property or lot into such public sewer at the nearest practicable point of connection, provided such owner has erected or constructed a building or other improvement on such property or lot, and provided such nearest point of connection shall be within three hundred (300) feet of such person's property line. If the council shall require such owner to make such connection, it shall require at least ten (10) days' notice to be served upon such owner, ordering such owner to make such connection, but such owner although so required, shall not be authorized to make such connection until such owner shall have first obtained a written permit to make such connection in accordance with this division. If the owner of such lot or property thereupon fails or refuses to apply for and obtain such written permit, or after having obtained such permit fails or refuses to make such connection in accordance with this division, after having been given such notice, the council may thereupon enter upon such lot and construct such sewer and may levy the actual cost thereof, including the tapping fee therefore, against the lot upon which the building or other improvement is built and collect such costs and fee from the owner of such lot in the same manner as city taxes are collected and as provided in the city charter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-262. - Permit-Required to tap or connect to public sewers; definition of person. 
(a)  No person shall tap or connect a private sewer with any public sewer of the city, whether lying within or without the corporate limits, without first paying a tapping fee as provided in section 9-240(d). 
(b)  The word "person", as used in this section and section 9-263, shall include the person performing the act therein prohibited and any contractor, subcontractor or manager or foreman directing such work to be done if the contractor or subcontractor is a corporation; and the owner who authorizes such work to be done, or, if the owner or one of the owners is a corporation, the office thereof directing such work to be done. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Cross reference- Wastewater discharge permits, § 9-292. 
Sec. 9-263. - Same-Required to tap or connect to private sewer connected to public sewer. 
(a)  Where there is a private drain or sewer connected with a public sewer of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, no person shall connect therewith another private drain or sewer which serves or is to serve any building or other improvement, without first paying the tapping fee and obtaining the issuance of a written permit to do so, for each building or other improvement so connected thereto, as provided in this division. 
(b)  If such private sewer or drain, already connected with the public sewer, shall serve or shall have served a building or other improvement which has been partially or wholly destroyed by fire, or which is partially or wholly dismantled or torn down preparatory to the erection of a new building or improvement, or which is being remodeled or improved; before such remodeling or improving and thereafter, no person shall connect with such private drain or sewer, (already connected with a public sewer) any such building or improvement, or rebuild, remodel or improve such building or improvement, without first obtaining the issuance of a written permit to do so provided in section 9-264 and without first paying the tapping fee (if any) therefore. 
(c)  Upon the payment of the tapping fee therefore, the general manager shall credit the tapping fee theretofore paid for the connection of the previous building or other improvement so partially or wholly destroyed by fire, or dismantled or torn down, or remodeled as aforesaid. Unless the applicant for such new written permit shall furnish the general manager with documentary proof that such former tapping fee paid was for a different amount, exactly specified in such documentary proof, the credit so allowed upon such tapping fee shall conclusively be presumed to be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-264. - Same-Issuance upon application and payment of fee; separate permit and fee required for each improvement; garages; expiration. 
(a)  The general manager of the sanitary board shall, upon application and upon the payment in cash of the proper tapping fee as set forth in this article, issue to such applicant a written permit to tap or connect, either directly or indirectly, to the public sewers of the city a private drain or sewer from any building or other improvement. A separate written permit shall be issued and a separate fee shall be paid for each building or other improvement, so connected directly or indirectly with such public sewer. 
(b)  Any building or improvement not constituting an integral part of another building or improvement, although appurtenant thereto, whether located on the same or another lot, shall be considered a separate building or improvement for the purposes of this division, requiring a separate permit and the payment of a separate fee. A garage apartment shall be considered such a separate building or improvement. 
(c)  A permit properly issued pursuant to this division to tap or connect to a public sewer, unless revoked, shall be an authorization to the holder thereof to make the connection therein described within one year from the date of the issuance thereof, but after the end of such year all rights of the holder to make such connection shall cease. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-265. - Same-Misrepresentation of cost of building, etc., to be connected to public sewer. 
    No person shall knowingly or fraudulent misrepresent to the recorder-treasurer the actual construction cost of any building or other improvement to be connected, directly or indirectly, to any public sewer of the city, nor obtain a written permit to connect such building or other improvement by virtue of such misrepresentation. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
See. 9-266. - Construction of new lateral or extension line-Authorized; determination of fee. 
    The sanitary board may, by order duly entered on its records, determine that the proposed construction of an extension or lateral line of the public sewers of the city, whether within or without the city, will entail a cost beyond the revenues to be derived from fees for tappings made along such extension, and in such case the sanitary board shall follow the rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission in determining how the costs and/or fees associated with the construction of such new lateral or extension will be calculated and allocated to the new customer(s) to be served. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-267. - Collection of tapping fees. 
    In addition to the collection of the penalties for violating any of the provisions or requirements of this division the city may, in a civil action, collect the amount of tapping fees due the city prescribed in this article in case such person shall, without the written permit specified, make any of the connections described in this division, and may in a civil action recover any additional amount due to the city under this division after such amount shall have been determined by the sanitary board. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Charter reference- Collection of connection costs, § 21(71). 
Sec. 9-268. - Procedure required for tapping; compliance mandatory. 
    The holder of a tapping permit shall apply to the sanitary board or any authorized employee thereof for the tapping to be made, and the sanitary board, through its authorized employees, shall proceed to make the tapping or connection desired. It shall be unlawful for any tap or connection to be made by any person in any manner except as provided in this section. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-269. - Disconnection of illegal taps. 
    If any person shall, without first obtaining a permit as provided in this division, tap or connect a private drain, sewer or building, either directly or indirectly, or violate any provision of this division, the sanitary board may, in addition to the other penalties or remedies herein provided for, disconnect such drain, sewer or building. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Secs. 9-270-9-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USE OF SEWERS 

Sec. 9-280. - Right of city to restrict use of system during emergency. 
    In case of emergency, the city shall have the right to restrict the use of any part of the system in any reasonable manner for the protection of the system and the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-281. - Willful or negligent damage to sewers, appurtenances, etc.- prohibited; restoration by offender. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or negligently to damage, deface, mar, take away or destroy any part, portion, section or appurtenance of any public sewer or the sewer system or sewage disposal plant of the city, including sewer lines, sections, joints or connections of a sewer line, manhole, or any part or appurtenance of a manhole or a sewer line, water line to or from a sewage disposal plant, or any structure, building, improvement or appurtenance thereto or constituting a part thereof, and including all tools, appliances, equipment or fixtures used in connection with such disposal plant, whether located within or without the city. 
(b)  If any person shall willfully, negligently or otherwise damage, deface, mar, take away or destroy any part, portion, section or appurtenance of any public sewer or the sewer system or sewage disposal plant of the city, including sewer lines, sections, joints, or connections of a sewer line, manhole, or any part or appurtenance of a manhole or a sewer line, water line to or from a sewage disposal plant, or any structure, building, improvement or appurtenance thereto or constituting a part thereof, and including all tools, appliances, equipment or fixtures used in connection with such disposal plant, whether located within or without the city, such person shall at once repair, return, restore or replace the same in the same condition as before. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-282. - Same-Duty of offender to notify city officers. 
    Any person who shall, whether willfully, negligently or otherwise, damage, deface, mar, take away or destroy any part, portion, section or appurtenance of any. public sewer or the sewer system or sewage disposal plant of the city, including sewer lines, sections, joints, or connections of a sewer line, manhole, or any part or appurtenance of a manhole or a sewer line, water line to or from a sewage disposal plant, or any structure, building, improvement or appurtenance thereto or constituting a part thereof, and including all tools, appliances, equipment or fixtures used in connection with such disposal plant, whether the same be located within or without the city, shall immediately notify the mayor or recorder-treasurer, or the manager of such sewer system, of the nature and full extent of such damage, damage or destruction. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Sec. 9-283. - Trespassing at wastewater treatment plant, facilities, or works. 
    No person shall trespass upon the enclosure or grounds of the wastewater treatment plant, facilities, or works of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Cross reference- Trespass generally, § 10-20. 
Sec. 9-284. - Causing vile odors to escape from sewers. 
    No person shall remove any sink, basin, stationary tub, commode or other sanitary equipment connected in any manner with any public sewer in the city, so as to allow to escape from such public sewer, or any connection therewith, vile odors, gases or sewer gas to the annoyance, injury or inconvenience of any person in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Cross reference- Offensive odors generally, § 8-3. 
Sec. 9-285. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the sanitary board or its duly authorized representative, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in Article I, section 9-5 of this chapter, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the general manager, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owners shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the general manager. Any removal and hauling of sand-collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. of 12-11-01) 
Secs. 9-286-9-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-300. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Authority: The emergency ambulance service authority created pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
    Board: The board of the emergency ambulance service authority. 
    Facilities and equipment: All real and personal property of every kind and character owned or held by the emergency ambulance service authority. 
    Participating government: The city and the county, establishing and participating in an emergency ambulance service authority created by this article. 
    Project: Any undertaking of the authority. 
    Revenues: The gross receipts derived directly or indirectly from or in connection with the operation of the authority and shall include, without limitation, all fees, rates, fares, rentals or other income actually received or receivable by or for the account of the authority from the operation of the authority's facilities and equipment, and any other receipts from whatever source derived. 
    Service area of the authority: The area commensurate with the territorial boundaries of each participating government and beyond to the extent permitted by any agreement with any county or municipality which is not a participating government in the project. 
    System: The emergency ambulance service provided pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-1) 
Sec. 9-301. - Findings and declaration of policy. 
    The council hereby finds and declares: 
(1)  That a significant part of the population of the city does not have adequate emergency ambulance service; 
(2)  That the establishment and maintenance of adequate emergency ambulance systems for the city and county is necessary to promote the health and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city and county; 
(3)  That emergency ambulance service is a public purpose and a responsibility of government for which public money may be spent. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-2) 
Sec. 9-302. - Construction; legal requirement; intent. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its objectives and purposes. 
(b)  The provisions of this article recognize that Chapter 7, Article 15 of the West Virginia Code imposes an additional duty upon all county commissions in the state to cause emergency ambulance service to be made available to all residents of the county where such service is not otherwise available, and further provides that such service may be provided through an authority as therein authorized and further provides that a municipality may, with a county, join to create such an authority. 
(c)  It is hereby declared that the city desires to join to create an emergency ambulance service authority to be funded by the county and by the city upon its making an affirmative determination that there are funds available therefor by the inclusion of a projected expenditure for such purpose in each yearly current levy estimate, provided that the city shall be under no duty to cause such service to be provided beyond the level commensurate with the amount of funds actually available for such purpose. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-3) 
Sec. 9-303. - Conflicts of interpretation of law. 
    In the event of a conflict between the interpretation of a provision of this article and the interpretation of a similar provision contained in the Code of West Virginian Chapter 7, Article 15, or any other state law, the interpretation of the provision of the state law shall apply to this article. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-4) 
Secs. 9-304-9-349. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE AUTHORITY 

Sec. 9-350. - Establishment; title; powers and objectives generally. 
    There is hereby established the Beckley-Raleigh County Emergency Ambulance Service Authority, hereinafter called "authority." The authority shall be a public corporation, and shall have perpetual existence. The authority shall have been formally established upon the adoption of an ordinance of the city adopting this article and upon the adoption of an ordinance or order of and in like manner by the county commission. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-5) 
Sec. 9-351. - Management of authority vested in board; eligibility, appointment, number and term of members; vote of members; vacancies. 
(a)  The management and control of the authority, its operations, business and affairs shall be lodged in a board of five (5) individuals who shall be known as members of the board and who shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years each by the governing bodies of the participating governments. The city shall appoint two (2) members of the board and the county commission shall appoint three (3) members of the board. The city shall make an initial appointment to the board of one member for a term of three (3) years and one member for a term of two (2) years. The county commission shall make an initial appointment to the board of one member for a term of one year, one member for a term of two (2) years, and one member for a term of three (3) years. As the term of each initial appointee expires, the successor to fill the vacancy created by such expired term shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Each member of the board shall have one vote on all matters coming before it. Any individual who is a resident of, or member of the governing body of any participating government is eligible to serve as a member of the board. The governing body of each participating government shall inform the authority of its appointments or reappointments to the board by delivering to the authority a certified copy of the ordinance or order making the appointment or reappointment. 
(b)  If any member of the board dies, resigns or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the board, the governing body of the participating government which such member represented shall appoint another individual to fill the unexpired portion of the term of such member. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-6) 
Sec. 9-352. - Compensation of members; expenses. 
    All members of the board shall serve without compensation; provided, however, that each member shall be reimbursed by the authority for all reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the discharge of duties as a member of the board. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-7) 
Sec. 9-353. - Meetings; officers; employees; official bonds; records. 
(a)  At its first meeting each year, the board shall elect from among its membership a president to act during the next ensuing fiscal year, or until a successor is elected and qualified. At that time, the board shall also elect a vice-president, a secretary and a treasurer and such other officers as may be required, who need not be members of the board, whose duties shall be defined and whose compensation shall be fixed by the board and paid out of the funds of the authority. 
(b)  The treasurer, and such other officers and employees as the board shall direct, shall furnish bond for the use and benefit of the authority in such penal sum as may be fixed by the board and conditioned upon the faithful discharge by such treasurer and such other officers and employees so directed by the board of the duties of their respective offices or employment, and upon accounting for and paying over all moneys which may come into their possession by virtue of such office or employment. 
(c)  At its first meeting each year the board shall also fix the time and place for holding regular meetings, but it shall meet at least once in the months of January, April, July and October. Special meetings of the board may be called by the president or by two (2) members, upon written request to the secretary. 
(d)  The secretary shall send to all the members, at least two (2) days in advance of a special meeting, a written notice setting forth the time and place of the special meeting and the matters to be considered at such special meeting. Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of the special meeting has been fixed in a regular meeting or if all the members are present at the special meeting. 
(e)  All regular meetings shall be general meetings for the consideration of any and all matters which may properly come before the authority. 
(f)  All proceedings of the authority shall be entered in a permanently bound record book, properly indexed, and shall be carefully preserved by the secretary of the authority. All records of the authority shall be public records. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-8) 
Sec. 9-354. - Quorum; majority vote required. 
(a)  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(b)  The vote of a majority of all members present at any meeting of the board shall be necessary to take any action. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-9) 
Sec. 9-355. - Budget. 
    The board shall establish the beginning and ending of its fiscal year, which period shall constitute its budget year. At least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of the first full fiscal year after the creation of the authority and annually thereafter, the treasurer shall prepare and submit to the board a tentative budget. The tentative budget shall be considered by the board; and, subject to any revisions or amendments that may be determined by the board, shall be adopted as the budget for the ensuing fiscal year. No expenditures in excess of the budget shall be made during such fiscal year unless expressly authorized and directed by the board. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-10) 
Sec. 9-356. - Powers and duties specifically. 
    The authority is hereby given the power: 
(1)  To sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded; 
(2)  To have and use a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(3)  To make and adopt all rules and regulations and bylaws as may be necessary or desirable to enable it to exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred or imposed upon it by the provisions of this article; 
(4)  To provide emergency ambulance service, maintain and operate such service, and employ, in its discretion, planning consultants, attorneys, accountants, superintendents, managers and such other employees and agents as may be necessary in its judgment and fix their compensation; 
(5)  To acquire by grant, purchase, gift, devise or lease and to hold, use, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of real and personal property of every kind and nature whatsoever; licenses, franchises, rights and interests necessary for the full exercise of its powers pursuant to the provisions of this article or which may be convenient or useful for the carrying out of such powers; 
(6)  To enter into contracts and agreements which are necessary, convenient or useful to carry out the purposes of this article with any person, public corporation, state or any agency or political subdivision thereof and the federal government and any department or agency thereof, including, without limitation, contracts and agreements for the joint use of any property and rights by the authority and any person or authority operating any system, whether within or without the service area of the authority, and contracts and agreements with any person or authority for the maintenance, servicing, storage, operation or use of any system or part thereof, facility or equipment on such basis as shall seem proper to its board; 
(7)  To enter into contracts and agreements for superintendence and management services with any person who has executive experience and skill applicable to the superintendence and management of any system, for the furnishing of its services and the services of experienced and qualified personnel for the superintendence and management of any system or any part thereof, including, without limitation, superintendence over personnel, purchases, properties and operations and all matters relating thereto, and any revenue bond trust indenture may require such contract or agreements; but the personnel whose services are to be so furnished under any such contract or agreement shall not include any member of the board, any member of the immediate family of a member of the board or any agents or employees of the authority; 
(8)  To execute security agreements, contracts, leases, equipment trust certificates and any other forms of contract or agreement, granting or creating a lien, security interest, encumbrance or other security in, on or to facilities and equipment containing such terms and provisions as the board considers necessary; 
(9)  To apply for, receive and use grants, grants-in-aid, donations and contributions from any source, including, but not limited to, the federal government and any agency or department thereof, and a state government whose constitution does not prohibit such grants, grants-in-aid, donations and contributions, and any agency or department thereof, and to accept and use bequests, devises, gifts and donations from any person; 
(10)  To encumber or mortgage all or any part of its facilities and equipment; and 
(11)  To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carrying out the powers given in this article unless otherwise forbidden by law. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-11) 
Sec. 9-357. - Contributions; funds and accounts; reports; audits. 
(a)  Contributions may be made to the authority from time to time by the participating governments and by the state, the United States of America, other municipalities, counties and persons desiring to do so. All such funds and all of the other funds received by the authority shall be deposited in a separate account in such banking institutions as the board may direct and shall be withdrawn therefrom only in such manner as the board may direct. 
(b)  The authority shall keep strict account of all its receipts and expenditures and shall make a quarterly report to the participating governments which have made contributions to it. The report shall contain an itemized account of the authority's receipts and disbursements during the preceding quarter and shall be made within sixty (60) days after the termination of the quarter. Within ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year, the authority shall make an annual report containing an itemized statement of its receipts and disbursements for the preceding fiscal year, and all other information which the board may consider pertinent, to all of the participating governments. The books, records and accounts shall be subject to audit and examination by the state tax department. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-12) 
Sec. 9-358. - Exemption from taxation. 
    It is hereby found, determined and declared that the creation of the authority and the carrying out of its purposes is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this county in general and of this city in particular and is a public purpose; and that the authority will be performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by the provisions of this article. Accordingly, the authority and, without limitation, its revenues, properties, operations and activities, shall be exempt from the payment of any taxes or fees to the city. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-13) 
Sec. 9-359. - Indebtedness. 
    No indebtedness or obligation incurred by the authority shall give any right against any member of the governing body of any participating government or any member of the board of the authority. Any obligation or indebtedness of any nature of the authority shall never constitute an obligation or indebtedness of any participating government or the governing body of any participating government, within the meaning of any constitutional provision or statutory limitation and shall never constitute or give rise to a pecuniary liability of any participating government or the governing body of any participating government or be a charge against the general credit or taxing power of any participating government or the governing body of any participating government. The rights of creditors shall be solely against the authority as a corporate body and shall be satisfied only out of revenues, moneys or property received or held by it in its corporate capacity. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-14) 
Sec. 9-360. - Conflict of interest. 
    No member of the authority, nor any of its officers, employees, agents or consultants, shall have any interest in any firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or joint-stock association engaged in the business of providing ambulance service or in the manufacture, sale or lease of ambulance equipment or facilities. No member of the authority, nor any of its officers, employees, agents or consultants, shall contract with the authority or be interested in, either directly or indirectly, any contract with the authority or in the sale of property, either real or personal, to the authority. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-15) 
Sec. 9-361. - Competitive bids; publication of solicitation for sealed bids. 
    A purchase of or contract for all supplies, equipment and materials and a contract for the construction of facilities by the authority, when the expenditure required exceeds the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be based on competitive sealed bids. Such bids shall be obtained by public notice published as a class II legal advertisement, and the publication area for such publication shall be on the service area of the authority. The second publication shall be made at least fourteen (14) days before the final date for submitting bids. In addition to such publication, the notice may also be published by any other advertising medium the authority may consider advisable, and the authority may also solicit sealed bids by sending requests by mail to prospective suppliers and by posting a notice on a bulletin board in the office of the authority. 
(Code 1971, § 8.5-16) 
Secs. 9-362-9-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; Mechanical Code, § 4-600 et seq.; floodplain district regulations, § 4-700 et seq.; unauthorized turning on of fire hydrants, § 7-8; improper drainage of premises, § 8-6; water-damaged goods sales, § 13-800 et seq.; public utility tax, § 13-1000. 

DIVISION 1. - WATER RESOURCES BOARD 

Sec. 9-400. - Established and composition. 
    Pursuant to the Code of West Virginia, Section 8-19-1, there is hereby established the water resources board of the city, which shall be composed of the mayor and two (2) persons appointed by the council. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-401. - Bond of treasurer. 
    The treasurer of the water resources board shall give a bond in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties as such treasurer and the faithful accounting for all monies which may come into such treasurer's hands as such treasurer, and otherwise conditioned as required by law; with surety to be approved by the council. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-402. - Term of members; vacancies. 
    One member shall be appointed as a member of the water resources board to serve a term of two (2) years, and the other member shall be appointed to serve a term of one year. Such terms shall expire on June 30th of the year the terms would expire. Then the members of the water resources board who are appointed by the council shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for any unexpired term which may occur, in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-403. - Officers. 
    The mayor shall act as chairman of the water resources board. The water resources board shall also designate a secretary and a treasurer (but the secretary and the treasurer may be one and the same), either of whom may or may not be a member of the water resources board. The secretary and treasurer shall hold office as such during the will and pleasure of the water resources board. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-404. - Cashier; collection and deposit of funds; liability upon official bonds; additional duties of recorder-treasurer. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall perform the duties of cashier for the water resources board, and as such shall receive and be responsible for all collections for all monies legally or properly collectible by the water resources board, and shall deposit them in the appropriate accounts in the respective banks designated as depositories for funds of the city. The recorder-treasurer shall be liable under such officer's official bond as recorder-treasurer for all such collections; but this shall not be taken and considered as relieving the treasurer of the water resources board for any liability upon such treasurer's official bond as such. The recorder-treasurer shall perform such other duties in connection with the operation of the office of the water resources board as the water resources board or its chairman may from time to time require. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-405. - Superintendent and purchasing agent. 
    The water resources board shall designate a superintendent who shall hold office as such during the will and pleasure of the water resources board and whose duties shall consist of supervision of all other employees of the board other than its officers, and supervision over all new construction authorized by the board and all maintenance of existing facilities. The superintendent shall also act as purchasing agent for the water resources board, but such superintendent's duties shall in no way include any of the duties set up in section 9-404. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-406. - Powers; duties; limitations thereon; obligation and expenditure of funds; employees. 
(a)  The water resources board shall have the supervision and control of the custody, administration, operation, and maintenance of all water-works which are now owned or may hereafter be acquired by the city. The water resources board shall have power to take all steps and proceedings and to make and enter into all contracts and agreements necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties and the execution of the powers granted to it by law, and shall have all of the powers granted to such water resources board under and by virtue of the Code of West Virginia, Chapter 8, Article 14, and shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations contained therein as well. 
(b)  The water resources board may employ engineers, architects, inspectors, superintendents, a manager, collectors, attorneys, and such other employees as in its judgment may be necessary in the execution of its powers and duties, and may fix their compensation, all of whom shall do such work as the board shall direct. All such compensation and all expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of Article 8, Chapter 14 of the Code of West Virginia shall be paid solely from funds provided under the authority of that Article, and the water resources board shall not exercise or carry out any authority or power given it so as to bind the board of the city beyond the extent to which money shall have been or may be provided under the authority of the aforesaid Article 14. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-407. - Construction, etc., of works; management of works; authority to promulgate rules and regulations. 
    The construction, acquisition, improvement, equipment, custody, operation, and maintenance of any waterworks and the collection of revenues therefrom for the service rendered thereby shall be under the supervision and control of the water resources board. After the construction, installation, and completion of the works, the water resources board shall operate, manage, and control such works and may order and complete any extensions, betterments, and improvements of and to the works that the board may deem expedient if funds therefor be available or made available as provided by law, and shall establish rules and regulations for the use and operation of the works. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-408. - Advertisement for bids; acceptance and rejection of bids. 
    No contract or agreement with any contractor for labor or material exceeding in amount the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall be made without advertising for bids, which shall be publicly opened and award made to the best bidder, with power in the water resources board to reject any and all bids. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-409. - Water resources board operating account. 
    There is created a fund to be designated as "City of Beckley Water Resources Board Operating Account," into which account shall be placed and deposited all funds derived from the issuance of permits under section 9-503 of this article. Such fund shall be used only for making new construction or extensions of the city water system or works. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-410. - Water resources board revenue account. 
    There is created a fund to be designated as "City of Beckley Water Resources Board Revenue Account," into which shall be placed and deposited all funds derived from rates or charges for service to the users of the system under and by virtue of sections 9-500 and 9-501 of this article, as well as all miscellaneous receipts from whatever source derived. All expenses of maintenance and operation of the system or works, including the salaries of all officers and employees of the water resources board as such, shall be paid out of the fund, and the water resources board may, from time to time, spend out of such funds so much thereof as it may deem proper for new construction and extensions of the water system or works. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Secs. 9-411-9-499. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER SERVICE RATES 

Sec. 9-500. - Schedules for services inside city. 
(a)  Monthly rates. There is established a schedule of just and equitable rates or charges for the use of and service rendered by the municipal waterworks which shall be paid by the owner of each lot, parcel of real estate, or building connected with or using such waterworks. Water charges, based upon consumption, shall be as follows: 
(1)  First two thousand (2,000) gallons used per month, three dollars and ninety-one cents ($3.91) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(2)  Next three thousand (3,000) gallons used per month, three dollars and thirty cents ($3.30) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(3)  Next twenty thousand (20,000) gallons used per month, three dollars and four cents ($3.04) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(4)  Next one hundred twenty-five thousand (125,000) gallons used per month, one dollar and eighty-six cents ($1.86) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(5)  Next eight hundred fifty thousand (850,000) gallons used per month, one dollar and forty-five cents ($1.45) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(6)  All over one million (1,000,000) gallons used per month, one dollar and fourteen cents ($1.14) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. Minimum: Seven dollars and eighty-two cents ($7.82) per month. 
(b)  Multiple occupancy. In apartment buildings, shopping centers, mobile homes, mobile home courts, or other multiple occupancy situations, each unit shall be required to pay not less than the minimum monthly charge provided above. 
(c)  Unmetered users residential. In locations where the customer has no water meter, charges for service shall be based upon one thousand (1,000) gallons for each occupant per month, but not less than the minimum monthly rate. 
(d)  Delinquency penalty. On all accounts not paid in full within twenty (20) days of the billing date, the penalty of ten (10) per cent will be added to the net amount shown. 
(Ord. of 2-13-91; Ord. of 8-13-91) 
Sec. 9-501. - Rates outside the city. 
    The rates set forth in section 9-500 shall apply to all users of the municipal water system within the city, and the rates or charges for all users of the water located outside the city. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-502. - Charges constitute liens; enforcement of liens; attorney fees. 
    All rates or charges imposed by this article, shall, as provided by law, constitute a lien upon the premises served by the waterworks of this city. If any such service rate or charge shall not be paid within thirty (30) days after due, the water resources board shall proceed to collect the amount thereof, together with the penalty of ten (10) per cent hereinbefore provided for in this division, and a reasonable attorney's fee in a civil action in the name of the city, and in connection with such action such lien may be foreclosed against such lot, parcel of land, and building, in accordance with the laws relating thereto. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-503. - Water connection charges. 
    The water connection fee will be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or the actual cost of the connection if higher than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such actual cost will include payroll, materials, and machine time. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 9-504. - Free service prohibited. 
    The city will not render or cause to be rendered any free services of any nature by the system nor any of the facilities; and in the event that the city or any department, agency, officer, or employee thereof should avail itself of the services or facilities of the system, the same fees, rates, and charges applicable to other customers shall be charged; such charges shall be paid as they accrue, and revenues so received shall be deposited and accounted for in the same manner as other revenues of the system. 
(Ord. of 2-13-90) 
Secs. 9-505-9-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE CONTROL 

Sec. 9-600. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used herein shall be as follows: 
    "Best Management Practices (BMPs)" are physical, structural and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, control site run-off, spillage and leaks, waste disposal and drainage from raw material storage and prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the state. BMPs may include schedules of activities, prohibition of practices, design standards, educational activities and treatment requirements. 
    "City watershed" are those areas within the corporate limits of the City of Beckley, and designated areas outside of those limits, over which surface water naturally drains into the city. Designation of areas outside of the corporate limits of the City of Beckley shall be made by the director. 
    "Director" is the General Manager of the Beckley Sanitary Board. 
    "Facility" for purposes of this article is a building, structure, installation or construction site in which pollutants are produced and/or generated as a result of a process or processes, conducted within the building, structure or installation. 
    "Flat rate charge" is the charge applicable to a single-family dwelling per dwelling unit. 
    "Footing drain" is a pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation or other structures for the purpose of admitting ground water. 
    "Illicit connection" means any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm drain system which has not been permitted allowed by the Beckley Sanitary Board from the date of enactment of this article. 
    "Illicit discharge" means any discharge to a storm drain or into the stormwater collection system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit, discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and other discharges exempted in this article. 
    "Impervious area" is land area covered by buildings, pavement, gravel or other material that significantly inhibits stormwater from penetrating the soil. 
    "Industrial sites" are those sites that contain industrial activities which require NPDES stormwater permits as set forth in 40 CFR 122.26(a)(6). 
    "Multi-unit property" is a residential, non-residential or commercial property of any size that has located upon the property two (2) or more tenants, at least one of which having no ownership interest in the property. 
    "Non-stormwater" is all flows to the stormwater system not defined as stormwater in this article or as determined by the director. This includes, but is not limited to, cooling water, process water, ground water from a purge well and swimming pool discharge. 
    "Pervious area" is all land area that is not impervious. 
    "Pollutant" means objects including, but not limited to, dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, grease, petroleum products, munitions, chemical waste, detergents, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, silt, dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, gasses entrained in water, paints, oil and other automotive fluids, soil, rubbish, debris, materials containing fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, and enterococcus, heavy metals, hazardous wastes, yard waste from commercial landscaping operations, animal waste, materials that result from the process of building, and offensive matter of any kind, which, when discharged to water, cause or contribute to water pollution. 
    "Pollution" is the degradation of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive properties of the waters of the state and/or the discharge of any pollutant to the waters of the state which will or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare or to the beneficial use of the water and/or the water environment. 
    "Public facility" is a stormwater facility that serves two (2) or more properties, including, but not limited to, main pipelines that collect and transmit stormwater from and/or across two (2) or more properties, and all taps or other connections onto a public facility. Public facilities that are privately owned upon enactment of this article shall become publicly owned facilities, and thus the responsibility of the stormwater utility, only upon conveyance by the private owner and acceptance by the director. 
    "Private facility" is a stormwater facility not otherwise classified as a public facility as defined above. 
    "Service area" is all areas within the political boundaries of the City of Beckley and those areas outside of said boundaries that naturally drain into the city, also called the "city watershed", and as designated in the operating permit issued under the provisions of the Clean Water Act. 
    "Stormwater" is atmospheric precipitation, surface runoff water, ground water discharge, water used in fire fighting, runoff from street sweeping, flows from footing drains and all other discharge sources identified in the City of Beckley Stormwater NPDES Permit, except as may be defined as non-stormwater by this article. 
    "Stormwater management" is the process of collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater to ensure control of the magnitude and frequency of runoff to minimize the impact of the runoff upon the water quality of the receiving stream and the other hazards associated with flooding. 
    "Stormwater service charge" is a flat rate charge, a charge based on land area, and/or a non-stormwater user charge. 
    "Stormwater system" is public and private stormwater sewers, drains, ditches, streets, retention/detention structures, dams, river impoundments and flood control facilities used for collecting and transporting stormwater and non-stormwater. 
    "User" is a firm, person or property which is the legal owner or occupant of a property that directly or indirectly contributes stormwater or non-stormwater flows to the stormwater system, whether within or outside the corporate limits of the City of Beckley. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
Sec. 9-601. - General. 
(a)  This article has been enacted to protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, groundwater and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act and associated federal and state stormwater regulations. 
(b)  The intent of this article is: 
(1)  To control non-stormwater discharges to storm drain systems. 
(2)  To reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges. 
(3)  To control stormwater runoff by providing design, construction and maintenance criteria for permanent and temporary stormwater facilities. 
(4)  To maintain and improve the stormwater collection system in order to protect and improve water quality in the receiving streams and to reduce or eliminate local flooding resulting from stormwater accumulation. 
(5)  To fully comply with federal and state statutory and regulatory requirements and schedules regarding stormwater management and the water quality of the receiving streams. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-1, 16-13-1, 16-13-2. 
Sec. 9-602. - Stormwater user fees and service charges. 
(a)  Users connected to or draining into the public storm drainage system shall pay an equitable share of the actual cost of the operation, maintenance of, improvements to, and necessary additions to the stormwater system. Therefore, all owners or tenants of real property in the City of Beckley and the city watershed shall be charged for the use of the stormwater system based on the amount of stormwater and rate of flow of stormwater which is projected to discharge into the stormwater system from the property. 
(b)  The city council shall, by ordinance, set user fees which will recover from users their fair share of costs for use of the stormwater system by property within and outside the corporate limits of the City of Beckley and within the city watershed. Such user fees will be for the operation and maintenance of, improvements to, necessary additions to, and environmental compliance programs for the stormwater system. 
(c)  The director may establish and enforce service fees to be charged and collected for services rendered by the stormwater utility or by agents of the utility, including, but not limited to, fees for permit application, stormwater management plan review, inspection, and other services. 
(d)  The director may establish and administer a storm water service fee reduction credit program to encourage the installation and maintenance of sound technical design practices which reduce the negative impact of development upon the storm water drainage system and/or the water environment, and to encourage and implement public education regarding storm water management and the water environment. Credits may be assigned in amounts designated by the director for practices that effectively and positively impact storm water runoff water quality, quantity and/or velocity, or for practices that improve the public knowledge of storm water runoff, the water-shed and/or the water environment. The director shall designate and administer the process by which credits may be obtained and maintained by the storm water customer. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07; Ord. of 2-24-09, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-18, 8-16-21, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-603. - Property affected. 
    Except as provided in this article and/or by regulation, all real property shall be subject to the stormwater user fee and service charges regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-18, 8-16-21, 16-13-16, 16-13-17, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-603.5. - Flat rate charges. 
    The monthly fee for users occupying a single-family residential dwelling, as defined by the director, shall be three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75). After July 1, 2008, the monthly service charge for a single-family residential dwelling shall be three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75). The city council may, from time to time, by ordinance, change this user fee. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-18, 16-13-16, 16-13-17, 16-17-23(a). 
Sec. 9-604. - Charges based on land area. 
    The monthly fee for properties other than described in section 9-603.5 (above) shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per drinking water service. If an improved property does not contain a water service, the service fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per parcel. After July 1, 2008, the monthly fee for properties other than described in section 9-603.5 shall be computed in the following manner: One dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious area upon the property, as determined by the director. 
    User fees for a multi-unit property shall be billed to each individual tenant upon the property in a fair and proportionate share of the total property fee, if said tenant has an individual drinking water service meter. At the discretion of the property owner, or if the individual tenants do not have individual drinking water service meters, fees for a multi-unit property may be billed to the property owner. A property owner exercising this choice must complete a written agreement as required by the director. 
    The city council may, from time to time, by ordinance, change these user fees. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07; Ord. of 2-24-09, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-18, 16-13-16, 16-13-17, 16-13-23(a). 
Sec. 9-605. - Billing. 
    The billing for stormwater service may be combined with the billing for other utility services provided by the Beckley Sanitary Board. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-18, 16-13-16. 
Sec. 9-606. - Collection. 
    The director is authorized to assess interest and penalties upon unpaid and past due stormwater user fees and service charges, and to act as deemed appropriate to enforce collection of unpaid fees and charges. Unpaid stormwater fees and charges shall constitute just cause for disconnection of public water service to the non-paying property. The director shall ensure sufficient notice of disconnection is issued no later than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled disconnection and that notice of disconnection is posted on the affected property no later than five (5) days prior to the scheduled disconnection. Water service shall be reactivated only upon full payment of the stormwater service charges or other payment arrangements approved by the director. The director may also take appropriate legal action to collect unpaid charges, including, but not limited to, placing a lien upon the subject property and/or bringing a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover unpaid charges and fees. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-18, 16-13-16. 
Sec. 9-607. - Use of funds. 
    All funds collected for stormwater service shall be accounted for separately and shall be used solely for the construction, operation and maintenance of the stormwater system and stormwater environmental compliance programs. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 16-13-16, 16-13-23(a). 
Sec. 9-608. - General requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  The use of the stormwater collection system shall be the collection and transportation of stormwater. 
(b)  No person shall place or cause to be placed any pollutant into the stormwater system other than stormwater, unless written approval has been granted by the director. The director may refuse to grant approval to discharge non-stormwater into the stormwater system for any reason or combination of reasons. 
(c)  The Beckley Sanitary Board shall administer use of the stormwater system to all users within the city watershed, whether located within or outside city limits. 
(d)  No person shall cause or permit the introduction of any pollutant into the stormwater system, whether solid, liquid or gaseous, that will cause: 
(1)  Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly with the materials of construction used in the stormwater system or that will impair the strength or durability of sewers or structures; 
(2)  Mechanical action that will destroy or damage sewers or structures; 
(3)  Restriction of the normal maintenance and inspection of sewers; 
(4)  Danger to public health and safety or to the environment; 
(5)  Conditions that create a public nuisance; 
(6)  An oil sheen or unusual color; 
(7)  Abnormal demand on the stormwater system capacity; or, 
(8)  The stormwater system to violate its NPDES permit or applicable receiving water standards and all other federal, state, and local regulations. 
(e)  Any person or entity engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drain system shall undertake best management practices to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, compliant operation of facilities that may be a source of pollutants, such as paved parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, and private roads/streets. 
(f)  No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain or cause to be thrown, deposited, left or maintained any refuse, rubbish, garbage, grease, petroleum products, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, parking area, or upon any private or public plot of land so that the same might become a pollutant, except where the pollutant is being temporarily stored in properly contained waste receptacles or is part of a well defined compost system. 
(g)  No person shall cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin, or similar container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged into any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structure, or upon any public or private plot of land in the urban watershed. 
(h)  No person shall use the stormwater system for discharge from any environmental cleanup that is regulated under federal or state law unless approved by the director. Approval by the director must be conditioned upon the discharge meeting all criteria for discharge under this chapter. Approval conditions may provide for measures appropriate to prevent harm due to possible exfiltration into the ground adjacent to the system or failure of any pretreatment system for the discharge. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-609. - Illicit connections. 
    It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain or continue illicit connections to the municipal stormwater system, or to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the municipal stormwater system. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-610. - Outdoor storage areas. 
    In outdoor areas, no person shall store grease, oil or other hazardous substances in a manner that will or may result in such substances entering the stormwater system. In outdoor areas, no person shall store motor vehicles, machine parts, or other objects in a manner that may leak grease, oil, or other hazardous substances to the stormwater system. To prevent the discharge of hazardous substances to the stormwater system, the director may require the installation of a spill containment system. Spill containment systems may consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, or other devices as required. No person shall operate a spill containment system such that it allows incompatible liquids to mix and thereby create a hazardous condition. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-611. - Construction sites. 
    Any person performing construction work in the city watershed of the City of Beckley shall comply with the provisions of this article and shall provide erosion and sediment controls that effectively prevent discharges of pollutants to the storm drain system and/or receiving stream. The director shall establish by regulation standards and guidelines for the implementation and maintenance of best management practices designed to provide erosion and sediment control from construction sites. At a minimum, these regulations shall address: 
(1)  Erosion controls through the protection and preservation of the soil at an active construction site to prevent off-site sedimentation. 
(2)  Sediment controls to remove sediment from runoff before the runoff is discharged from an active construction site. 
(3)  Stabilization and structural practices to prevent sedimentation and erosion. 
(4)  Stormwater management measures to be installed before, coincident with and upon completion of construction activities. These measures shall be designed to reduce or eliminate pollutants discharged from the site and to promote flood control objectives designated by the director. 
(5)  Construction site housekeeping best management practices, including, but not limited to, equipment maintenance, repair and cleaning, waste management and collection, storage of materials and chemicals, and sanitary facilities. 
(6)  Compliance with any and all other requirements imposed under the provisions of the Clean Water Act. 
    No landowner or land operator shall receive any building, grading or other land development permit or administrative authorization/license required for building or land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirement of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-612. - Discharge of pollutants. 
    Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a regulated source of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer and waters of the state when properly managed: water line flushing and uncontaminated discharges from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, groundwater infiltration to separate storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation and footing drains, roof drains, water from crawl space pumps, residential air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washes, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges or flows from fire fighting activities and training. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-613. - Discharge in violation of permit. 
    Any discharge that would cause a violation of a municipal NPDES permit and any amendments, revisions or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge, including, but not limited to, the cost of remedial activity, shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and the city shall seek to have such persons defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action against the City of Beckley and/or the Beckley Sanitary Board relating to such discharge as provided by applicable rules of law. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-614. - Notification of spills. 
    All persons in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility are responsible to train facility personnel, maintain records of such training and maintain notification procedures to assure that immediate notification is provided to the director upon becoming aware of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of material, pollutants or waste creating a risk of discharge into the municipal stormwater system or into a receiving stream. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-615. - Construction. 
(a)  Only designated Beckley Sanitary Board employees or parties authorized by the director may perform construction upon the public facilities of the stormwater system. Public facilities of the system shall include: 
(1)  Those facilities that serve two or more properties, including, but not limited to, main pipelines that collect and transmit stormwater from and/or across two or more properties; and, 
(2)  All taps or other connections from a private lateral to a public facility of the system. 
(b)  All public costs and expenses of and incidental to the installation of private stormwater facilities, connections to public facilities, and installation of public facilities to facilitate and convey flows from a specific private facility shall be borne by the owner(s) of the private facility. Payment terms for these costs and expenses shall be designated by the director. 
(c)  Parties authorized by the director to perform construction of or upon the public facilities of the stormwater system shall comply with the design and construction standards promulgated by the director. These parties shall allow for inspection of the construction by the director at all times, and construction shall only occur during normal working hours of the sanitary board. No facility constructed by an authorized party may be covered or connected to a public facility without specific authorization of the director. This authority shall be granted by the director upon satisfaction of the announced design and construction standards. 
(d)  All public facilities shall, upon authorized completion, be property of the City of Beckley. 
(e)  A party authorized by the director to perform construction upon the public facilities of the stormwater system shall meet the following requirements prior to and throughout construction: 
(1)  Compliance with all relevant federal and state labor, employment and environmental laws; and, 
(2)  Compliance with all relevant and applicable state laws regarding government construction contracts, including, but not limited to, W. Va. Code §§ 5-22-1, et seq. and 21-5A-1, et seq.; and, 
(3)  Full and active policy coverage as certified by the West Virginia Bureau of Employment Programs, Workers' Compensation Division; and, 
(4)  Contractor's liability insurance, issued by an insurance company with a Best's rating of no less than "A" and certified to the satisfaction of the director, which may include commercial general, automobile, umbrella and builders risk policies, naming the City of Beckley and the Beckley Sanitary Board as additional insureds. Policies and coverage limits and terms required shall be appropriate to the subject construction and shall be designated by the director; and, 
(5)  A construction bond, issued by an insurance company with a Best's rating of no less than "A" and certified to the satisfaction of the director, equal to the estimated cost of the construction and for a term equal to the duration of the construction project. At the discretion of the director, a bonded party may provide a cumulative general construction bond in satisfaction of this requirement; and, 
(6)  A repair bond, issued by an insurance company with a Best's rating of no less than "A" and certified to the satisfaction of the director, in an amount no more than the reasonable estimate of repair costs, as determined by the director, and for a term of no longer than five years, beginning on the date of substantial project completion. At the discretion of the director, a bonded party may provide a cumulative general construction bond in satisfaction of this requirement; and, 
(7)  Certification of full compliance with all relevant state and local permitting and tax rules and regulations, certification of appropriate property rights to perform the construction, and conveyance to the City of Beckley of appropriate property rights for the completed public facilities. 
(8)  Nothing in sub-paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) shall apply to any situation where the director shall come to an agreement with volunteer or a volunteer group doing work for a qualified not-for-profit entity, whereby the director will provide engineering, technical or other services and the volunteers will provide the necessary labor without charge to, or liability upon, the City of Beckley or the Beckley Sanitary Board. The not-for-profit entity shall be responsible for all costs to the utility associated with such a project. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-616. - Stormwater taps. 
(a)  The director or a party authorized by the director will furnish and install stormwater system taps of the size and at the location requested in writing by an applicant upon a form to be provided by the director. The applicant shall pay the full cost of the tap installation. 
(b)  The director may deny a tap application when the requested tap is proposed to an inadequate public facility. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-617. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall construct or maintain any property, residence or business not in compliance with the standards of this article. 
(b)  The director and other authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted, after reasonable notice, to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person or firm shall fail to provide any report or other information or perform any duty required by this article. 
(d)  The director is authorized to take appropriate legal action to require compliance with this article. 
(e)  The director is authorized to enforce and collect upon the terms of a construction and/or repair bond in the event of default of the conditions described therein. 
(f)  If, after reasonable notice, a person fails to comply with this article, the director may cause the work to be done to obtain compliance and shall charge the cost of that work to the person responsible. The responsible person shall pay in full the charged amount within thirty (30) days of the invoice date, or otherwise make arrangements, acceptable to the director, for full payment of the invoiced amount. 
(g)  The director is authorized to take all steps necessary to immediately halt any discharge of pollutants which reasonably appear to present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment. 
(h)  Persons aggrieved by any determination of the director in enforcing this article may appeal that determination to the Beckley Sanitary Board or a court of proper jurisdiction. Prosecution shall be stayed pending such an appeal. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-618. - Stormwater management and comprehensive drainage plans. 
(a)  Upon the effective date of this article, the director shall enact regulations providing for specific requirements and standards for stormwater management and drainage upon all new developments and redevelopment projects. These regulations shall be written to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants to storm drain systems and prevent the deterioration of water quality. At a minimum, these regulations shall address: 
(1)  Prevention of any direct discharge of untreated stormwater, either on or off-site. 
(2)  Prevention of increased post-development discharge rates. 
(3)  Removal of a designated amount, determined by the percentage of impervious parcel area, of annual total load of pollutants generated from development or redevelopment runoff prior to any off-site discharge. 
(4)  Description and implementation of best management practices, and the continuation of those BMPs for appropriate periods of time. 
(5)  Protection of ground water from instances of polluted runoff infiltration. 
(6)  Protection and preservation of the stormwater collection system, including, but not limited to, open natural drainage ways and riparian areas, which together function to attenuate runoff volumes, peak discharges and pollutant loading to the water environment. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-619. - Drainage system standards. 
    Drainage systems shall comply with the standards established by the director. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-620. - Plan submission and review process. 
(a)  Upon the effective date of this article, and following the enactment of regulations providing for specific requirements and standards for stormwater management and drainage upon all new developments and redevelopment projects, stormwater management plans and comprehensive drainage plans for any new construction or reconstruction within the city watershed shall be submitted to the director. The plans shall be reviewed by the director or his/her designated representative for compliance with the applicable rules and standards. Plans developed to meet federal or state requirements may be submitted, and will be approved if they conform to the requirements of this article. If the director employs outside services for plan review, the cost of that review shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  The plan submission and review process shall be coordinated with and integrated into the city planning and permitting process. Following the effective date of this section, no building permit shall be issued without an approved stormwater management plan if required under this article. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-621. - Maintenance of stormwater facilities. 
(a)  Private stormwater facilities located in private property and within the city watershed shall be maintained by the owner or other responsible party and shall be repaired and/or replaced by such person when such facilities are no longer functioning as designed. 
(b)  Disposal of waste from maintenance of private facilities shall be conducted in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(c)  Records of installation and maintenance and repair shall be retained by the owner or other responsible party for a period of five (5) years and shall be made available to the director upon request. 
(d)  The director may perform corrective or maintenance work, which shall be at the owner's expense, upon any failure to maintain facilities or correct problems with facilities after receiving due reasonable notice from the director. 
(e)  Routine maintenance of detention/retention facilities shall be conducted by the owner of the facility in accordance with this article and guidance of the director. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-622. - Inspection. 
(a)  Stormwater systems within the city watershed shall be inspected by the director during and after construction to assure consistency with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)  All stormwater systems within the city watershed shall be subject to the authority of the director to ensure compliance with this article and may be inspected when deemed necessary. 
(c)  The owner of a private stormwater system, or other responsible party designated by the owner, shall make annual inspections of the facilities, including any detention/retention facility, and maintain records of such inspections for a period of five (5) years. 
(d)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which may constitute a violation of the provisions of this article, the director may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed by this article; provided that (1) if such building or premises is occupied, he or she first shall present proper credentials and request entry; and (2) if such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she first shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
(e)  The property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry but, in the event such entry is refused, the director is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry and performing such inspection. 
(f)  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this article, including but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, or similar factors. 
(g)  Storm water customers assigned service fee reduction credits as authorized in this article shall, at all reasonable times, allow the director to enter upon, and inspect, the qualifying controls or practices to ensure continuing qualification of these credits. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07; Ord. of 2-24-09, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-623. - Sampling. 
    With the consent of the owner or occupant or with court order, the director may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the director may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record the on-site activities, provided that owners or occupants shall be entitled to split samples. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-624. - Testing and monitoring. 
(a)  Whenever the director determines that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or illicit discharges to the stormwater system, the director may, by written notice, order that such person undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the director may require. The written notice shall be served either in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and shall set forth the basis for such order and shall particularly describe the monitoring activities and/or analyses and reports required. The burden to be borne by the owner or operator, including costs of these activities, analyses and reports, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such order shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports within the time frames set forth in the order. 
(b)  Within twenty (20) days of the date of receipt of the order notice, the recipient shall respond personally or in writing advising the director of the recipient's position with respect to the order's requirements. Thereafter, the recipient shall be given the opportunity to meet with the director to review the order's requirements and revise the order as the director may deem necessary. Within ten (10) days of such meeting, the director shall issue a final written order. Final orders issued pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Beckley Sanitary Board by the filing of a written appeal with the sanitary board within ten (10) days of receipt of the final order. The appeal notice shall set forth the particular order requirements or issues being appealed. The sanitary board shall hear the appeal at its earliest practical date and may either affirm, revoke or modify the order. The decision of the sanitary board shall be final, but may be subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In the event the owner or operator of a facility or property fails to conduct the monitoring and/or analyses and furnish the reports required by the order in the time frames set forth therein, the director may cause such monitoring and/or analyses to occur. If a violation is found, the director may assess all costs incurred, including reasonable administrative costs and attorney's fees, to the owner or operator. The director may pursue judicial action to enforce the order and recover all costs incurred. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-625. - Concealment. 
    Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-626. - Acts resulting in violation of Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, also may be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of that Act including civil and criminal penalties. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
Sec. 9-627. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be considered a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and the environment, may be declared and deemed a nuisance by the director and may be summarily abated and/or restored by the director and/or civil action taken to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance 
(b)  The cost of such abatement and/or restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. 
(c)  If any violation of this article constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the director shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further declaration. 
(d)  In any administrative or civil proceeding under this article in which the city or its agent prevails, the city or its agent may be awarded all costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, costs of suit and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-628. - Administrative enforcement powers. 
(a)  In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this article, the director has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies. 
(1)  Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this article, the director may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: (a) comply with the requirement; (b) comply with a time schedule for compliance, and/or (c) take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. The director may refer the violation to the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection for further civil and/or criminal prosecution in accordance with the Clean Water Act. The director may, in any case, assess a charge to the violator to recover the cost of response/remediation incurred by the utility. If the invoice is not paid within sixty (60) days, a lien shall be placed upon and against the property. The director may also bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover unpaid costs and fees. 
(2)  Notice to clean. Whenever the director finds any oil, earth dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds or in close proximity to any open drain or ditch channel, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the storm drain system or a non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, he or she may give notice to the property owner remove and lawfully dispose of such material in any manner that he or she reasonably may provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice within the time frames set forth therein. 
(3)  In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the activities as described in the notice, the director may cause such required activities as described in the notice to be performed, and the cost thereof shall be assessed and invoiced to the owner of the property. If the invoice is not paid within sixty (60) days, a lien shall be placed upon and against the property. The director may also bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover unpaid costs and fees. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-629. - Nonexclusivity of remedies. 
    Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 8-16-5, 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-630. - Appeal. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or organization notified of non-compliance with this Article or required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities who is aggrieved by the decision of the director may appeal such decision in writing to the Beckley Sanitary Board within ten (10) days following the effective date of the decision. Upon receipt of such request, the sanitary board shall request a report and recommendation from the director and shall set the matter for administrative hearing at the earliest practical date. At said hearing, the sanitary board may hear additional evidence, and may revoke, affirm or modify the earlier decision. Such decision shall be final, subject to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code §§ 16-13-2, 16-13-22. 
Sec. 9-631. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this article does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the state. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-26-07) 
Chapter 10 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Tampering with and damage to fire apparatus, etc., § 7-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Duties of persons as to public officers and employees-Obstructing officer; fleeing from officer; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who, by threats, menaces, acts, or otherwise, shall forcibly or illegally, obstruct, or oppose or attempt to obstruct or oppose, or shall council, advise, or invite others to hinder, obstruct, or oppose any officer in the city, (whether civil or military), the mayor or any council member, or other officer or employee of the city in the lawful exercise of their official duty shall, for every such offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may, at the discretion of the court, be imprisoned not exceeding one (1) year. 
(b)  If any person intentionally flees from or attempts to flee from any officer in this municipality, (whether civil or military), who is attempting to make a lawful arrest of such person, and the person knows or reasonably believes the officer is attempting to arrest him or her, he or she is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may, at the discretion of the Court, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding twelve (12) months. 
(Code 1971, § 14-11; Ord. of 3-14-95; Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Obstructing an officer in performance of duty, W. Va. Code, § 61-5-17. 
Sec. 10-2. - Same-Not to seek release of property or animals in public custody without proper authority. 
    No person shall, without proper authority, seek to release any property or animal in the custody of the city or its officers, employees or agents. 
(Code 1971, § 14-12) 
Sec. 10-3. - Same-Not to impersonate city officer or representative. 
(a)  No person not a member of the police department or fire department, a legally elected public official, or commissioned by the proper legal authority, shall falsely represent such person's self to be any such member or public official. No person not a member of the police department, for the purpose of such false representation, shall wear a uniform or part thereof similar to the uniform worn by a member of the police department. 
(b)  No person shall represent such person's self falsely to be any authorized representative of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-13) 
Sec. 10-4. - Aiders and abettors. 
    Any person who aids, abets or procures another to commit an offense may be prosecuted and punished as if such person were the principal offender. 
(Code 1971, § 14-5) 
Sec. 10-5. - Falsely reporting an emergency incident. 
    A person is guilty of reporting a false emergency incident when, knowing the information reported, conveyed, or circulated, is false or baseless, he: 
(1)  Initiates or circulates a false report or warning of or impending occurrence of a fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, accident, illness, or other emergency under circumstances in which it is likely that public alarm or inconvenience will result or that firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, one or more rescue vehicles, or other emergency apparatus might be summoned; or 
(2)  Reports, by word or action, to any official or quasi-official agency or organization having the function of dealing with emergencies involving danger to life or property, an alleged occurrence, or impending occurrence of a fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, accident, illness, or other emergency in which it is likely that public alarm or inconvenience will result or that firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, one or more rescue vehicles, or other emergency apparatus might be summoned, which did not occur, does not in fact exist; or 
(3)  Reports to a law enforcement officer or agency the alleged occurrence of any offense or incident which did not, in fact, occur or an allegedly impending occurrence of an offense or incident which is not in fact about to occur or false information relating to an actual offense or incident or to the alleged implication of some person therein; or 
(4)  Without just cause, calls or summons by telephone, fire alarm system, or otherwise, any firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, rescue vehicles, or other emergency vehicles. 
    Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or confined in the county jail not more than six (6) months or both fined and confined. 
(Code 1971, § 14-15; Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. code, § 61-6-20. 
Sec. 10-6. - Advertising-On private property. 
(a)  No person shall stick or post any advertisement, poster, sign, handbill or placard of any description upon any building, vehicle, tree, post, fence, billboard or any other structure or thing whatever, the private property of another, without permission of the occupant or owner thereof. 
(b)  No person shall paint, mark, write, print or impress, or in any manner attach any notice or advertisement or the name of any commodity or thing or any trademark, symbol or figure of any kind upon anything whatever the property of another without first obtaining permission of the owner of such thing on which such person desires to place such notice, advertisement, name, mark or figure. 
(Code 1971, § 14-2) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to regulate certain advertising, § 21(26)-(28). 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertising generally, W. Va. Code, § 17-22-21 et seq. 
Sec. 10-7. - Same-On public property or utility company poles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stick, post or attach any advertisement, poster, sign, handbill or placard of any kind or description upon any telegraph, telephone, railway or electric light pole within the city or upon any public building, vehicle, voting booth, flagging, curb, tree, lawn, walk, step, stone or sidewalk, or to write, print or impress or in any manner attach any notice of advertisement of any kind upon any public building, voting booth, flagging, curb, tree, lawn, step, stone, or sidewalk, the property of the city or within the street lines of the city or over which the city or the council thereof has the care, custody or control, except such as may be permitted by the laws of the state, or upon written permission of the mayor; provided, that any permit granted by the mayor may be revoked by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 14-3) 
Sec. 10-8. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful to assault or threaten another in a menacing manner, or to strike or wound another. 
(Code 1971, § 14-7) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to prohibit assault and battery, § 21(36). 
State Law reference- Provisions as to assault and battery, W. Va. Code, §§ 61-2-9, 61-2-10. 
Annotations- For a case holding that conviction of assault and battery under this section, in the city court, does not bar prosecution in a state court for violation of state law as to assault and battery, as the same act of assault and battery constitutes two separate offenses, one against the city and the other against the state, see State v. Mills, 150 S.E. 142. For a case holding that acts of assault and battery might well be classed as breaches of the peace, see State v. Mills, 150 S.E. 142. 
Sec. 10-9. - Clubs; hours regulated. 
(a)  Any corporation, society, order or voluntary association organized and carried on solely for the benefit of its members and their beneficiaries is hereby declared to be a "club" for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful within the city for any club building to be open prior to 6:00 a.m. on Mondays, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a club from operating a public dining room between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays. Such club buildings shall be considered "open" within the meaning of this section whenever any person other than a paid employee of such club is within the building during the prohibited hours. 
(Code 1971, § 14-8) 
Sec. 10-10. - Electrically charged fences. 
    No person shall construct, erect, maintain or use for any purpose any fence charged with electrical current within the corporate city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-14) 
Sec. 10-11. - Disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace, good order or quiet of the city by any indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and good order of the city by fighting, quarreling, wrangling, threatening violence to the person or property of others, or by riot, tumult, lascivious, obscene, profane or scandalous language or by making outcries, clamor or noise in the night, or by intoxication, drunkenness, or by lewd or lascivious behavior, or by indecent exposure of the person, or by abusing such person's family, or any member thereof by inflicting person violence or any other gross abuse. 
(Code 1971, § 14-10) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to suppress disorderly conduct and disturbances of the peace, § 21(35), (36), (40). 
Cross reference- Unnecessary noise, § 8-9; see also § 10-25. 
State Law reference- Crimes against the peace, W. Va. Code, § 61-6-1 et seq.; suppression of riots, unlawful assemblies and mobs, §§ 61-6-1, 61-6-12. 
Sec. 10-12. - Conduct upon streets, sidewalks; possession of beer or intoxicating beverages in public places. 
    No person on any sidewalk or street or public park shall engage in conduct in a manner annoying to persons passing by or occupants or residents of adjoining buildings. No person shall carry or possess or consume or intend to consume from any unsealed container or partially filled container of nonintoxicating beer or intoxicating beverage upon any sidewalk, street, playground, recreational facility, or parking lot within the city except when specifically permitted by the city during an organized activity. 
(Code 1971, § 14-55) 
Sec. 10-13. - Fortune-telling, etc. 
    No person not legally licensed to do so shall represent such person's self commercially to be an astrologer, fortune-teller, clairvoyant or palmist. 
(Code 1971, § 14-16) 
Sec. 10-14. - Spitting or relieving bladder. 
    No person shall expectorate, spit or urinate on another person or upon any sidewalk or public property, or in or upon any taxicab or other public vehicle carrying passengers for hire. 
(Code 1971, § 14-39) 
Sec. 10-15. - Intoxication. 
    No person shall appear in a public place or in any place of public resort in an intoxicated or drunken condition. 
(Code 1971, § 14-23) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to penalize drunkenness in public, Char., § 21(39). 
State Law reference- Public drunkenness, W.Va. Code, § 61-8-15. 
Sec. 10-16. - Gambling. 
(a)  No person shall play, possess or operate any gambling device or play or operate any game for money or other thing of value, or make a wager for money or other thing of value. 
(b)  No owner or lessee of any premises shall knowingly permit any gambling table, implement or apparatus for gambling to be kept or used in such premises for winning or gaining money. 
(Code 1971, § 14-17) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to regulate gambling, § 21(53). 
State Law reference- Gambling generally, W. Va. code, § 61-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-17. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any of the streets, sidewalks, public buildings, or vacant lots of the city, and there conduct such person's self in a manner annoying to persons nearby or passing by, or occupants of adjacent buildings. 
(Code 1971, § 14-24) 
Sec. 10-18. - Suspicious persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any suspicious person to be found strolling, loitering or lingering within the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a "suspicious person" shall be deemed to be a person who, not being licensed or privileged by law to possess it, is found with any of the controlled substances named in the state controlled substances law in such person's possession; and any person in whose possession shall be found concealed any device, tool, instrument or thing for use in the commission of burglary, larceny or other crime, or for picking locks or pockets, or for use in obtaining money or other property of value by swindle, trick or false pretense; and any person who is known to obtain a living by criminal means and practices or who is known to be a companion and associate of criminals or other dissolute persons. 
(Code 1971, § 14-40) 
Sec. 10-19. - Vagrancy. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be found loitering about any street, park, public building or public or private place without any visible means of support, and being able to work for the support of himself at honest industry, intentionally to live idly and without endeavoring in good faith to obtain lawful work or employment. 
(Code 1971, § 14-42) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to restrain vagrants, § 21(34). 
Sec. 10-20. - Trespass. 
    No person shall enter without lawful authority upon the land or premises of another. No person, being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or the agent or servant of either, shall without lawful authority neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. 
(Code 1971, § 14-41) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to prohibit trespassing, § 21(37). 
Cross reference- Trespassing at sewage disposal plant, § 9-283. 
State Law reference- Provisions as to trespassing upon enclosed lands, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-33; trespassing on railroad property, § 61-3-43. 
Sec. 10-21. - Wilful destruction of property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully or maliciously to destroy or damage property not such person's own within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-47) 
Cross reference- Tampering with or causing damage to fire hydrants, § 7-5; wilful or negligent injury to sewers or appurtenances, etc., § 9-203. 
Sec. 10-22. - Taking or tampering with vehicle-Unauthorized taking; owner's consent not to be implied. 
    Any person who drives a vehicle, not such persons own, without consent of the owner thereof, and with intent temporarily to deprive the owner of possession of such vehicle, without intent to steal it, is guilty of an offense against this section, punishable as provided in section 1-8. The consent of the owner of a vehicle to its taking or driving shall not in any case be presumed or implied because of such owner's consent on a previous occasion to the taking or driving of such vehicle by the same or a different person. Any person who assists in, or is a party or accessory to or an accomplice in any such unauthorized taking or driving, is guilty of an offense against this section. 
(Code 1971, § 13-132) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17A-8-4. 
Sec. 10-23. - Same-Tampering and malicious mischief. 
(a)  Any person who either individually or in association with one or more persons wilfully damages or tampers with any vehicle or breaks or removes any part of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner is guilty of an offense against this section, punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(b)  Any person who with intent to commit any malicious mischief, injury, or other crime climbs into or upon a vehicle whether it is in motion or at rest or with like intent attempts to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of a vehicle while it is at rest and unattended or with like intent sets in motion any vehicle while it is at rest and unattended is guilty of an offense against this section, punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1971, § 13-133) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. code, § 17A-18-6. 
Sec. 10-24. - Petit larceny; obtaining money, etc., by false pretenses. 
(a)  No person shall commit larceny of goods or chattels of a value less than the felony amount provided in Chapter 61, Article 3, Code of West Virginia. 
(b)  No person shall obtain possession of or title to anything of value with[out] the consent of the person from whom such person obtained it, nor shall any person induce such consent by a false or fraudulent representation, pretense, token or writing. 
(Code 1971, § 14-32) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to prohibit and punish petit larceny, § 21(41); authority of council to prevent and punish fraudulent practices, § 21(52). 
State Law reference- Larceny generally, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-13 et seq.; obtaining money by false pretenses, § 61-3-24. 
Sec. 10-25. - Shoplifting-Definition of offense. 
(a)  General definitions. 
(1)  Conceal means to hide, hold, or carry merchandise so that, although there may be some notice of its presence, it is not visible through ordinary observation. 
(2)  Merchant means an owner or operator of any mercantile establishment, and includes the merchant's employees, servants, security agents, or other agents. 
(3)  Mercantile establishment means any place where merchandise is displayed, held, or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale. "Mercantile establishment" does not include adjoining parking lots or adjoining areas of common use with other establishments. 
(4)  Merchandise means any goods, foodstuffs, wares, or personal property or any part or portion thereof of any type or description displayed, held or offered for sale, or a shopping cart. 
(5)  Value of the merchandise means the merchant's stated price of the merchandise, or in the event of altering, transferring, or removing a price marking or causing a cash register or other sales device to reflect less than the retail value of the merchandise, as defined in subsection (b) hereof, the difference between the merchant's stated price of the merchandise and the altered price. 
(b)  Shoplifting defined. 
(1)  A person commits the offense of shoplifting if, with intent to appropriate merchandise without paying the merchant's stated price for the merchandise, such person, alone or in concert with another person, knowingly: 
a.  Conceals the merchandise upon his or her person or in another manner; or 
b.  Removes or causes the removal of merchandise from the mercantile establishment or beyond the last station for payment; or 
c.  Alters, transfers, or removes any price marking affixed to the merchandise; or 
d.  Transfers the merchandise from one container to another; or 
e.  Causes cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise; or 
f.  Removes a shopping cart from the premises of the mercantile establishment. 
(2)  A person also commits the offense of shoplifting if such person, alone or in consort with another person, knowingly and with intent, obtains an exchange or refund for merchandise which has not been purchased from the mercantile establishment. 
(Code 1971, § 14-34; Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 61-3A-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-26. - Same-Evidence. 
(a)  Evidence of stated price of ownership of merchandise may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  The actual merchandise alleged to have been shoplifted; or 
(2)  The unaltered content of the price tag or marking from such merchandise; or 
(3)  Properly identified photographs of such merchandise. 
(b)  Any merchant may testify at a trial as to the stated price or ownership of merchandise, as well as to other matters pertaining to the case. 
(Code 1971, § 14-35) 
Sec. 10-27. - Same-Penalties. 
    A person convicted of shoplifting shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense conviction. Upon a first shoplifting conviction: 
a.  When the value of the merchandise is less than or equal to five hundred dollars ($500.00), the defendant shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
b.  When the value of the merchandise exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the defendant shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and such fine shall not be suspended, or the person shall be confined in jail not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(2)  Second offense conviction. Upon a second shoplifting conviction: 
a.  When the value of the merchandise is less than or equal to five hundred dollars ($500.00), the defendant shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and such fine shall not be suspended, or the person shall be confined in jail not more than six (6) months, or both. 
b.  When the value of the merchandise exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the defendant shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall be confined in jail for not less than six (6) months nor more than one year. 
(3)  Mandatory penalty. In addition to the fines and imprisonment imposed by this section, in all cases of conviction for the offense of shoplifting, the Court shall order the defendant to pay a penalty to the mercantile establishment involved in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), or double the value of the merchandise involved, whichever is higher. The mercantile establishment shall be entitled to collect such mandatory penalty as in the case of a civil judgment. This penalty shall be in addition to the mercantile establishment's rights to recover the stolen merchandise. 
(4)  Prior convictions. In determining the number of prior shoplifting convictions for purposes of imposing punishment under this section, the court shall disregard all such convictions occurring more than seven (7) years prior to the shoplifting offense in question. 
(Code 1971, § 14-36; Ord. of 8-26-97) 
Sec. 10-28. - Same-To constitute breach of peace; detention. 
    An act of shoplifting, as defined herein, is hereby declared to constitute a breach of peace and any owner of merchandise, the owner's agent or employee, or any law enforcement officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed shoplifting, may detain such person in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, for the purpose of investigating whether or not such person has committed or attempted to commit shoplifting. Such reasonable detention shall not constitute an arrest nor shall it render the owner of merchandise, or the owner's agent or employee, liable to the person detained. 
(Code 1971, § 14-37) 
Sec. 10-29. - Same-Civil liability. 
(a)  General rule: Any person who commits any of the acts described in section 10-25 shall be civilly liable: 
(1)  To restore the merchandise to the mercantile establishment; and 
(2)  If such merchandise is not recoverable or is damaged, for actual damages, including the value of the merchandise involved in the shoplifting; and 
(3)  For other actual damages arising from the incident, not including the loss of time or loss of wages incurred by the mercantile establishment or any merchant in connection with the apprehension and processing of the suspect; and 
(4)  In all cases, for a penalty to be paid to the mercantile establishment in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) or double the value of the merchandise, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Costs and attorneys' fees: A merchant who is a prevailing party under this section is entitled to costs. 
(c)  Effect of conviction: A conviction for the offense of theft by shoplifting is not a prerequisite to the maintenance of a civil action authorized by this section. However, a merchant who has recovered the penalty prescribed by section 10-27 is not entitled to recover the penalty imposed by this section. 
(d)  Right to demand payment: The fact that a mercantile establishment may bring any action against an individual as provided in this section does not limit the right of such establishment to demand, orally or in writing, that a person who is liable for damages or a penalty under this section remit said damages or penalty prior to the commencement of any legal action. 
(Code 1971, § 14-38) 
Sec. 10-30. - Theft of television cable service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use any connection, whether physically, electrically, inductively, or otherwise, with any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, or equipment or a cable television system with the intent to enable such person's self, or others, to receive or use any signal without the consent of, or payment to, the cable television system owner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully tamper with, remove or damage, or cause to be tampered with, removed or damaged, any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, or equipment of a cable television system without the consent of the cable television system owner. 
(Code 1971, § 14-56; Ord. of 10-23-84) 
Sec. 10-31. - Receiving or transferring stolen goods. 
    No person shall buy or receive from another person, or aid in concealing, or transfer to a person other than the owner thereof, any stolen goods or other thing of value, which such person knows or has reason to believe has been stolen. 
(Code 1971, § 14-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-18. 
Sec. 10-32. - Possession of marihuana. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess an amount of marihuana, less than fifteen (15) grams in weight, unless the marihuana was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of such person's professional practice. 
(b)  Whenever any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense under the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 60A of the West Virginia Code, or under any statute of the United States or of any state relating to narcotic drugs, marihuana, or stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic drugs, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of possession of an amount of marihuana weighing less than fifteen (15) grams in violation of subsection (a) of this section, the judge may discharge the person and dismiss proceedings against such person after any fine or jail sentence imposed hereunder has been paid or served. The judge, in determining whether or not to discharge the defendant and to dismiss proceedings against the defendant, shall take into account the following factors: 
(1)  The attitude of the defendant toward the offense mentioned herein, and 
(2)  Whether or not the defendant has sought professional counseling in relation to the possession of marihuana, as well as the nature and extent of such counseling and the defendant's response to such counseling; provided, that the defendant has been advised of the availability of such counseling and has had at least thirty (30) days time thereafter to begin participation in such counseling. 
(c)  Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. The effect of such dismissal and discharge shall be to restore such person in contemplation of law to the status such person occupied prior to such arrest and trial. No person as to whom such dismissal and discharge have been effected shall be thereafter held to be guilty of perjury, false swearing or otherwise giving a false statement by reason of such person's failure to disclose or acknowledge such arrest or trial in response to any inquiry made of such person for any purpose. 
(d)  After discharge and dismissal under this section and upon proper motion by the defendant, the court may issue an order expunging from all official records all recordation of the defendant's arrest, trial and conviction pursuant to this section. The court also shall contact all federal and state agencies which may have in their possession official records relating to the offense herein mentioned and request that all recordations relating to the defendant's arrest, trial and conviction, pursuant to this section, be expunged from such records. 
(Code 1971, § 14-50) 
Cross reference- See also § 10-18. 
Sec. 10-33. - Curfew-Definitions. 
(a)  A minor is any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A public place is any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, sidewalk, park, playground, store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, game room, pool room, bus station or shopping center. 
(Code 1971, § 14-51) 
Sec. 10-34. - Same-Established for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play, or drive, park or ride in or upon a vehicle which is driven or parked in a public place in the city during the following times: (1) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, Sunday through Thursday and (2) between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to (i) a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; (ii) a legally employed minor who is going to or from the place of his employment or is engaged in the duties of such employment; (iii) a minor who is on an emergency errand; or (iv) a minor who is exempt from the penalties of this section pursuant to section 10-36. 
(b)  Any minor who violates this section shall be deemed a status offender as defined in Chapter 49 of the West Virginia Code and shall be dealt with pursuant to the provisions of that chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 14-52) 
Sec. 10-35. - Same-Parent's responsibility. 
    It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult having custody or control of any minor to knowingly permit or to permit by inefficient supervision such minor to remain, loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or drive, park or ride in or upon a vehicle which is driven or parked in a public place in the city during the following times: (1) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, Sunday through Thursday, and (2) between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the parent, guardian or other adult having custody or control of (i) a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; (ii) a legally employed minor who is going to or from the place of such minor's employment or is engaged in the duties of such employment; (iii) a minor who is on an emergency errand; or (iv) a minor who is exempt from the penalties of this section pursuant to section 10-36. 
(Code 1971, § 14-53) 
Sec. 10-36. - Same-Special functions; hardship. 
(a)  Any minor who is or was attending a special function of any church, school, club, or other organization that requires such minor to be out at a later hour than that allowed by section 10-34 and section 10-35 shall be exempt from the penalties of section 10-34 provided the chief of police or in the chief's absence, the mayor, grants an exemption to the organization holding the function. An organization shall apply in writing for an exemption at least twenty-four (24) hours before such function is scheduled to begin, stating the name of the organization and the individual applicant, the nature of the function, and the time such function is scheduled to end. The chief of police or in the chief's absence, the mayor, shall decide whether to grant an exemption. Such exemptions shall be in writing and shall state a reasonable time period during which a minor who is or was attending such special function shall be exempt from the operation of the curfew provisions. 
(b)  The council shall have the right upon application to exempt a minor from the penalties of section 10-34 when such minor's compliance with the section would result in undue hardship to the minor or to his family, parents, guardian, or other adult having custody or control of such minor. Applications for such exemption shall be in writing and shall state the name of the minor and the reason for requiring the exemption. 
(Code 1971, § 14-54) 
Sec. 10-37. - Bicycles-Duty of person selling or transferring ownership. 
    It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle within the city to report such sale or transfer to the police department within seven (7) days of the date of such sale or transfer, giving the name and address of the purchaser and make, type, and frame or serial numbers of the bicycle. 
(Code 1971, § 4-1) 
Cross reference- Bicycle regulations, § 14-900 et seq. 
Sec. 10-38. - Same-Businesses to report sales, exchanges, etc.; restrictions as to purchases. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or trading in use or secondhand bicycles, and every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new bicycles, shall make a report to the chief of police of all used or secondhand bicycles bought, exchanged or traded in, and of all used or secondhand parts of bicycles bought by each such person during the preceding month, on forms provided by the police department. 
(b)  Each such report shall specify a full and complete description of such used or secondhand bicycle or used or secondhand bicycle parts, and in addition thereto, wherever available, the serial numbers, factory numbers, frame number, color, type, model, frame size, wheel size, name of brake and other marks of identification, the date of purchase or trade, together with the name, address, age, height, and weight of the person selling or trading in such bicycle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles to purchase any secondhand bicycles from a minor under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1971, § 4-2) 
Sec. 10-39. - Immoral conduct-Indecent exposure; profane, etc., language. 
    No person shall wilfully make an indecent exposure of the person to public view where there is another person to be offended or annoyed thereby, or utter profane, obscene or licentious language in the presence or hearing of another. 
(Code 1971, § 14-18) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to suppress immoral conduct, § 21(32)-(35). 
Cross reference- See also disorderly conduct, § 10-11. 
State Law reference- Crimes against chastity, morality and decency, W. Va. Code, § 61-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-40. - Same-Lascivious, etc., exhibitions and devices therefor. 
    No person shall give a public or private exhibition of a lascivious, indecent, immoral or impure nature or an exhibition tending to corrupt morals; or own, operate or permit another to operate on such person's premises, a phonograph or other device giving forth profane, indecent, immoral or impure language; or own, operate, or permit another to operate on such person's premises, a picture machine or other device exhibiting a lascivious, indecent, immoral or impure picture or figure of a picture of crime or lust, or a picture tending to corrupt morals. 
(Code 1971, § 14-19) 
Sec. 10-41. - Same-Adultery; fornication; lewd and lascivious cohabitation; presumption of no marriage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit adultery or fornication. 
(b)  No person, not married to each other, shall lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or whether married or not be guilty of open or gross lewdness or lasciviousness. 
(c)  In prosecutions for violations of this section, the persons named in the complaint or indictment shall be presumed to be unmarried persons in the absence of proof to the contrary. 
(Code 1971, § 14-20) 
Sec. 10-42. - Same-Prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(a)  No person shall engage in prostitution, lewdness, or assignation by any means. 
(b)  No person shall procure, solicit or offer to procure or solicit for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation. 
(Code 1971, § 14-21) 
Sec. 10-43. - Same-Keeping of and transporting persons to places of prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(a)  No person shall keep, set up, maintain or operate any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation. 
(b)  No person shall occupy any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation or permit any place, structure, building or conveyance owned by such person or under such person's control to be used for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation with knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the same is, or is to be, used for such purpose. 
(c)  No person shall receive, or offer or agree to receive, any person into any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation or permit any person to remain there for such purpose. 
(d)  No person shall direct, take or transport, or offer or agree to take or transport any person to any place, structure or building or to any other person with knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness, or assignation. 
(e)  No person shall reside in, enter or remain in any place, structure or building, or enter or remain in any conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab or vehicle for hire to permit such taxicab or vehicle to be used as a place for prostitution, lewdness, or assignation. 
(Code 1971, § 14-22) 
Sec. 10-44. - Obscene literature. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit any act declared to be unlawful under West Virginia code, section 61-8A-1-7, which section is hereby adopted in its entirety as fully as if set out at length herein, and the same shall constitute obscene literature provisions of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-29) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to suppress obscene literature, § 21(33). 
State Law reference- Obscene literature, distribution to minors, W. Va. Code, § 61-8A-11. 
Sec. 10-45. - "Peeping Toms." 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to peer or look inspectingly into any building for a lustful, lewd, wanton or lascivious purpose, or to annoy or molest the occupant thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 14-31) 
Sec. 10-46. - Weapons-Switchblade or automatic spring knives prohibited; sale of legal knives to minors under eighteen. 
(a)  No person shall possess, sell, exhibit for sale or carry on or about the person any knife with a blade more than four (4) inches in length, or equipped with a blade fitted with a mechanical device for automatic release of the blade, opening the knife and locking the knife in the open position, commonly known as a switchblade or automatic spring knife. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the sale to persons of eighteen (18) years of age or older of knives used for food preparation, hunting, skinning or scouting purposes; but it shall apply to such sales to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless, at the time of such sale, the minor shall be accompanied by one or both of such minor's parents, or by the minor's legal guardian. 
(Code 1971, § 25-1) 
Sec. 10-47. - Same-Carrying deadly weapon without license of other authorization; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Blackjack means a short bludgeon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or some other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact when a person or object is struck. The term "blackjack" shall include, but not be limited to, a billy, billy club, sand club, sandbag, or slapjack. 
(2)  Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force and, when so released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever, or other locking or catching device. 
(3)  Knife means an instrument, intended to be used or readily adaptable to be used as a weapon, consisting of a sharp-edged or sharp-pointed blade, usually made of steel, attached to a handle, which is capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing, or tearing wounds. The term "knife" shall include, but not be limited to, any dagger, dirk, poniard, or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half (31/2) inches in length, any switchblade knife or gravity knife, and any other instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing, or tearing wounds. A pocket knife with a blade three and one-half (31/2) inches or less in length, a hunting or fishing knife carried for hunting, fishing, sports, or other recreational uses, or a knife designed from use as a tool or household implement shall not be included within the term "knife" as defined herein, unless such knife is knowingly used or intended to be used to produce serious bodily injury or death. 
(4)  Switchblade knife means any knife having a spring-operated blade which opens automatically upon pressure being applied to a button, catch, or other releasing device in its handle. 
(5)  Nunchuka means a flailing instrument consisting of two (2) or more rigid parts, connected by a chain, cable, rope, or other non-rigid, flexible, or springy material, constructed in such a manner as to allow the rigid parts to swing freely, so that one rigid part may be used as a handle and the other rigid part may be used as the striking end. 
(6)  Metallic or false knuckles means a set of finger rings attached to a transverse piece, to be worn over the front of the hand for use as a weapon, and constructed in such a manner that, when striking another person with the fist or closed hand, considerable physical damage may be inflicted upon the person struck. The terms "metallic or false knuckles" shall include any such instrument, without reference to the metal or other substance or substances from which the metallic or false knuckles are made. 
(7)  Pistol means a short firearm having a chamber which is integral with the barrel, designed to be aimed and fired by the use of a single hand. 
(8)  Revolver means a short firearm having a cylinder of several chambers that are brought successively into line with the barrel to be discharged designed to be aimed and fired by the use of a single hand. 
(9)  Deadly weapon means an instrument which is designed to be used to produce serious bodily injury or death, or is readily adaptable to such use. The term "deadly weapon" shall include, but not be limited to, the instruments defined in subdivisions (1) through (8) of this section, or other deadly weapons of like or character which may be easily concealed on or about the person. 
(10)  Concealed means hidden from ordinary observation so as to prevent disclosure or recognition. A deadly weapon is concealed when it is carried on or about the person in such a manner that another person in the ordinary course of events would not be placed on notice that the deadly weapon was being carried. 
(11)  Firearm means any weapon which will expel a projectile by action of an explosion. 
(12)  Controlled substances shall have the same meaning as is ascribed to that term in West Virginia Code section 60A-1-101(d). 
(13)  Drug shall have the same meaning as is ascribed to that term in West Virginia Code section 60A-1-101(1). 
(b)  Any person who carries a concealed deadly weapon, without a state license or other lawful authorization, established under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and may be imprisoned in jail for not more than twelve (12) months. 
(c)  The licensure provisions set forth in this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person carrying a deadly weapon upon his own premises; nor shall anything herein prevent a person from carrying any firearm, unloaded, from the place of purchase to his or her home, residence, or place of business or to a place of repair and back to his or her home, residence, or place of business, nor shall anything herein prohibit a person from possessing a firearm while hunting in a lawful manner or while traveling from his or her home, residence, or place of business to a hunting site, and returning to his or her home, residence, or place of business. 
(2)  Any person who is a member of a properly organized target-shooting club authorized by law to obtain firearms by purchase or requisition from this state, or from the United States for the purpose of target practice, from carrying any pistol, as defined in this section, unloaded, from his home, residence, or place of business to a place of target practice, and from any such place of target practice back to his home, residence, or place of business, for using any such weapon at such place of target practice in training and improving his skill in the use of such weapons. 
(3)  Any law enforcement officer or law enforcement official as such are defined in section 30-29-1 of the West Virginia Code. 
(4)  Any employee of the West Virginia Department of Corrections duly appointed pursuant to the provisions of section 28-5-5 of the West Virginia Code while such employee is on duty. 
(5)  Any member of the Armed Forces of the United States or the militia of this state while such member is on duty. 
(6)  Any circuit judge, including any retired circuit judge designated senior status by the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, or a duly appointed investigator employed by a prosecuting attorney. 
(7)  Any resident of another state, who has been issued a license to carry a concealed weapon by that state or a political subdivision thereof, shall be exempt from the licensing requirements. Provided, that such state or political subdivision thereof shall likewise recognize and honor West Virginia licenses issued pursuant to West Virginia Code section 61-7-4. 
(Code 1971, § 25-2; Ord. of 8-26-97) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to apprehend and punish persons who, without state license, carry dangerous weapons, § 21(55). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 61-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-48. - Same-Sale or rental of weapons to minors under eighteen. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or sell any machine gun, high-powered rifle or any gun of similar kind or character, or revolver, pistol, dirk, bowie knife or other dangerous weapon of like kind or character, or any ammunition for any such weapon, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless at the time of such rental or sale such minor shall be accompanied by one or both of such minor's parents or by the minor's legal guardian. 
(Code 1971, § 25-3) 
Sec. 10-49. - Same-Discharge of firearms and other weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge within the city any cannon, gun, pistol, B-B gun, B-B pistol, air rifle, air pistol, slingshot or gravel shooter or any firearm, except in case of necessity or in the discharge of some public duty or at a military formation by order of the officer in command, or with the permission of the mayor or chief of police; provided, that nothing herein shall prohibit the firing or shooting of a B-B gun, B-B pistol, air rifle, air pistol, slingshot or gravel shooter by a person on such person's property, or on the property of another with the permission of the latter, so long as the stone, pellet or other missile projected by such device does not leave the property from which it is fired or shot and does not endanger the person or property of any other person. 
(Code 1971, § 25-4) 
Sec. 10-50. - Same-Use of firearms restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally, either with or without malice, to point or aim a firearm at or toward another person or to discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed, or to maim or injure a person by the discharge of a firearm so pointed or aimed. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the use of any firearm in self-defense or in any case of justifiable homicide or wounding or lawful use in line of official duty, nor shall it prohibit the mayor from authorizing the lawful use of firearms at special functions. 
(Code 1971, § 25-5) 
Sec. 10-51. - Same-Brandishing deadly weapons; threatening or causing breach of the peace; penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person armed with a firearm or other deadly weapon, whether licensed to carry the same or not, to carry, brandish, or use such weapon in a way or manner to cause, or threaten, a breach of the peace. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction therefor, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confined in the regional jail more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 61-7-11. 
Sec. 10-52. - False reports concerning bombs or other explosive devices. 
    Any person who shall impart or convey or cause to be imparted or conveyed any false information, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe such information to be false, concerning the presence of any bomb or other explosive device in, at, on, near, under, or against any dwelling house, structure, improvement, building, bridge, motor vehicle, vessel, boat, railroad car, airplane or other place, or concerning an attempt or alleged attempt being made or to be made to so place or explode any such bomb or other explosive device, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement in the county jail for not more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 61-6-17. 
Sec. 10-53. - Obscene, anonymous, harassing, repeated, and threatening telephone calls; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to harass or abuse another by means of telephone to: 
(1)  Make any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is obscene; or 
(2)  Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his identity and with intent to harass any person at the called number; or 
(3)  Make or cause the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or 
(4)  Make repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or 
(5)  Threaten to commit a crime against any person or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section. 
(c)  Any offense committed under this section may be deemed to have occurred at the place at which the telephone call was made, or the place at which the telephone called was received. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in jail not more than six (6) months, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 61-8-16. 
Sec. 10-54. - Sale or gift of cigarette, cigarette paper, pipe, cigar, snuff, or chewing tobacco to persons under eighteen; penalty. 
    No person, firm, or corporation may sell, give, or furnish, or cause to be sold, given, or furnished to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years: 
(1)  Any cigarette, cigarette paper, or any other paper prepared, manufactured, or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco or tobacco product; or 
(2)  Any cigar, pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco, or tobacco product, in any form. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of subsections (1) or (2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, and for each subsequent offense, not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 16-9A-2. 
Sec. 10-55. - Use of false identification, etc., by person under age; penalty. 
    Any person who exhibits or displays a false or erroneous birth certificate, draft card, registration card or certificate, license, or identification card or certificate of any kind or character, or who exhibits or displays any certificate, card, or license, of any kind or character not his own, for the purpose of purchasing or drinking beer or liquor or gaining admittance to any establishment, from which he or she would otherwise be barred by reason of age, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and in the discretion of the court, may be imprisoned in jail not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. of 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 16-8-27a. 
Sec. 10-56. - Possession of alcoholic liquor by any person under twenty-one; penalties; unlawful acts by persons. 
(a)  Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who purchases, consumes, sells, serves, or possesses alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or shall be incarcerated in the regional jail for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours, or both fined and imprisoned. 
    Nothing in this section shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age from serving in the lawful employment of a licensee which includes the sale and serving of alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer. 
    Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age from purchasing or possessing alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer when he or she is acting upon the request of, or under the direction and control of, any member of a state, federal, or local law enforcement agency or the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Administration while the agency is conducting an investigation or other activity relating to the enforcement of the alcohol beverage control statutes and the rules and regulations of the commissioner. 
(b)  Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who, for the purpose of purchasing alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer from a retail licensee, misrepresents his or her age, or who, for such purpose, presents or offers any written evidence of age which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own, or who illegally attempts to purchase alcoholic liquor or, non-intoxicating beer from a retail licensee, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned in the regional jail for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly buys for, gives to, or furnishes to anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) to whom he or she is not related by blood or marriage any alcoholic liquor or nonintoxicating beer from whatever source, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned in the regional jail for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(d)  No person, while on the premises of a retail outlet, may consume alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer or break the seal on any package or bottle of alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer. Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned in the regional jail for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(e)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
    Alcohol shall mean ethyl alcohol whatever its origin and shall include synthetic ethyl alcohol but not denatured alcohol. 
    Alcoholic liquor shall include alcohol, beer, wine, and spirits, and any liquid or solid capable of being used as a beverage, but shall not include non-intoxicating beer. 
    An agency shall mean a drugstore, grocery store, or general store designated by the commission as a retail distributor of alcoholic liquor for the West Virginia alcohol beverage control commissioner. 
    Beer shall mean any beverage obtained by the fermentation of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product or substitute, and containing more alcohol than that of non-intoxicating beer. 
    Commissioner or Commission shall mean the West Virginia alcohol beverage control commissioner. 
    Department shall mean the organization through which the commission exercises powers imposed upon it by this section. 
    Intoxicated shall mean having one's faculties impaired by alcohol or other drugs to the point where physical or mental control or both are markedly diminished. 
    Non-intoxicating beer shall mean any beverage, obtained by the fermentation of barley, malt, hops, or similar products or substitute and containing not more alcohol than that specified by section 11-16-2 of the West Virginia Code. 
    Original package shall mean any closed or sealed container or receptacle used for holding alcoholic liquor. 
    Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, corporation, or voluntary association. 
    Public place shall mean any place, building, or conveyance to which the public has, or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies, and corridors of hotels and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement: Provided, that the term "public place" shall not mean or include any of the above-named places or any portion or portions thereof which qualify and are licensed under the provisions of this section to sell alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises. 
    Sale shall mean any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means, for a consideration, and shall include all sales made by principal, proprietor, agent, or employee. 
    Selling shall include solicitation or receipt of orders; possession for sale; and possession with intent to sell. 
    Spirits shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation and mixed with potable water and other substances in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, cordials, and gin. 
    State liquor store shall mean a store established and operated by the commission under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the original package for consumption off the premises. 
    Wine shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural content of fruits, or other agricultural products, containing sugar. 
Secs. 10-57-10-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECURITY DEVICES 

Sec. 10-200. - Security requirements; exemptions. 
    Except as hereinafter specifically exempted, all existing and future buildings in the city used by any person for the purpose of conducting, managing, or carrying on any business, shall when not occupied by a watchman, maintenance personnel, or other authorized persons during the period that such building is closed to business, be so secured as to prevent unauthorized entry in accordance with specifications for physical security of exterior accessible openings as provided in sections 10-204 and 10-205; provided, that existing buildings used for residential purposes shall not be subject to this section. However, any multi-unit building hereafter constructed for this purpose shall be subject to the terms, modifications, requirements, and penalties of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 10-201. - Enforcement; right of entry. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article, and upon presentation of proper credentials, the chief of police or the chief's duly authorized representative may, with the consent of the occupant or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, enter at reasonable times, any building or premises used for business purposes for the purpose of inspecting the physical security of exterior accessible openings of such building or premises. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 10-202. - Responsibility for compliance. 
    Responsibility for compliance with the specifications set forth in sections 10-204 and 10-205 shall be as follows: 
(1)  As to buildings occupied by a business establishment which does not share the exterior openings of such building with any other business establishment, the person operating such business shall be responsible. 
(2)  As to buildings occupied by two (2) or more business establishments who share the same exterior openings of such building, the owner of said building, or the owner's agent having charge, care or control of such building, shall be responsible. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. II, § 3) 
Sec. 10-203. - Inspection; notice. 
    The chief of police shall inspect or cause to be inspected the accessible exterior openings of every building subject to the provisions of this article, and if the chief shall find accessible exterior openings in any such building which do not comply with the specifications set forth in sections 10-204 and 10-205, the chief shall give notice in writing to the person responsible, as designated in section 10-202, setting forth the deficiencies which are to be corrected, and the period of time within which such corrections shall be completed. Failure to comply with such notice within the period of time specified shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. II, § 4) 
Sec. 10-204. - Security measures-Locking devices. 
    All exterior openings of any building used for business purposes and subject to the provisions of this article and not otherwise protected by photoelectric, ultrasonic or other intrusion detection devices, approved by the chief of police, shall be secured as provided in this section. 
(A)  Front doors: All front doors of any such building or premises shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Tempered glass doors, wood and metal doors with tempered glass panel, solid wood or metal doors shall be secured as follows: 
(a)  A single door shall be equipped with either double cylinder dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by key, or with cylinder dead lock that unlocks from the outside by key and inside by turnpiece, handle or knob, or with dead locking latch having guarded bolt that unlocks from the outside by key and inside by turnpiece, handle or knob. 
(b)  On double doors the active leaf shall be equipped with a type of lock as prescribed for single doors above and the inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at head and foot. 
(2)  Doors with glass panels not of tempered glass and doors that have nontempered glass panels adjacent to the door frame shall be secured as follows: 
(a)  A single door shall be equipped with cylinder dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by a key. 
(b)  On double doors the active leaf shall be equipped with cylinder dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by a key and the inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at head and foot. 
(3)  Rolling overhead doors that are not controlled or locked by electric power operation shall be equipped on the inside with the following protective devices: 
(a)  Manually operated doors shall be provided with slide bolts on the bottom bar. 
(b)  Chain operated doors shall be provided with a cast iron keeper and pin for securing the hand chain. 
(c)  Crank operated doors shall be provided with a means for securing the operating shaft. 
(4)  A solid overhead, swinging, sliding, or accordion garage type door shall be secured with a cylinder lock, padlock, and/or metal slide bar, bolt, or crossbar on the inside when not otherwise controlled or locked by electric power operation. If padlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel shackle, with minimum four-pin tumbler operation. In the event that this type of door provides the only entrance to the front of the building, a cylinder lock or padlock may be used on the outside. 
(5)  Metal accordion grate or grill type doors shall be equipped with metal guide track at top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle and minimum four-pin tumbler operation. 
(6)  Outside hinges on all front doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged, or secured by a screw. 
(B)  Rear, side and basement doors: All accessible rear, side and basement doors of any such building or premises shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All doors of the types listed below shall comply with the requirements of subsection (A) of this section for front doors. 
(a)  Tempered glass doors, wood or metal doors with tempered glass panel. 
(b)  Metal doors. 
(c)  Rolling overhead doors. 
(d)  Solid overhead, swinging, sliding, or accordion garage type doors. 
(e)  Metal accordion grate or grill type doors. 
(2)  Doors with glass panels and doors that have glass panels adjacent to the door frame shall be secured as follows: 
(a)  The glass panel shall be covered with iron bars of at least one-half (1/2) inch round or one (1) inch by one-fourth (1/4) inch flat steel material spaced not more than five (5) inches apart, or, 
(b)  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch material of two (2) inch mesh. 
(c)  If the door or glass panel barrier is on the outside it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolt on the outside. 
(d)  If the remaining portion of a door panel exceeds eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches (excluding door frame), is of wood but not of solid core construction or is less than one and three-eighths (1 3/8 ) inches thick, said portion shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen (16) gauge sheet metal attached with screws. 
(3)  Wood doors not of solid core construction or with panels therein less than one and three-eighths (1 3/8 ) inches thick shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen (16) inch gauge steel attached with screws. 
(4)  Locking devices. 
(a)  A single door shall be equipped with either double cylinder dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by key with cylinder dead lock that unlocks from the outside by key and inside by turnpiece, handle or knob with dead locking latch having guarded bolt that unlocks from outside by key and inside by turnpiece, handle or knob or with approved slide bar bolt, crossbar, and/or padlock. If padlock is used it shall be of hardened steel shackle with minimum four-pin tumbler operation. 
(b)  On double doors the active leaf shall be equipped with a type of lock as prescribed for single doors above and the inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at head and foot. 
(5)  Outside hinges on all rear, side and basement doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged, or secured by a screw. 
(C)  Roof doors: All doors that exit onto the roof of any such building or premises shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Doors with glass panels and any glass panels that are adjacent to the door frame shall be protected as follows: 
(a)  The glass portion shall be covered with iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch material of no more than two (2) inch mesh securely fastened. 
(b)  If the door or glass panel barrier is on the outside it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolt on the outside. 
(c)  If the remaining portion of a door panel exceeds eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches (excluding door frame) and is of wood but not of solid core construction or is less than one and three-eighths (1 3/8 ) inches thick, said portion shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen (16) inch gauge sheet steel attached with screws. 
(2)  Wood doors not of solid core construction or with panels therein less than one and three-eighths (1 3/8 ) inches thick shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen (16) gauge sheet steel attached with screws. 
(3)  All roof doors shall be provided with a lock that will permit the door to be opened from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. 
(4)  Outside hinges on all roof doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(D)  Glass windows: The chief of police shall, with the advice and assistance of the chief of the fire department, determine the extent of protection, if any, that will be required for accessible glass windows at the side or rear of such building. Glass windows shall be deemed accessible if less than eighteen (18) feet above ground. In making such determination the chief of police shall consider whether the side of the building fronts on a street, the area, the location, and the contents thereof, and whether such openings are protected by intrusion detection devices. 
(1)  The chief of police may require side and rear glass windows with a pane exceeding ninety-six (96) square inches in area with its smallest dimension exceeding six (6) inches to be protected in the following manner: 
(a)  Inside or outside iron bars of at least one-half (1/2) inch round or one (1) inch by one-fourth (1/4) inch flat steel material spaced not more than five (5) inches apart, securely fastened; or 
(b)  Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch material of two (2) inch mesh securely fastened. If such barrier is on the outside it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolt on the outside. 
(2)  If the side or rear window is of the type that can be opened it shall, where applicable, be secured on the inside with either a glide bar, bolt, crossbar and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle, and minimum four-pin tumbler operation. 
(3)  Outside hinges on all side and rear glass windows shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(E)  Accessible transoms: All exterior transoms exceeding eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches on the side and rear of any such building or premises shall be protected by either of the following: 
(1)  Outside iron bars of at least one-half (1/2) inch round or one (1) inch by one-fourth (1/4) inch flat steel material spaced no more than five (5) inches apart; or 
(2)  Outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch material but not more than two (2) inch mesh. Such barrier shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
(F)  Roof openings: All exterior openings on the roof of any such building or premises shall be protected as follows: 
(1)  Glass skylights shall be provided with: 
(a)  Iron bars of at least one-half (1/2) inch round or one (1) inch by one-fourth (1/4) inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or 
(b)  A steel grill of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch material of two (2) inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened. 
(2)  Hatchway openings shall be secured as follows: 
(a)  If the hatchway is of wooden material it shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen (16) gauge sheet steel attached with screws; 
(b)  The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts. The use of crossbar or padlock is unauthorized unless approved by the chief of the fire department; 
(c)  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(3)  Air duct or air vent openings exceeding eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches shall be secured by covering the same with either of the following: 
(a)  Iron bars of at least one-half (1/2) inch round or one (1) inch by one-fourth (1/4) inch flat steel material spaced no more than five (5) inches apart and securely fastened; or 
(b)  A steel grill of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch material of two (2) inch mesh and securely fastened. If the barrier is on the outside it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. II, § 5) 
Sec. 10-205. - Same-Intrusion detection devices. 
(a)  If it is determined by the chief of police, or the chief's duly appointed representative, that the security measures and locking devices prescribed in section 10-204 do not adequately secure the building he may require the installation and maintenance of proper security devices. In making such determination, the chief shall consider whether: 
(1)  The business establishment has experienced a high incidence of burglary in the past; or 
(2)  The type of merchandise and its inventory value require added security protection. 
(b)  If the chief determines that such installation is required, notice in writing shall be given to the responsible person designated in section 10-202 specifying the installation to be made and the period of time within which such installation shall be completed. Unless an appeal is filed in accordance with section 10-206, failure to comply with such notice within the time specified shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. II, § 6) 
Sec. 10-206. - Appeal from intrusion detection device requirements; punishment for violation. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice from the chief of police requiring the installation and maintenance of intrusion detection devices, the person responsible for compliance therewith may appeal in writing to the recorder-treasurer. In filing the appeal, the appellant shall set forth the specific grounds wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the chief of police, or wherein the issuance of said written notice was not supported by proper evidence. Upon receipt of such appeal, the recorder-treasurer shall in such officer's discretion hear both sides of the contested issue and any evidence of the dispute. The recorder-treasurer may then affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the chief of police. If said decision is affirmed or modified by the recorder-treasurer, the appellant shall be given written notice thereof by the chief of police setting forth the installation to be made and the period of time within which the same shall be completed. In no event shall the period be less than that originally granted appellant. Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. II, § 7) 
Secs. 10-207-10-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELEPHONIC ALARM SYSTEM 

Sec. 10-300. - Definition. 
    "Telephonic alarm system" shall mean any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to operate automatically through the use of public telephone facilities to transmit a signal, message or warning to another location. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 10-301. - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to any city police department or fire department telephone line, without first obtaining a permit as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. III, § 2) 
Sec. 10-302. - Same-Application; filing, fee. 
(a)  Applications for permits to install, maintain or operate a telephonic alarm system which is intended to automatically transmit a signal, message or warning to any city police department or fire department telephone line shall be filed with the chief of the concerned department on forms supplied by the city, together with an application fee of eighty dollars ($80.00). Said application shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of both the installer of the system and the person or business on whose premises the system will be installed, as well as a description of the system and the location where it is proposed to be installed. 
(b)  The chief of the concerned department shall approve such application if such chief finds that: 
(1)  The use of said alarm system to transmit a signal, message or warning to a designated city police department or fire department telephone line will not interfere with the orderly conduct of city business. 
(2)  The person installing the system maintains an adequate service organization to repair, maintain and otherwise service telephonic alarm systems sold or leased by such person. 
(c)  The police chief or fire chief may impose reasonable conditions on the exercise of said permit. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. III, § 3) 
Sec. 10-303. - Same-Annual fees. 
    Each permit holder whose facility is located within the corporate limits of the city shall pay to the city on or before July first of each year, a fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to reimburse the city for its cost incurred, and each permit holder whose facility is located outside the corporate limits shall pay to the city on or before July first of each year a fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to reimburse the city for its costs incurred. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. III, § 7) 
Sec. 10-304. - Same-Revocation. 
    The chief of the concerned department may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, after giving written notice to the permit holder and an opportunity for the permit holder to be heard, if such chief determines that the telephonic alarm system installed pursuant to said permit has been installed, maintained or operated in violation of the provisions of this article, or of any term or condition of said permit, or for failure to pay the annual service fee specified in section 10-303. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. III, § 6) 
Sec. 10-305. - Right of inspection. 
    The chief of the concerned department, either police or fire, shall have the right to inspect any telephonic alarm system on the premises where it is intended to function prior to issuance of any permit for its operation and may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any time after issuance of a permit to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. III, § 4) 
Sec. 10-306. - Restricted numbers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to any city police department or fire department telephone line, except to such telephone number or numbers as designated by the permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, Art. III, § 5) 
Secs. 10-307-10-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HUMAN RIGHTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- West Virginia Human Rights Act, W. Va. Code, § 5-11-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-400. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    Age: Persons over forty (40) years of age. 
    Discriminate: To exclude from or fail to refuse to extend to a person equal opportunities because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, or blindness or other handicap; the term "discriminate" includes to separate or segregate. 
    Employer: Any person, as defined in section 1-2, employing twelve (12) or more persons within the city; provided, that such term shall not be taken, understood or construed to include a private club. The term "employer" shall not include the state, the county or the city, or any political or civil subdivisions thereof. 
    Employment agency: Any person undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure, recruit, refer, or place employees. A newspaper engaged in the activity of advertising in the normal course of its business shall not be deemed to be an employment agency. 
    Familial status: "Familial status" means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years) being domiciled with: 
(a)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(b)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protection afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. Nothing in this definition restricts advertisements of dwelling which are intended and operated for occupancy by older persons and which constitutes housing for older persons. 
    Handicap: Any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of the individual's major life activities. For the purposes of this article, a person shall be considered to be blind only if such person's central visual acuity does not exceed twenty-two hundred (2200) in the better eye with correcting lenses, or if such person's visual acuity is greater than twenty-two hundred (2200) but is occasioned by a limitation in the field of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than twenty (20) degrees. 
    Housing accommodations: Any building or portion thereof which is used or intended for use as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. Nothing contained in this definition or this article shall apply to the rental of a room or rooms in a rooming house occupied by the owner as a place of residence and containing no more than four (4) rented rooms, or rooms to be rented. 
    Owner: The owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager, agents, or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation or real property within the state. 
    Place of public accommodations: Any establishment or person, as defined herein, including the city, or any political or civil subdivision thereof, which offers its services, goods, facilities, or accommodations to the general public, but shall not include any accommodations which are in their nature private. 
    Purchaser: Any occupant, prospective occupant, lessee, prospective lessee, renter, prospective renter, buyer, or prospective buyer. 
    Real estate broker: Any person who, for a fee, commission, or other valuable consideration, or by reason of a promise or reasonable expectation thereof, lists for sale, sells, exchanges, buys or rents, or offers or attempts to negotiate a sale, exchange, purchase, or rental of real estate or any interest therein, or collects or offers or attempts to collect rent for the use of real estate or solicits for prospective purchasers or assists or directs in the procuring of prospects or the negotiation or closing of any transaction which does or is contemplated to result in the sale, exchange, leasing, renting, or auctioning of any real estate, or negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by mortgage or other encumbrance upon transfer of any real estate for others, or any person who, for pecuniary gain or expectation of pecuniary gain, conducts a public or private competitive sale of lands or any interest in lands. In the sale of lots, the term "real estate broker" shall also include any person employed by or on behalf of the owners of lots or other parcels of real estate, at a stated salary, or upon a commission, or upon a salary and commission or otherwise, to sell such real estate, or any parts thereof, in lots or other parcels, and who shall sell or exchange, or offer or attempt or agree to negotiate the sale or exchange of any such lot or parcel of real estate. A newspaper engaged in the activity of advertising in the normal course of its business shall not be deemed to be a real estate broker. 
    Real estate salesman: Any person who, for compensation, valuable consideration or commission, or other thing of value, or by reason of a promise or reasonable expectation thereof, is employed by and operates under the supervision of a real estate broker to sell, buy, or offer to buy or negotiate the purchase, sale or exchange of real estate, offers or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance upon or transfer of real estate for others, or to collect rents for the use of real estate, or to solicit for prospective purchasers or lessees of real estate, or who is employed by a licensed real estate broker to sell or offer to sell lots or other parcels of real estate, at a stated salary, or upon a commission, or upon a salary and commission, or otherwise to sell real estate, or any parts thereof, in lots or other parcels. 
    Rooming houses: A house or building where there are one or more bedrooms which the proprietor can spare for the purpose of giving lodgings to such persons as such proprietor chooses to receive. (Code 1971, § 10-1; Ord. of 1-24-84; Ord. of 9-12-89) 
Sec. 10-401. - Declaration of public policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the public safety, public health and general welfare, for the maintenance of business and good government and for the promotion of the city's trade, commerce and manufacturing, to provide all of its citizens equal opportunity for employment, equal access to places of public accommodations and equal opportunity in the sale, purchase, lease, rental, and financing of housing accommodations or real property. Equal opportunity in the areas of employment, public accommodations, housing accommodations, and real property is hereby declared to be a human right or civil right of all persons without regard to race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap, or familial status. 
(b)  The denial of these rights to properly qualified persons by reason of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap, or familial status is contrary to the principles of freedom and equal opportunity and is destructive to a free and democratic society. 
(Code 1971, § 10-2; Ord. of 9-12-89) 
State Law reference- Public policy of the state, W. Va. Code, § 5-11-2. 
Sec. 10-402. - Construction of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its objectives and purposes. 
(b)  This article shall in no way be construed to deny any person such person's rights as they exist at common law or under the laws of the state for redress or damages, in the event of wilful and malicious wrongs or harassment committed upon such person. 
(Code 1971, § 10-3) 
Sec. 10-403. - Conflicts of interpretation of law. 
    In the event of a conflict between the interpretation of a provision of this chapter and the interpretation of a similar provision contained in the Code of West Virginia, Chapter 5, Article 11, or any other state law, or in any similar federal statute, the interpretation of the provision of the state law or federal statute shall apply to this article. 
(Code 1971, § 10-4) 
Sec. 10-404. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the city human rights commission, its members, agents or agencies in the performance of duties pursuant to this article, or to wilfully violate a final order of the city human rights commission, but seeking judicial review of an order shall not be deemed to be such wilful conduct. 
(b)  Any person who shall wilfully resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the city human rights commission, its members, agents or agencies in the performance of duties pursuant to this article, or shall wilfully violate a final order of the city human rights commission in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1971, § 10-5) 
Secs. 10-405-10-424. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 10-425. - Established; title; powers and objectives generally. 
    The Beckley Human Rights Commission is hereby established in the city government. The commission shall have the powers and authority and shall perform the functions and services as in this article prescribed and otherwise provided by law. The commission shall encourage and endeavor to bring about mutual understanding and respect among all racial, religious and ethnic groups within the city and shall strive to promote fair and equal employment practices, and to eliminate all discrimination in employment, places of public accommodations and in the sale, purchase, lease, rental or financing of housing and other real property by virtue of race, religion, color, national origin or ancestry. 
(Code 1971, § 10-6) 
Sec. 10-426. - Composition; appointment, qualifications, term of office and compensation of members; vacancies. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of nine (9) members, all residents and citizens of the city and broadly representative of the several racial, religious, political and ethnic groups residing within the city, at least one (1) of whom shall be a licensed practicing attorney, and all members shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the council. Not more than five (5) members of the commission shall be members of the same political party. 
(b)  Each year, prior to the first day of July, three (3) members of the commission shall be appointed to terms of three (3) years commencing on the first day of July of the year of their appointments, so that the term of three (3) members of the commission will expire on the thirtieth day of June of each year. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term thereof. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(c)  No member of the commission shall receive any salary or compensation for such member's services. 
(Code 1971, § 10-7) 
Sec. 10-427. - Office; officers; meetings; budget. 
(a)  Annually, as soon as practical after the first day of July, the commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership and such other officers as may be found necessary and proper for its effective organization. 
(b)  The commission shall equip and maintain its offices at the city hall or other accommodation as allowed by council and shall hold its annual organizational meeting there. The commission may hold other meetings at such times and places within the city as may be found necessary. Any five (5) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Minutes of its meetings shall be maintained. 
(c)  The commission shall prepare and submit a proposed annual budget to the council for approval. 
(Code 1971, § 10-8) 
Sec. 10-428. - Executive director and other personnel. 
    The mayor may, by and with the advice and consent of the council, appoint an executive director who shall serve at the mayor's will and pleasure. The executive director shall serve as secretary of the commission. The director shall be selected with particular reference to such director's training, experience and qualifications for the position and shall be paid an annual salary, payable in bi-monthly installments, from any appropriations made therefor. The commission, upon recommendation of the executive director, may employ such personnel as may be necessary for the effective and orderly performance of the functions and services of the commission. 
(Code 1971, § 10-9) 
Sec. 10-429. - Objectives; powers, functions, duties and services. 
    The commission is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(1)  To cooperate and work with federal, state and local government officers, units, activities and agencies in the promotion and attainment of more harmonious understanding and greater equality of rights between and among all racial, religious and ethnic groups in this city. 
(2)  To enlist the cooperation of racial, religious, political and ethnic units, community and civic organizations, industrial and labor organizations, employers and other identifiable groups of the city in programs and campaigns devoted to the advancement of tolerance, understanding and the equal protection of the laws of all groups and peoples. 
(3)  To receive, investigate and pass upon complaints alleging discrimination in employment or places of public accommodations, because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap, or familial status, and complaints alleging discrimination in the sale, purchase, lease, rental, and financing of housing accommodations or real property because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, blindness or other handicap, or familial status, and to initiate its own consideration of any situations, circumstances, or problems, including therein any racial, religious, or ethnic group tensions, prejudice, disorder or discrimination reported or existing within the state relating to employment, places of public accommodations, housing accommodations, and real property. 
(4)  To hold and conduct public and private hearings on complaints, matters and questions before the commission and, in connection therewith, relating to discrimination in employment or places of public accommodations, housing accommodations, or real property, and during the investigation of any formal complaint before the commission relating to employment, places of public accommodations or real property, to: 
(a)  Issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum upon the concurrence of at least three (3) members of the commission, administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath, and make reimbursement for travel and other reasonable and necessary expenses in connection with such attendance. 
(b)  Furnish copies of public hearing records to parties involved therein upon their payment of the reasonable costs thereof to the commission. 
(c)  Delegate to a hearing committee of three (3) to five (5) commission members appointed by the chairman, the power and authority to hold and conduct the hearings, as herein provided, but all decisions and actions growing out of or upon any such hearings shall be reserved for determination by the commission. 
(d)  To enter into conciliation agreements and consent orders. 
(e)  To apply to the circuit court of the county where the respondent resides or transacts business for enforcement of any conciliation agreement or consent order by seeking specific performance of such agreement or consent order. 
(f)  To issue cease and desist orders against any person found, after a public hearing, to have violated the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations of the commission. 
(g)  To apply to the circuit court for an order enforcing any lawful cease and desist order issued by the commission. 
(5)  To recommend to the mayor and council policies, procedures, practices, and legislation in matters and questions affecting human rights. 
(6)  To delegate to its executive director such powers, duties and functions as may be necessary and expedient in carrying out objectives and purposes of this article. 
(7)  To prepare a written report on its work, function and services for each year, ending on the thirtieth day of June, and to deliver copies thereof to the mayor on or before the first day of September next thereafter. 
(8)  To do all other acts necessary and proper to carry out and accomplish effectively the objects, functions and services contemplated by the provisions of this article, including the promulgation of rules and regulations implementing the powers and authority hereby vested in the commission. 
(9)  To create such advisory agencies and conciliation councils, local, regional or statewide, as in its judgment will aid in effectuating the purposes of this article; to study the problem of discrimination in all or specific fields or instances of discrimination because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap, or familial status; to foster, through community effort or otherwise, good will, cooperation, and conciliation among the groups and elements of the population of this state; and to make recommendations to the commission for the development of policies and procedures, and for programs of formal and informal education, which the commission may recommend to the appropriate state agency. Such advisory agencies and conciliation councils shall be composed of representative citizens serving without pay. The commission may itself make the studies and perform the acts authorized by this subdivision. It may, by voluntary conferences with parties in interest, endeavor by conciliation and persuasion to eliminate discrimination in all the stated fields and to foster good will and cooperation among all elements of the population of the state. 
(10)  To accept contributions from any person to assist in the effectuation of the purposes of this section, and to seek and enlist the cooperation of private, charitable, religious, labor, civic, and benevolent organizations for the purposes of this section. 
(11)  To issue such publications and such results of investigations and research as in its judgment will tend to promote good will and minimize or eliminate discrimination; provided, that the identity of the parties shall not be disclosed. 
(Code 1971, § 10-10; Ord. of 9-12-89) 
Sec. 10-430. - City officers, departments and agencies to assist; legal services. 
    The commission may call upon other officers, departments and agencies of the city government to assist in its hearings, programs and projects. The city solicitor shall render legal services to the commission upon request made by the commission or by the chairman or the executive director thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 10-11) 
Secs. 10-431-10-449. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES 

Sec. 10-450. - Enumeration. 
    It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification, or except where based upon applicable security regulations established by the United States, the state or this city, or any agency or political subdivision thereof: 
(1)  For any employer, or such employer's agent or employees, to discriminate against an individual with respect to compensation, hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment if the individual is able and competent to perform the services required, even if such individual is blind or otherwise handicapped; provided, that it shall not be unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer to observe the provisions of any bona fide pension, retirement, group or employee insurance, or welfare benefit plan or system not adopted as a subterfuge to evade the provisions of this subsection. 
(2)  For any employer, employment agency, or labor organization, or the agent or employees thereof, prior to the employment or admission to membership, to: 
(a)  Elicit any information or make or keep a record of or use any form of application or application blank containing questions or entries concerning the race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age or handicap, of any applicant for employment or membership; 
(b)  Print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment or membership indicating any preference, limitations, specification, or discrimination based upon race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap; or 
(c)  Deny or limit, through a quota system, employment or membership because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap. 
(3)  For any labor organization because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap, of any individual, to deny full and equal membership rights to any individual or otherwise discriminate against such individuals with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment or any other matter directly or indirectly related to employment. 
(4)  For any employer, labor organization, employment agency, or any joint labor-management committee controlling apprentice training programs to: 
(a)  Select individuals for an apprentice training program registered with the city on any basis other than their qualifications as determined by objective criteria which permit review; 
(b)  Discriminate against any individual with respect to such individual's right to be admitted to or participate in a guidance program, an apprenticeship training program, on-the-job training program, or other occupational training or retraining program; 
(c)  Discriminate against any individual in such individual's pursuit of such programs or to discriminate against such a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of such program; or 
(d)  Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for such programs or to make any inquiry in connection with such program which expresses, directly or indirectly, discrimination or any intent to discriminate, unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification. 
(5)  For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly, refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual because of such individual's race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap. 
(6)  For any reason being the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent, or employee of any place of public accommodations, to: 
(a)  Refuse, withhold from or deny to any individual because of such individual's race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap, or familial status, either directly or indirectly, any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges, or services of such place of public accommodation; 
(b)  Publish, circulate, issue, display, post, or mail, either directly or indirectly, any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement to the effect that any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges, or services of any such place shall be refused, withheld from, or denied to any individual on account of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, blindness or other handicap, or familial status or that the patronage or custom thereat of any individual, belonging to or purporting to be of any particular race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, or age, or who is blind or handicapped, is unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable, undesired, or not solicited. 
(7)  For the owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or other person having the right of ownership or possession of, or the right to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease any housing accommodations or real property or part or portion thereof, or any agent, or employee of any of them; or for any real estate broker, real estate salesman, or employee or agent thereof to: 
(a)  Refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign, or sublease, or otherwise to deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons any housing accommodations or real property, or part or portion thereof, because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, blindness or other handicap, or familial status of such person or group of persons; provided, that this provision shall not require any person named herein to rent, lease, assign, or sublease any housing accommodations or real property, or any portion thereof, to both sexes where the facilities of such housing accommodations or real property, or any portion thereof, are suitable for only one sex; 
(b)  Discriminate against any person or group of persons because of the race, sex, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, blindness or other handicap, or familial status of such person or group of persons in terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodations or real property, or part or portion thereof, or in the furnishing of facilities or service in connection therewith; 
(c)  Print, publish, circulate, issue, display, post, or mail, or cause to be printed, published, circulated, issued, displayed, posted, or mailed any statement, advertisement, publication, or sign, or to use any form of application for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment, or sublease of any housing accommodations or real property, or part or portion thereof, or to make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental, lease, assignment, or sublease of any housing accommodations or real property, or part or portion thereof, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any discrimination as to race, sex, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, blindness or other handicap, or familial status, or any intent to make any such discrimination; and the production of any statement, advertisement, publicity, sign, form of application, record, or inquiry purporting to be made by any such person shall be prima facie evidence in any action that the same was authorized by such person; provided, that with respect to sex discrimination, this provision shall not apply to any person named herein whose housing accommodations or real property, or any portion thereof, have facilities which are suitable for only one sex; 
(d)  Solely for purposes of familial status, nothing in subsection (7) (other than paragraph (7)(c)) of this section shall apply to: 
1.  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time; provided, however, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time; and provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from application of this subchapter only if such house is sold or rented (i) without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person and (ii) without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of paragraph (c), subsection (7) of this section; but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
2.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence; 
(e)  For the purposes of paragraph (7)(d) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
1.  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
2.  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
3.  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families; 
(f)  1.  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. Nor does any provision in this article regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
2.  As used in this section "housing for older persons" means housing: 
a.  Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program); or 
b.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or 
c.  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the commission shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors: 
(i)  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or if the provision of such facilities and services is not practical, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; and 
(ii)  That at least eighty (80) percent of the units are occupied by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and 
(iii)  The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
3.  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
a.  Persons residing in such housing as of July 1, 1989, who do not meet the age requirements of subparagraphs b. or c., paragraph 2., of this subsection (7)f.; provided, that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subparagraph b. or c., paragraph 2., of this subsection (7)f.; or 
b.  Unoccupied units: Provided, that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subparagraphs b. or c., paragraph 2., of this subsection (7)f. 
(8)  For any person or financial institution or lender to whom application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of any housing accommodations or real property or portion thereof or any agent or employee thereof to: 
(a)  Discriminate against any person or group of persons because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, blindness, or other handicap, or familial status, of such person or group of persons or of the prospective occupants or tenants of such housing accommodations or real property, or part or portion thereof, in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the fixing of the rates, terms, conditions, or provisions of any such financial assistance or in the extension of services in connection therewith; 
(b)  Use any form of application for such financial assistance or to make any record of inquiry in connection with applications for such financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any discrimination as to race, sex, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, blindness or other handicap, or familial status, or any intent to make any such discrimination. 
(9)  For any person, employer, employment agency, labor organization, owner, real estate broker, real estate salesman, or financial institution, or the agents or employees of any of them, to: 
(a)  Engage in any form of threats or reprisals, or to engage in, or hire, or conspire with others to commit acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to harass, degrade, embarrass, or cause physical harm or economic loss, or to aid, incite, compel, or coerce any person to engage in any of the unlawful discriminatory practices defined in this article; 
(b)  Willfully obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article, or to resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with the commission of any of its members or representatives in the performance of duty under this article; 
(c)  Engage in any form of reprisal or otherwise discriminate against any person because such person has opposed any practices or acts forbidden under this article or because such person has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding under this article; or 
(d)  For profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent or to not sell or rent any housing accommodations or real property by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons who are blind or otherwise handicapped or who are of a particular age, race, sex, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, or familial status; provided, that for the purposes of this article, it shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, employer or owner to refuse to make any unreasonable capital expenditure to accommodate the physical or mental impairment of any handicapped person. 
(Code 1971, § 10-12; Ord. of 11-22-83; Ord. of 9-12-89) 
Secs. 10-451-10-474. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REMEDIAL PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-475. - Exclusiveness of remedy. 
(a)  The procedure provided in this division shall, when invoked, be exclusive and the final determination therein shall exclude any other action, civil or criminal, based on the same grievance of the complainant concerned. If such complainant institutes any action based on such grievance without resorting to the procedure provided in this article, such complainant may not subsequently resort to the procedure herein. 
(b)  If the complainant has submitted the same or similar allegations of discrimination to a disinterested third party arbitrator, through an employee grievance procedure, whether required by a collective bargaining agreement or otherwise, then the procedure provided in this chapter shall not be available to the complainant. 
(Code 1971, § 10-13; Ord. of 9-10-85) 
Sec. 10-476. - Who may file complaint against whom; verification and contents of complaint; restrictions imposed during period of conciliation. 
(a)  Any individual claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful discriminatory practice shall make, sign and file with the commission a verified complaint, which shall state the name and address of the person, employer, labor organization, owner or real estate broker or agency, real estate salesman, financial institution or lender, or employment agency alleged to have committed the unlawful discriminatory practice complained of, and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be required by the commission's rules and regulations. The commission, upon its own initiative, or the mayor or the city solicitor, may in like manner make, sign and file such complaint. 
(b)  Any employer whose employees, or some of them, hinder or threaten to hinder compliance with the provisions of this article shall file with the commission a verified complaint, asking for assistance by conciliation or other remedial action, and no hearings, orders or other actions shall be taken, held or made by the commission against such employer. 
(c)  Any complaint filed pursuant to this article must be filed within ninety (90) days after the alleged act of discrimination. 
(Code 1971, § 10-14) 
Sec. 10-477. - Investigation of complaint by commission. 
    After the filing of any complaint, or whenever there is reason to believe that an unlawful discriminatory practice has been committed, the commission shall make a prompt investigation in connection therewith. 
(Code 1971, § 10-15) 
Sec. 10-478. - Opportunity for complainant to show cause; endeavors by commission to eliminate discriminatory practices; confidential nature of endeavors of commission. 
(a)  If it shall be determined by the commission after investigation of a complaint that no probable cause exists for substantiating the allegations of the complaint, the commission shall, within ten (10) days from such determination, cause to be issued and served upon the complainant written notice of such determination, and the complainant or complainant's attorney may, within ten (10) days after such service, file with the commission a written request for a meeting with the commission to show probable cause for substantiating the allegations of the complaint. 
(b)  If it shall be determined after such investigation or meeting that probable cause exists for substantiating the allegations of the complaint, the commission shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful discriminatory practices complained of by conference, conciliation and persuasion. 
(c)  The members of the commission and its staff shall not disclose what has transpired in the course of such endeavors; provided, that the commission may publish the facts in the case of any complaint which has been dismissed, and the terms of the conciliation when the complaint has been adjusted without disclosing the identity of the parties involved. 
(Code 1971, § 10-16) 
Sec. 10-479. - When copy of complaint to be served on respondent; notice of hearing on complaint. 
    In the case of failure so to eliminate such practice or in advance thereof, if, in the judgment of the commission circumstances so warrant, the commission shall cause to be issued and served written notice together with a copy of such complaint as the same may have been amended, in the manner provided by law for the service of summons in civil actions, requiring the person, employer, labor organization, employment agency, owner, real estate broker or agency, real estate salesman, financial institution or lender named in such complaint, hereinafter referred to as respondent, to answer the charges of such complaint at a hearing before the hearing committee in the city at a time and place to be specified in such notice; provided, that such written notice be served at least thirty (30) days prior to the time set for the hearing. 
(Code 1971, § 10-17) 
Sec. 10-480. - Hearing on complaint; rights of parties; burden of proof; rules of procedure. 
    The case in support of the complaint shall be presented before the hearing committee by the complainant or complainant's attorney or the executive director of the commission, and in every instance the complainant shall be present in person and shall have the burden of proving such complainant's case. The respondent may file a written verified answer to the complaint and appear at such hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, and submit testimony and evidence. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all of the pertinent provisions of Article 5, Chapter 29A the Code of West Virginia shall apply to and govern the hearing and the administrative procedure in connection with and following such hearing with like effect as if the provisions of such Article 5, Chapter 29A were set forth in full in this section. 
(Code 1971, § 10-18) 
Sec. 10-481. - Finding against respondent; issuance and provisions of cease and desist order; findings of fact. 
    If, after such hearing and consideration of all of the testimony, evidence and record in the case, the hearing committee shall find by a preponderance of the evidence that a respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful discriminatory practice as defined in this article, the hearing committee shall issue and cause to be served on such respondent an order to cease and desist from such unlawful discriminatory practice and to take such affirmative action, including, but not limited to, hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of employees, with or without back pay, admission or restoration to membership in any respondent labor organization or the admission to full and equal enjoyment of the services, goods, facilities or accommodations offered by any respondent place of public accommodations and the sale, purchase, lease, rental or financial assistance to any complainant otherwise qualified for the housing accommodation or real property denied in violation of this article, as, in the judgment of the hearing committee, will effectuate the purposes of this article and including a requirement for report of the manner of compliance. Such order shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law as specified in section 29A-5-3 of the Code of West Virginia. 
(Code 1971, § 10-19) 
Sec. 10-482. - Commission action of finding in favor of respondent. 
    If, after such hearing and consideration of all of the testimony, evidence and record in the case, the hearing committee shall find that a respondent has not engaged in such unlawful discriminatory practice, the hearing committee shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law as aforesaid and shall issue and cause to be served on the complainant an order dismissing the complaint as to such respondent. 
(Code 1971, § 10-20) 
Sec. 10-483. - To whom copies of orders shall be provided; manner of enforcement of orders. 
    A copy of its order shall be delivered in all cases by the hearing committee to the complainant, to the respondent, to the city solicitor and to such other public officers as the hearing committee may deem proper. Any such order shall not be enforceable except as provided in section 10-485. 
(Code 1971, § 10-21) 
Sec. 10-484. - Appeals from cease and desist orders. 
    Any person against whom a cease and desist order has been served by the hearing committee shall have a full appeal and complete right of review and a hearing de novo as a matter of right by the circuit court; provided, that, except as to the hearing de novo, any provision of Chapter 29A of the Code of West Virginia shall supersede this provision in the event of any conflict therewith. 
(Code 1971, § 10-22) 
Sec. 10-485. - Enforcement of cease and desist orders. 
(a)  In the event any person shall fail to obey a lawful cease and desist order of the hearing committee, the commission may seek an order of the circuit court for its enforcement, in a proceeding as provided in this section. Such proceeding shall be brought in the circuit court of the county wherein any person required in the order to cease and desist from an unlawful discriminatory practice or to take other affirmative action resides or transacts business. Such proceeding shall be initiated by the filing of a petition in such court, together with a written transcript of the entire record of the hearing before the commission. Notice of the filing of such petition, together with a copy thereof shall be served upon respondent in the manner provided by law for the service of summons in civil actions. No hearing shall be held upon such petition within twenty (20) days of the date of service thereof on the respondent. 
(b)  The court may grant such temporary relief or restraining order as it deems just and proper and shall make and enter upon the pleadings, testimony and proceedings set forth in such transcript an order enforcing, modifying and enforcing as so modified or setting aside in whole or in part the order of the commission. All such proceedings shall be heard and determined by the court. The jurisdiction of the circuit court shall be final and subject to review by the supreme court of appeals. 
(Code 1971, § 10-23) 
Secs. 10-486-10-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC NUISANCE 

Sec. 10-500. - Drug and gang houses, houses of prostitution and other disorderly houses. 
(a)  Any premises used for prostitution; illegal gambling; illegal possession, storage, or delivery of or trafficking in controlled substances, or other illegal drug activity is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; provided that no public nuisance or violation of this section shall be deemed to exist unless: 
(1)  The property is used for two (2) or more such offenses or incidents within any twelve-month period; or 
(2)  The offense for which the property is used is punishable by imprisonment for one (1) year or more. 
(b)  Any person who owns, manages or controls any premises and who: 
(1)  Encourages or permits an illegal activity described in subsection (a) to occur or continue on such premises; or 
(2)  Fails to implement reasonable and warranted abatement measures identified in the notice issued pursuant to section 10-501, or subsequently agreed to, or other abatement measures which successfully abate the nuisance within the thirty-day period following the notice, or within any other agreed upon period, shall be subject to a fine according to the schedule set forth in section 10-502. 
(Ord. of 9-26-17) 
Sec. 10-501. - Order of abatement. 
(a)  The chief of police, city code enforcement officer, or other authorized representative of the city may bring an action to abate a public nuisance described by this section in Beckley Municipal Court. 
(b)  The chief of police, city code enforcement officer, or other authorized representative of the city shall issue an order of abatement upon a finding of liability under this section. 
(c)  The order of abatement shall require the defendant to take measures reasonably calculated to prevent the recurrence of the illegal activity. 
(d)  The order of abatement may also authorize the issuance of search warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been abated or whether the order of the court has been obeyed. 
(Ord. of 9-26-17) 
Sec. 10-502. - Penalty. 
(a)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(1)  No person shall be found in violation of section 10-500(b)(2) unless the city proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the abatement measures were reasonable and warranted, and that the defendant knowingly failed to implement them. 
(2)  A person may be found in violation of subsections 10-500(b)(1) or (b)(2) regardless of whether an order or abatement is issued under section 10-501 or in violation of section 10-500(b)(1) regardless of whether a notice has been given under section 10-501. A fine in accordance with subsection (b) hereof may be assessed by Beckley Municipal Court. 
(b)  Upon a finding of liability under this article, the defendant shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense. 
(Ord. of 9-26-17) 
Chapter 11 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Permit for noisy activity in parks, § 8-10(c); dangerous activities on park property, § 8-5. 
State Law reference- Public recreation and playgrounds, W. Va. Code, § 10-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to establish, construct, acquire, provide, equip, maintain, and operate recreational parks, playgrounds, and other recreational facilities for public use and for the promotion of the public health and general welfare. 
(Ord. of 1-24-84) 
Sec. 11-2. - Parks and recreation commission-Established; authority; membership. 
(a)  Under the authority of section 8-12-5(37) of the Code of West Virginia, and the charter of the city, section 21(1) and (76), there is hereby established in the city a parks and recreation commission. 
(b)  The parks and recreation commission shall consist of nine (9) members, all citizens of the United States and bona fide residents of the city. 
(c)  The members shall serve without pay. 
(d)  They shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the council. 
(e)  The members of the parks and recreation commission shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor; the term of office shall be for three (3) years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the first three (3) members of the commission duly approved shall serve for a term of one (1) year; the next three (3) members approved shall serve for a term of two (2) years; and the last three (3) members approved shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, the term of office shall expire after three (3) years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired term. Members shall not be disqualified for re-appointment following the expiration of their term. 
(f)  Each member of the council shall have the right to nominate and have approved for appointment, one (1) person from such member's ward. Each council member-at-large shall have the right to nominate and have approved for appointment, one (1) member from the general population of the city. The mayor shall have the right to nominate and have approved for appointment, two (2) members from the general population of the city. 
(g)  In addition to the duly appointed members of the commission, the secretary-treasurer of the city shall serve as the ex-officio fiscal officer; the county recreation authority shall appoint one (1) ex-officio member; and the city solicitor shall serve as legal counsel. The mayor shall appoint a recording secretary for the taking of minutes, preparation of correspondence, and performance of general secretarial duties to the commission. No ex-officio member shall vote on any matter. 
(Code 1971, §§ 18-2-18-5; Ord. of 1-24-84) 
Sec. 11-3. - Same-Organization; meetings. 
(a)  Immediately after appointment, the parks and recreation commission shall meet and organize by electing one of its members chairman and such other officers that may be deemed necessary. The commission shall have the power to adopt bylaws, to conduct and regulate the business of the commission, and to adopt rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties. 
(b)  The parks and recreation commission shall hold regular meetings and shall designate the time and place thereof, and shall keep a record of all proceedings. Five (5) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy in the commission shall occur when any member shall fail to be present at four (4) consecutive meetings, or twenty-five (25) per cent of any such meetings in any fiscal year, unless such absence shall be excused by the commission with reason therefor, entered in the minutes of the commission. 
(Code 1971, §§ 18-6, 18-11; Ord. of 1-24-84) 
Sec. 11-4. - Same-Powers, functions and duties. 
(a)  The parks and recreation commission shall have the powers and authority and shall perform the functions and services as prescribed in this chapter. 
(b)  The parks and recreation commission shall be advisory in nature with each member having one (1) vote. 
(c)  The parks and recreation commission shall advise the mayor and council with regard to the provision, conduct, supervision, management, operation, construction and improvement of playgrounds, recreation centers, athletic fields, swimming pools, and such other areas and facilities as may be deemed advisable by the commission. 
(d)  The parks and recreation commission shall call upon other officers, departments, and agencies of city government to assist in its meetings, programs, and projects. 
(e)  The parks and recreation commission shall make semi-annual reports to the mayor and council with regard to its activities, and such other reports as may be requested. 
(f)  The parks and recreation commission shall recommend to the mayor and council the need for the institution of condemnation proceedings, whenever in its judgment private property should be taken in the name of the city for the purposes of the commission. 
(Code 1971, §§ 18-1, 18-5, 18-8-18-10, 18-12; Ord. of 1-24-84) 
Sec. 11-5. - Director; personnel. 
    Upon the recommendation of the commission, the mayor may appoint a director of recreation who is trained and properly qualified for the work and such other personnel as may be deemed necessary. Appointment of personnel shall be made in accordance with the city rules and regulations and compensation shall be fixed by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 18-7; Ord. of 1-24-84) 
Sec. 11-6. - Motor vehicles on grass areas of city parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, motor bike, trail bike or similar device on the grass areas of any city park; provided, however, for the purpose of park maintenance, mowers and similar equipment may be utilized for the maintenance of the parks and may travel on and upon all grass areas. 
(Code 1971, § 14-9(b)) 
Chapter 12 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council as to streets and sidewalks generally, § 21(4) to (6), (65), (75), (78), (79), and § 27. 
Cross reference- Definition of street generally, § 1-2; placing advertisements on sidewalks, § 10-7; burning leaves on streets, § 7-7; heavy trucks prohibited on certain streets, § 14-550; dropping or tracking of dirt, etc., on streets, § 14-551. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish, construct, etc., streets and sidewalks, and to regulate the use thereof, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5; assessments to improve streets and sidewalks, § 8-18-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Sidewalk, curb and gutter construction-When permit required; application for permit; when construction may begin. 
    Before any person shall construct any sidewalk, curb or gutter in the city in, on or adjacent to any public street or other public right-of-way or public property, application shall be made by such person to the recorder-treasurer for approval of such proposed construction. The application shall include a profile, cross section and the specifications for such sidewalk, curb or gutter. The construction thereof shall not commence until the city shall have provided the applicant with the grade level for the construction and shall have approved the profile, cross section and specifications. 
(Code 1971, § 22-3) 
Sec. 12-2. - Same-Requirements for approval of construction permit. 
    Approval of an application under section 12-1 shall not be granted if the minimum slope or pitch proposed shall be less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch or the maximum more than five-eighths ( 5/8 ) of an inch per foot. All slopes shall be in the direction of the curb. No curbs shall be approved that are less than five (5) inches in height or more than seven (7) inches in height, except where a lower curb is necessary for driveways crossing the sidewalk, which shall be shown on the profile thereof; provided, that the city may, in cases of undue hardship or special circumstances, approve lesser or greater curb heights. All sidewalks shall be constructed in a smooth and even manner, and on a plane with the curb. 
(Code 1971, §§ 22-2, 22-4) 
Sec. 12-3. - Repair of sidewalks and driveway entrances-Duty of property owners, etc.; liability to city for neglect. 
    It shall be the duty of the owners of real estate abutting on any sidewalk, or the agent of the owner, or the occupant of such property, to keep the sidewalk and driveway entrance or apron adjacent to their properties in good repair. Any property owner, agent of the owner or occupant failing to keep the sidewalk or driveway area adjacent to such person's property in repair shall be liable to reimburse the city for all loss that it may sustain, or any damage, cost, or expenses that may be imposed upon it by reason of the failure of the property owner, agent or occupant to perform such duty. 
(Code 1971, § 22-6) 
Charter reference- Duty or property owners, etc., to keep sidewalks in good repair, and recourse of city upon their failure to do so, § 21(75). 
Sec. 12-4. - Same-By city upon neglect of owner, etc.; procedure; assessment of cost against owner. 
    In the event any sidewalk or driveway entrance shall become out of repair, and the property owner, agent or occupant has not upon such person's own initiative repaired it, the city may serve a notice upon the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk or driveway entrance so out of repair, if such owner be a resident, or upon the owner's agents or the occupant if the owner is a nonresident, requiring the owner, agent or occupant to repair or rebuild, where necessary, any such sidewalk or driveway entrance within a time stated in the notice. In the event of the failure of the property owner, or the owner's agent or the occupant to rebuild or repair the sidewalk or driveway entrance within the specified time, the city may have the work done and may assess the cost thereof against the abutting land owner, and the amount thereof may be collected by the recorder-treasurer by distress and sale, or otherwise as provided by law for the collection of taxes and it may be docketed in the office of the clerk of the county court as a lien against the property in the same manner as an original sidewalk assessment; provided, except where a dangerous condition exists in such sidewalk or driveway, the property owner, agent or occupant shall not be required to begin such repair or rebuilding within less than ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice. 
(Code 1971, § 22-7) 
Sec. 12-5. - Procedure for change of street grade by two per cent or more; exceptions. 
(a)  Whenever the grade of any street or portion thereof is to be changed by two (2) per cent or more, such change shall not be authorized or directed by the council unless the project, and specifically the plan to so change the grade, is first announced at two (2) successive regular council meetings, with the property owners who will be directly affected thereby to be notified by letter between the two (2) meetings. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall have no application to a street being paved under the assessment procedure. 
(c)  The provisions of this section being for the protection of property owners whose property abuts the portion of the street where the grade change is contemplated, such change may be authorized and directed at any time if waivers of the provisions of this section, signed by the affected property owners and acknowledged before a notary public, are first secured by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 22-1) 
Sec. 12-6. - When property owners, etc., to clear sidewalks of snow and ice; maintenance of gutters and drains. 
(a)  Every person or public institution using or occupying in any manner or for any purpose whatsoever any house, store, shop, garage, tenement or building of any kind, or any vacant lot, and all persons having charge of churches and public buildings of every description, and the owners of unoccupied houses and unimproved lots abutting on a sidewalk in the city, and their agents, shall within three (3) hours after the fall of any snow or the formation of any ice on the sidewalk on which such property abuts, remove and clear, or cause to be removed and cleared, the snow and ice in such manner as to leave the sidewalk free and clear of such deposits, and in such manner as not to obstruct the passage of water in the gutter adjacent to the sidewalk; provided, that this section shall not apply on Sundays or legal holidays; and provided further, if snow falls or ice forms between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. such snow or ice shall be removed before 11:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be the further duty of the persons hereinbefore mentioned and their agents to keep the gutters, downspouts and drains serving their properties so located and in such a state of repair that water, snow or ice shall not fall, flow or escape therefrom onto the adjacent sidewalk. 
(Code 1971, § 22-8) 
Sec. 12-7. - Unloading heavy material on streets and sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by throwing or letting it fall upon the pavement of any street, sidewalk or other public way without first placing some sufficient protection over the pavement. 
(Code 1971, § 22-9) 
Sec. 12-8. - Safeguards required for coal holes, basement openings, etc. 
(a)  No property owner or other person shall have or maintain in the city any coal hole, basement opening, stairway or any other opening for like purpose in the sidewalk or street which opening is not protected by a grating provided with a limiting device. Such limiting device shall prohibit the cover of any such opening from raising to an angle greater than eighty-five (85) degrees and shall so function that such opening cannot wilfully or negligently be left open. It shall be unlawful to detach the limiting device so as to permit the cover of such opening to be propped open or left open unless an attendant is stationed on the street level to warn pedestrians or vehicles of the opening and to protect them from falling or stepping therein. 
(b)  When any such opening or excavation is to be left uncovered for any length of time and it is not practicable to station an attendant thereat, the opening shall be substantially fenced or barricaded off and warning lights placed in such manner that pedestrians or vehicles shall not fall or step therein. 
(Code 1971, § 22-10) 
Sec. 12-9. - Removal of and tampering with safety barricades and warnings. 
    The removal of red lanterns, barricades or other means placed on the streets, sidewalks and construction projects, public or private, in the city as a warning or protection for the public by persons unauthorized to remove them, or the wilful, careless or negligent destruction or damage thereof is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 22-11) 
Sec. 12-10. - Glass and other injurious substances-Depositing on streets. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street any glass, nail, tack, wire, can or other substance likely to injure or damage any person, animal or vehicle upon such street. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pour, spread or otherwise place oil, gasoline, kerosene, grease or any other petroleum product or other substance harmful or deleterious to tar or asphalt paving upon any street or alley of the city constructed with the use of tar or asphalt products or similar substances, or upon any unimproved street within fifty (5) feet of any street or alley constructed with the use of tar or asphalt products or similar substances. 
(Code 1971, § 22-13) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-11. 
Sec. 12-11. - Same-Duty to remove. 
    Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove it or cause it to be removed. 
(Code 1971, § 22-14) 
Sec. 12-12. - Same-Duty upon removing wrecked or damaged automobile. 
    Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street. 
(Code 1971, § 22-15) 
Sec. 12-13. - Planting or trimming trees and shrubbery-Permit required to plant shrub on city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree, shrub or perform any form of horticulture in any parkway, street, alley or other property owned or held by the city without having first obtained the written consent of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 24-1) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to regulate planting, etc., of shade trees in public places and on adjacent property, § 21(6). 
Cross reference- Protection of trees during street excavation, § 12-207. 
State Law reference- Destruction of tree within fifty feet of public road prohibited, W. Va. Code, § 17-19-13; prohibited cutting or carrying away trees, flowers, etc., within one hundred yards of public road, § 61-3-48; prohibited cutting, damaging or taking of trees and plants without permission of owner, § 61-3-48a; when reward may be offered by county court for destruction of noxious weeds within county, § 7-4-2. 
Sec. 12-14. - Same-Duty of owners, etc., of lots as to trimming of trees and plants on or near streets and parkways. 
(a)  The requirements of this section shall apply to trees, shrubs, hedges, weeds and bushes growing either upon lots or upon parkways and portions of streets adjacent to such lots. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner, controller and manager of lots bounding and abutting on street areas including sidewalks of the city, for the distance which their lots so abut and boarder, to take the following steps for the protection of the public: 
(1)  To cut away and remove all trees, parts of trees and limbs which are dead or which because of decay or other causes, threaten the safety of persons using the streets and sidewalks; 
(2)  To trim, cut away and remove overhanging limbs of trees and shrubs so that no part thereof shall be lower than seven (7) feet from a sidewalk or ten (10) feet from the surface of a street over which they hang; 
(3)  To cut and remove all weeds and bushes which grow or encroach upon a sidewalk or street; 
(4)  To keep all hedges so trimmed that they will not extend over any part of a street or sidewalk and will not be of greater height than three (3) feet; and 
(5)  To cut down and remove any tree, plant or shrubbery or any part thereof as may be necessary to provide a clear and unobstructed view of traffic from all directions at any street intersection, or to abate any nuisance necessary to protect life, limb or property of persons, drivers of vehicles or pedestrians using a street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1971, § 24-2) 
Cross reference- Weeds and noxious grass near streets, § 8-217. 
Sec. 12-15. - Same-Performance by city at owner's expense. 
    In the event of the failure of any owner, controller or manager to perform any service required by section 12-14, then the city may have such work done by city employees or by an independent contractor, as provided in section 8-211, 8-212 or 8-221, at the expense of the owner, controller or manager of such lots; which shall be collected as provided in section 8-222. 
(Code 1971, § 24-3) 
Sec. 12-16. - Permit to encumber street or sidewalk-With boxes, trash, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to encumber any street, sidewalk or public park or, being the owner, occupant or person having care of any building or lot of land bordering on any street, sidewalk or public park, to permit the street, sidewalk or public park to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans, wrecked cars, articles or substances of any kind so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use thereof, without a permit from the recorder-treasurer to do so. 
(Code 1971, § 22-16) 
Sec. 12-17. - Same-For merchandise display. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or public park area, including the lateral strip area between the street and sidewalk, for the display of merchandise or for any advertising display without the written permission of the recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 22-17) 
Sec. 12-18. - Same-For parade or to block off street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any organization or group of persons to parade upon the streets, sidewalks or public parks or to block off any public area without having obtained a permit to do so from the mayor or chief of police. The permit shall designate the area through which the parade shall be permitted or the street area to be blocked off. 
(Code 1971, § 22-18) 
Secs. 12-19-12-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Placing barricades, etc., § 12-8; removal of barricades, etc., § 12-9. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for the opening and excavation of streets, sidewalks and public places and to regulate conditions therefor, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(2). 

Sec. 12-200. - Permit required. 
    No excavation or other opening shall be made in any street, sidewalk or public park or other public place within the city by any person without first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 22-25) 
Sec. 12-201. - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring to make an excavation or other opening in any street, sidewalk or public park or other public place within the city shall make application in writing to the city for a permit to do so. Such application shall be filed with the recorder-treasurer and shall state the name and address of the person proposing to make such excavation or opening, the purpose for which it is to be made, the location thereof, and the time within which the street or public place will be restored to its former condition, but which time limit shall not exceed ten (10) days. In the event that such excavation or opening is for the purpose of placing any pipe, conduit or other construction in such street or other public place, such application shall be accompanied with an accurate plat or blueprint showing such construction in detail, together with its proposed connection, if any, with existing construction. 
(Code 1971, § 22-26) 
Sec. 12-202. - Investigation of application; issuance or denial of permit. 
    After the filing of an application for excavation permit with the recorder-treasurer, together with the deposits required by this article, and the insurance policy when so required, the director of public works shall investigate the advisability of issuing such a permit, and shall then transmit such application, together with such director's findings and recommendations, to the mayor, who is hereby authorized to issue such permit if such official deems it advisable to do so. Should the mayor not deem it advisable to issue such permit, such official shall transmit such application to the council, together with the report of the director of public works and the reasons for not issuing the permit, and the council at its next meeting shall determine whether such permit shall be issued, and its action in such respect shall be final. 
(Code 1971, § 22-29) 
Sec. 12-203. - Fee; deposit or bond to cover certain costs. 
    Except in cases in which an excavation or opening is intended as a part of the work under a franchise heretofore or hereafter granted, the application mentioned in section 12-201 shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars ($5.00), with such further sum or bond as the director of public works may specify as necessary to defray the cost and expense of investigation and inspection of the work, as provided in this article, and to restore the surface of the street to its former condition after the making of such excavation or opening. 
(Code 1971, § 22-27) 
Sec. 12-204. - Liability insurance policy. 
    The application for permit shall be accompanied by a policy of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, recognizing the city as an insured in no event less than twenty-five thousand dollars/fifty thousand dollars ($25,000/$50,000) personal injury liability, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000) property damage liability, conditioned to indemnify, defend and save harmless the city from any debt, claim, suit, action or demand by any person, caused by or arising out of the work for which permission is sought under such application; provided, that if the excavation or opening is such that in the opinion of the mayor there is no danger to the public, the mayor may waive the requirement for liability insurance on the part of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 22-28) 
Sec. 12-205. - Disposition of fees and deposits; when permittee chargeable with additional amount. 
    If no permit shall be issued pursuant to any such application, the deposits made with such application shall be returned to the applicant, less the cost and expense of the investigation by the street commissioner. If a permit is issued, the fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the treasury as a fee for issuing such permit. The balance of such deposit shall be held until the street or other public place is restored to its former condition to the approval of the director of public works, after which the balance thereof, less the cost of inspection of work if any, shall be returned to the applicant. In case such restoration is not made within the time specified in the permit, the work shall be done by the city and the expense thereof shall be charged against such deposit, and the balance, if any, returned to the applicant. In case the amount deposited is not sufficient either to pay the cost and expense of the investigation and inspection by the director of public works or to restore the street or other place so excavated or opened, the additional amount required therefor shall be paid to the treasurer by such applicant upon receipt of a statement therefor. 
(Code 1971, § 22-30) 
Sec. 12-206. - Inspection. 
    When an excavation or opening is made under permit for the purpose of installing any construction in such street or public place, the work shall be subject to the inspection of the director of public works. No construction shall be covered until the director of public works shall have ascertained that such work conforms to the plans submitted. 
(Code 1971, § 22-31) 
Sec. 12-207. - Protection of trees; backfills must satisfy street commissioner. 
    In the making of any excavation or opening under this article, all work in connection therewith shall be done in such a manner as not to injure or destroy the roots, trunk or branches of any tree. All directions given by the director of public works as to the manner of performing said work, in order to avoid such injury or destruction, shall be fully and completely complied with. All backfills in openings shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(Code 1971, § 22-32) 
Sec. 12-208. - Penalty. 
    Should any person, firm, or corporation make any excavation or opening in any public street, sidewalk, or public park or other public place within the city, and upon conclusion of the need for such excavation or opening, the street, sidewalk, or public park or other public place is not restored to its original condition within the time specified in the permit, or within ten (10) working days following completion of the work, then said person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed in violation of this article and shall be subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day said excavation remains incomplete and not restored to the original condition of the street or public place. 
    In addition to the cost of repairs specified in section 12-205, if the city is required to correct the excavation or opening in order to restore the site to its original condition for the public benefit, then the costs of such restoration shall be chargeable to the person, firm, or corporation which caused excavation or opening to be made and which costs shall be collectible along with the fine mentioned in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-27-86) 
Sec. 12-209. - Emergency repair work. 
    Whenever a sudden unexpected and unforeseen occurrence or condition results in a condition that calls for immediate action on the part of any utility servicing the City of Beckley or its environs and which calls for the immediate excavation and opening in any street, sidewalk, or public park or other public place within the city, that particular utility shall immediately notify the director of the department of public works of such necessary action, the location of the action, and the expected time to repair the condition, within two (2) hours of the time that said condition is made known to the utility. Thereafter, the director of the department of public works shall monitor the actions of the utility, cause to be issued the necessary permit for correction of the condition, and shall over-see the work of the utility to its conclusion. 
    In cases of emergency as aforesaid, the permit required by section 12-201 shall be applied for the next day of normal business activity for the city. 
(Ord. of 10-25-88) 
Sec. 12-210. - Courthouse square. 
    Pursuant to the area outlined as Courthouse Square in section 15-200 of this Code, any excavation or other opening in any street, sidewalk, or public park or other public place made by a utility or any private property owner pursuant to the permit issued under section 12-201 shall be closed by the city department of public works or under the direction of the director of the department of public works and the costs therefor shall be assessed against the utility or other private person who has created the excavation or other opening. Additionally, if the permittee fails to timely execute the permit as issued, any costs or charges for labor or supervision incurred by the department of public works in the enforcement of the permit shall be assessed against the utility or the private property owner in whose name the permit was issued. 
    The cost of closing the excavation or other opening shall include any necessary new materials and labor expended by the city for this purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-25-88) 
Secs. 12-211-12-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 27, 1985, added provisions designated as Art. IV of Ch. 22 to the 1971 Code. At the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as a new Art. III of Ch. 12. 

Sec. 12-300. - Procedure for abandonment of property. 
    Whenever the common council has deemed it proper to close or abandon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk, or portions thereof, or any public land, whether permanently or temporarily, said closing shall be by ordinance only, which ordinance shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 8, Article II, section 3 of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended, and common council shall cause notice of the proposed adoption of said proposed ordinance to be published as a Class 1-0 legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 59, Article 3, section 1, et seq., of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, and the publication area for such publication shall be the municipality. A reasonable number of copies of the proposed ordinance shall be kept in the office of the recorder-treasurer and made available for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-27-85, § 22-34) 
Sec. 12-301. - Form of deed. 
    Whenever any public street, alleyway, sidewalk, or portion thereof, or any public lands are declared permanently closed or abandoned and the common council has, by ordinance, vacated said public street, alleyway, sidewalk, or other public ground, the deed of conveyance of the property shall be a quitclaim deed and shall contain words and language to show the intent of the common council to relinquish forever any claim to the property so conveyed, except as hereinafter reserved. Additionally, unless so paid, the deed of conveyance shall not recite a consideration for the property, but shall refer to the proper ordinance so permanently closing and abandoning the property. 
(Ord. of 8-27-85, § 22-35) 
Sec. 12-302. - Required reservation in property conveyance from the city. 
    Whenever any public street, alleyway, sidewalk, or portions thereof, or any public lands are declared permanently closed or abandoned and the common council has by ordinance, vacated said public street, alleyway, sidewalk, or other public ground, the deed of conveyance of the property to persons entitled thereto shall contain a reservation of all rights and easements unto the city for the purposes of constructing any and all easements for utilities (electric, gas, water, telephone, television, or otherwise). 
(Ord. of 8-27-85, § 22-36) 
Sec. 12-303. - Declaration of value. 
    In all deeds provided for in the aforementioned sections 12-300, 12-301 and 12-302, it shall be recited in the deed itself that the conveyance is exempt from the excise tax on the privilege of transferring real property inasmuch as the transfer of property is a quitclaim deed without consideration and is a transfer from a political subdivision of the State of West Virginia by gift. 
(Ord. of 8-27-85, § 22-37) 
Sec. 12-304. - Signing. 
    Upon the proper passage of an ordinance [as] aforesaid in sections 12-300 through 12-303, and upon the proper preparation of a deed conveying land to persons entitled thereto, the deed shall be signed by the mayor without the necessity for affixing the seal of the City of Beckley thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-27-85, § 22-38) 
Chapter 13 - TAXES, BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to require licenses generally, § 21(12), (13), (16); in cases where state so requires, § 30. 
Cross reference- Licensing of persons engaged in mechanical trades, § 4-660 et seq.; use of street for merchandise display, § 12-17. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require licenses in cases where state license required, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the cords "fee" and "tax" shall be construed as interchangeable, and shall mean the charge fixed by the council for the purpose to which such fee or tax relates. Other terms used in this chapter shall have such definitions as are attributable by the West Virginia State Tax Department and the West Virginia Code. 
(Code 1971, § 11-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Tax administration and procedures. 
    The administration and procedures provisions of the West Virginia State Tax Department are hereby adopted by reference by the city, and shall henceforth apply to taxation by the city except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
Sec. 13-3. - Obtaining license and payment of tax required; compliance with chapter. 
    Except as may be provided otherwise in this Code or other ordinance or by state law, no person shall engage in any business, profession, occupation, trade or activity, hereinafter referred to as "business", within the city for which a license is prescribed by this article without having obtained a license to do so and without having paid the prescribed tax or fee with respect thereto; and it shall be the duty of every person who engages in any business, as hereinabove referred to, within the city to maintain in a current status such license and tax payments with respect thereto, and to comply with all requirements of this article relating to the business for which the license is required. 
(Code 1971, § 11-2) 
Sec. 13-4. - Applications for licenses. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license under the provisions of this article shall apply to the recorder-treasurer in writing and shall specify the exact place for which the license is desired and such other information as that officer may require. 
(Code 1971, § 11-3) 
Sec. 13-5. - Issuance; refusal to issue. 
(a)  The recorder-treasurer shall have the power to issue a license subject to the exceptions set forth in this chapter, or may submit any application for a city license to the council in such officer's discretion. 
(b)  The recorder-treasurer shall refuse to issue a license whenever such officer has reason to believe that the applicant is ineligible for a state license for the same purpose, and may, in such officer's discretion, refuse to issue such a license until such time as the applicant has obtained such state license and shown it to such officer. 
(c)  In case the recorder-treasurer fails or refuses to issue such license, the application therefor may then be made to the council, and no such license shall be granted except by the vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all the members elected to the council. When granted by the council, such license shall be issued by the recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 11-4) 
Sec. 13-6. - Denial by council after hearing. 
    When any license is applied for under the provisions of this article and it shall appear to the council that the applicant has theretofore held such a license from the city and has violated the provisions of section 13-10, or has permitted the doing of any act therein forbidden upon the premises covered by such license, or that such applicant is a person of immoral character and unfit to hold such license or that such license is thought to be exercised in an improper place, the council may in its discretion refuse such license. Before refusing any license, notice shall be given the applicant and the right to be heard thereon as provided in section 13-12. 
(Code 1971, § 11-5) 
Sec. 13-7. - Council may prohibit issuance. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall deprive the council of authority to prohibit by resolution the issuance of a license in any particular case in which it shall appear to the council to be proper to refuse to issue such license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-6) 
Sec. 13-8. - Duration; license year. 
    The term for all annual licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall begin on the first day of July of each year and shall end on the thirtieth day of the following June. Every license issued under this article, except where otherwise specifically provided, shall expire on the thirtieth day of June next following its issuance. 
(Code 1971, § 11-7) 
Sec. 13-9. - Computation of fee for less than one year. 
    If any license issued under this article is granted for a period of less than one year, the fee for such license shall be computed from the annual fee for such license in proportion to the length of time such license has to run, unless otherwise specifically provided. However, no license shall be issued for a fee of less than two dollars ($2.00). 
(Code 1971, § 11-8) 
Sec. 13-10. - Licensees not to permit violation of penal laws upon licensed premises. 
    No person holding a license issued under the provisions of this article shall permit the violation of any penal law of the state or city by any person upon the licensed premises. 
(Code 1971, § 11-9) 
Sec. 13-11. - Revocation of license-Upon conviction of licensee. 
    When any licensee is convicted of a violation of any provision of section 13-10 in addition to all other punishments imposed, such licensee shall forfeit the license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-10) 
Sec. 13-12. - Same-By council or mayor; grounds; hearing and procedure; appeals from actions of mayor. 
    The council shall have power to cancel or revoke any license granted under this article on complaint of any official, citizen or resident of the city, for a violation of section 13-10. When any such complaint is made, notice shall be given the holder of such license, signed by the mayor or recorder-treasurer, specifying with reasonable certainty the charges made against the licensee, and naming a time and place at which the licensee may be present and make defense against the charges. At such time the evidence produced both to sustain and to disprove such charges shall be heard by the council, and the licensee shall be permitted to make defense either in person or by counsel. The council shall thereupon take such action in the premises as it may deem proper by a majority vote of the members present and voting at any lawful meeting. It shall not be necessary to show upon such hearing that the violation of the law charged against such licensee was committed with the licensee's personal knowledge, or that the licensee knowingly permitted the violation. The mayor shall have the power to revoke any such license after notice and hearing aforesaid, but with the right of appeal from the mayor's decision to the council, and a full hearing therein as above provided. 
(Code 1971, § 11-11) 
Sec. 13-13. - Posting and display of license certificates. 
    Every person to whom a license certificate is issued under the provisions of this article shall keep such certificate posted in a conspicuous position in the place where the privileges of such license are exercised, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter. Such license certificate shall be produced for inspection whenever required by the recorder-treasurer or by any duly authorized inspecting officer or police officer of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 11-12) 
Sec. 13-14. - License a nonassignable, personal privilege. 
    Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall confer only a personal privilege to transact the business which may be the subject of the license; and no license shall be exercised except by the licensee designated therein and no license shall be assignable. 
(Code 1971, § 11-13) 
Sec. 13-15. - Powers and responsibilities of recorder-treasurer. 
    The recorder-treasurer is responsible for the collection of all taxes due the city and in the determination of the correctness of any tax returns or assessments of taxes due the city, and the recorder-treasurer or his designee shall have the power to examine any books, papers, documents, records, memoranda, inventories, or equipment bearing upon matters required to be included in the tax return, and require that said books, papers, documents, records, memoranda, inventories, or equipment bearing upon matters required to be included in the tax return be produced for review, and may make test checks of tax yields. 
(Ord. of 9-12-89) 
Secs. 13-16-13-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Business and occupation tax, W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 13; authority of city to impose business and occupation or privilege tax, § 8-13-5. 

Sec. 13-200. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Banking business or financial organization: Any bank, banking association, trust company, industrial loan company, small loan company or licensee, building and loan association, savings and loan association, credit union, finance company, investment company, investment broker or dealer, and any other similar business organization at least ninety (90) per cent of the assets of which consists of intangible personal property and at least ninety (90) per cent of the gross receipts of which consists of dividends, interest and other charges derived from the use of money or credit. 
    Business: All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain or economic benefit, either direct or indirect. "Business" shall not include a casual sale by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved in such casual sale. "Business" shall include the production of natural resources or manufactured products which are used or consumed by the producer or manufacturer and shall include the activities of a banking business or financial organization. 
    Contracting: The furnishing of work, or both materials, and work, in the fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration or improvement of a new or existing building or structure, or any part thereof, or for the alteration, improvement or development of real property. 
    Gross income: The gross receipts of the taxpayer, other than a banking or financial business, received as compensation for personal services and the gross receipts of the taxpayer derived from trade, business, commerce or sales and the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property (real or personal), or service, or both, and all receipts by reason of the investment of the capital of the business engaged in, including rentals, royalties, fees, reimbursed costs or expenses or other emoluments however designated and including all interest, carrying charges, fees or other like income, however denominated, derived by the taxpayer from repetitive carrying of accounts, in the regular course and conduct of such taxpayer's business, and extension of credit in connection with the sale of any tangible personal property or service, and without any deductions on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, taxes, royalties paid in cash or in kind or otherwise, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever. "Gross income" of a banking or financial business is specified in section 13-217. "Gross income" shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
(2)  The proceeds of sale of goods, wares or merchandise returned by customers when the sale price is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
(3)  The amount allowed as "trade-in value" for any article accepted as part payment for any article sold; 
(4)  Excise taxes imposed by this state; or 
(5)  Money or other property received or held by a professional person for the sole use and benefit of a client of another person or money received by the taxpayer on behalf of a bank or other financial institution for the payment of a debt of another. 
    Gross proceeds of sales: The value, whether in money or other property, actually proceeding from the sale of tangible property without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold or expenses of any kind. "Gross proceeds of sales" shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
(2)  The proceeds of sale of goods, wares or merchandise returned by customers when the sale price is refunded either by cash or by credit; 
(3)  The amount allowed as "trade-in value" for any article accepted as part payment for any article sole; 
(4)  Excise taxes imposed by this state; or 
(5)  Money or other property received or held by a professional person for the sole use and benefit of a client or another person or money received by the taxpayer on behalf of a bank or other financial institution for the repayment of a debt of another. 
    Sale, sales or selling: Any transfer of the ownership of, or title to, property, whether for money or in exchange for other property. 
    Selling at wholesale or wholesale sales: "Selling at wholesale" or "wholesale sales" shall mean and include: 
(1)  Sales of any tangible personal property for the purpose of resale in the form of tangible personal property; 
(2)  Sales of machinery, supplies or materials which are to be directly consumed or used by the purchaser in the conduct of any business or activity which is subject to the tax imposed by this article; and 
(3)  Sales of any tangible personal property to the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities or to the state, its institutions or political subdivisions. 
    Service business or calling: All activities engaged in by a person for other persons for a consideration, which involve the rendering of a service as distinguished from the sale of tangible property, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to such employee's employer. This term shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Persons engaged in manufacturing, compounding or preparing for sale, profit, or commercial use, articles, substances or commodities which are owned by another or others; 
(2)  Persons engaged as independent contractors in producing natural resource products which are owned by another or others, as personal property, immediately after the same are served, extracted, reduced to possession and produced; 
(3)  The repetitive carrying of accounts, in the regular course and conduct of business, and extension of credit in connection with the sale of any tangible personal property or service, except as to persons taxed pursuant to the provisions of section 13-217. 
    Taxpayer: Any person liable for any tax under the provisions of this article. 
    Tax year or taxable year: The calendar year, or the taxpayer's fiscal year when permission is obtained from the recorder-treasurer to use such fiscal year as the tax period in lieu of the calendar year. 
(Code 1971, § 23-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-1. 
Sec. 13-201. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied and shall be collected annual privilege taxes against the persons, on account of the business and other activities, and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against values or gross income as set forth in sections 13-208 through 13-217. 
    To the extent not herein set forth in Chapter 13 of the Beckley City Code, Chapter 8, Article 13, section 5 of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, is hereby incorporated into this Code as if set forth in its entirety. Any provisions in the Beckley City Code contrary to the provisions set forth in Chapter 8, Article 13, section 5 of the West Virginia Code, shall be resolved in favor of the West Virginia Code. 
(Code 1971, § 23-2; Ord. of 5-27-87) 
Sec. 13-202. - Producer shipping products beyond city without making sale. 
    If any person liable for any tax under section 13-208 or section 13-209 shall ship or transport such person's products or any part thereof out of the city without making sale of such products, the value of the products in the condition or form in which they exist immediately before transportation out of the city shall be the basis for the assessment of the tax imposed in those sections, except in those instances in which another measure of the tax is expressly provided. The council shall prescribe equitable and uniform rules for ascertaining such value. 
(Code 1971, § 23-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2. 
Sec. 13-203. - Sales where gross proceeds not indicative of true value. 
    In determining value, as regards sales from one to another of affiliated companies or persons, or under other circumstances where the relation between the buyer and seller is such that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale, the council shall prescribe uniform and equitable rules for determining the value upon which the tax imposed by this article shall be levied, corresponding as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or character where no common interest exists between the buyer and seller, but the circumstances and conditions are otherwise similar. 
(Code 1971, § 23-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2. 
Sec. 13-204. - Adding to or deducting from gross income. 
    Gross income included in the measure of the tax under sections 13-208 and 13-209 shall neither be added nor deducted in computing the tax levied under the other sections of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2. 
Sec. 13-205. - Producers or manufacturers selling at retail. 
    A person exercising any privilege taxable under section 13-208 or section 13-209 and engaging in the business of selling such person's natural resources or manufactured products at retail in this city shall be required to make returns of the gross proceeds of such retail sales and pay the tax imposed in section 13-210 for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling such natural resources or manufactured products at retail in this city. But any person exercising any privilege taxable under section 13-208 or section 13-209 and engaging in the business of selling such person's resources or manufactured products to producers of natural resources, manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, retailers or commercial consumers for use or consumption in the purchaser's business shall not be required to pay the tax imposed in section 13-210. 
(Code 1971, § 23-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2. 
Sec. 13-206. - Manufacturers selling products for delivery outside city. 
    Manufacturers exercising any privilege taxable under section 13-209 shall not be required to pay the tax imposed in section 13-210 for the privilege of selling their manufactured products for delivery outside of this city, but gross income derived from the sale of such manufactured products for delivery outside of this city, but the gross income derived from the sale of such manufactured products outside of this city shall be included in determining the measure of the tax imposed on such manufacturing section 13-209. 
(Code 1971, § 23-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2. 
Sec. 13-207. - Producing coal, oil, gas, etc., and using such products in producer's business. 
    A person exercising privileges taxable under the other sections of this article, producing coal, oil, natural gas, minerals, timber, or other natural resource products, the production of which is taxable under section 13-208, and using or consuming such products in such person's business or transferring or delivering the same as any royalty payment, in kind, or the like, shall be deemed to be engaged in the business of mining and producing coal, oil, natural gas, minerals, timber or other natural resource products for sale, profit or commercial use, and shall be required to make returns on account of the production of the business showing the gross proceeds or equivalent in accordance with uniform and equitable rules and determining the value upon which such privilege tax shall be levied, corresponding as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the sale of similar products or like quality or character by other taxpayers, which rules the council shall prescribe. 
(Code 1971, § 23-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-3. 
Sec. 13-208. - Production of oil and other natural resource products. 
(a)  Upon every person exercising the privilege of engaging or continuing within this city in the business of severing, extracting, reducing to possession and producing for sale, profit or commercial use any natural resource products, the amount of such tax to be equal to the value of the articles produced as shown by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof by the producer, except as otherwise provided, multiplied by the respective rates as follows: 
(1)  Coal, one (1) per cent; 
(2)  Limestone or sandstone, quarried or mined, one and fifty one-hundredths (1.50) per cent; 
(3)  Oil, three (3) per cent; 
(4)  Natural gas, in excess of the value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), six (6) per cent; 
(5)  Blast furnace slag, three (3) per cent; 
(6)  Sand, gravel or other mineral product not quarried or mined, three (3) per cent; 
(7)  Timber, one and fifty one-hundredths (1.50) per cent; 
(8)  Other natural resource products, two (2) per cent. 
(b)  The measure of this tax is the value of the entire production in this city, regardless of the place of sale or the fact the delivery may be made to points outside the city; provided, however, that for the purposes of the production of oil classification, and the production of natural gas classification, as set forth in this section, multiple co-owners of oil or natural gas, in place, lessees thereof, or others being vested with title and ownership to part or all of the oil and gas, as personal property, immediately after the severance, extraction, reduction to possession and production, except royalty recipients, in kind, shall be deemed to be a "group or combination acting as a unit" and one "person", as defined in section 1-2, if not otherwise defined therein, whenever engaged in the business of producing oil or natural gas through common use, by joint or separately executed contracts, of the same independent contractor, driller or operator's services; and notwithstanding provisions of private contracts for separate deposit of gross receipts in separate members' accounts or for members of such group or combination to take in kind any proportionate part of such natural resources. 
(c)  Lessees, sublessees or other denominated lessees are considered to be producers of all of the oil or natural gas produced, regardless of any payment, in kind, to lessors, sublessors or other denominated lessors of a part of such natural resources as rent or royalties. Recipients of royalties or rents, in kind, in cash or otherwise are taxable on their gross income pursuant to the provisions of section 13-215. 
(Code 1971, § 23-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2a. 
Sec. 13-209. - Manufactured or compounded products. 
(a)  Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of manufacturing, compounding or preparing for sale, profit or commercial use, either directly or through the activity of others in whole or part, any article or articles, substance or substances, commodity or commodities, or electric power produced by public utilities or others and not taxed under other provisions of this article, the amount of the tax to be equal to the value of the article, substance, commodity or electric power manufactured, compounded or prepared for sale, as shown by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof by the manufacturer or person compounding or preparing the same, except as otherwise provided, multiplied by a rate of thirty one-hundredths (0.30) of one per cent: Provided, That for manufacturing activity engaged in after June 30, 2016, the rate of tax is twenty-five one-hundredths (0.25) of one percent of gross income, except as otherwise provided in this article. The measure of this tax is the value of the entire product manufactured, compounded or prepared in this city for sale, profit or commercial use, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the city. However, the dressing and processing of food by a person, which food is to be sold on a wholesale basis by such person, shall not be considered as manufacturing or compounding, but the sale of these products on a wholesale basis shall be subject to the same tax as is imposed on the business of selling at wholesale as provided in section 13-210 
(b)  It is further provided, however, that in those instances in which the same person partially manufactures, compounds or prepares products within this city and partially manufactures, compounds or prepares such products outside of this city, the measures of such person's tax under this section shall be that proportion of the sale price of the product that the payroll cost of manufacturing within this city bears to the entire payroll cost of manufacturing the product; or, at the option of the taxpayer, the measure of such person's tax under this section shall be the proportion of the sales value of the articles that the cost of operations in this city bears to the full cost of manufacture of the articles. 
(Code 1971, § 23-10; Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2b. 
Sec. 13-210. - Business of selling tangible property; exceptions. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of selling any tangible property whatsoever, real or personal, including the sale of food, and the services incident to the sale of food in hotels, restaurants, cafeterias, confectioneries, and other public eating houses, except sales by any person engaging or continuing in the business of horticulture, agriculture or grazing, or of selling stocks, bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, there is likewise levied, and shall be collected, a tax equivalent to fifty one-hundredths (0.50) of one percent of the gross income of the business: Provided, That for sales activity engaged in after June 30, 2016, the rate of tax is forty one-hundredths (0.40) of one percent of gross income, except as otherwise provided in this article: Provided, however, That in the case of a person engaged in the business of selling his manufactured products at wholesale, the tax imposed by this section shall be equal to fifteen one-hundredths (0.15) of one per cent of the gross income of the business. 
(Code 1971, § 23-11; Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2c. 
Sec. 13-211. - Public service or utility business; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon any person engaging or continuing within this city in any public service or utility business, except railroad, railroad car, express, pipeline, telephone and telegraph companies, water carriers by steamboat or steamship and motor carriers, there is likewise levied and shall be collected taxes on account of the business engaged in equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the respective rates as follows: 
(1)  Street and interurban and electric railways, one (1) per cent; 
(2)  Water companies, four (4) per cent, except as to income received by municipally-owned water plants; 
(3)  Electric light and power companies, four (4) per cent on sales and demand charges for domestic purposes and commercial lighting and three (3) per cent on sales and demand charges for all other purposes, except as to income received by municipally-owned plants producing or purchasing electricity and distributing same; 
(4)  Natural gas companies, three (3) per cent; 
(5)  Toll bridge companies, three (3) per cent; and 
(6)  Upon all other public service or utility business, two (2) per cent. 
(b)  The measure of this tax shall not include gross income derived from outside the city. The measure of the tax under this section shall include only gross income received from the supplying of public services. The gross income of the taxpayer from any other activity shall be included in the measure of the tax imposed under the appropriate section or sections of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2d. 
Sec. 13-212. - Business of contracting. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of contracting, the tax shall be equal to two (2) per cent of the gross income of the business. 
(Code 1971, § 23-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2e. 
Sec. 13-213. - Business of operating amusements. 
    For every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of operating a theater, opera house, moving picture show, vaudeville, amusement park, dance hall, skating rink, race track, radio broadcasting station, or any other place at which amusements are offered to the public, the tax shall equal to fifty hundredths (0.50) of one per cent: Provided, That for amusements offered after June 30, 2016, the rate of tax is thirty-five one hundredths (0.35) of one percent of the gross income of the business, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-14; Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2g. 
Sec. 13-214. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect upon its adoption by the Common Council in the year 2015. However, the rate reductions provided for in sections 13-209, 13-210 and 13-213 of this article shall first apply to gross income and gross proceeds of sales derived from business activities engaged in after June 30, 2016 but only if the State Tax Commissioner begins collecting the sales and use taxes imposed by article XIV of this chapter as of July 1, 2016. In the event the State Tax Commissioner does not begin to collect the city's sales and use taxes as of July 1, 2016, then the rate reductions provided in section 209, 210 and 213 of this article do not go into effect until the first day of July on which the State Tax Commissioner begins to collect the City's sales and use taxes as provided in the legislative rule codified in W. Va. Code St. R. § 110-28-1 et seq. 
(Code 1971, § 23-15; Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2h. 
Sec. 13-215. - Business of furnishing property for hire. 
(a)  For every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of furnishing any real or tangible personal property, which has a tax situs in this city, or any interest therein, for hire, loan, lease or otherwise, whether the return be in the form of rentals, royalties, fees or otherwise, the tax shall be one (1) per cent of the gross income of any such activity. 
(b)  The term "tangible personal property", as used herein shall not include money or public securities. 
(Code 1971, § 23-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2i. 
Sec. 13-216. - Small loan business. 
    Upon each person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of making loans of money, credit goods or things in action, who because of such activity is required under the provisions of section 47-7A-1 et seq., of the Code of West Virginia, to obtain a license from the commissioner of banking of the state, and upon each industrial loan company, the tax shall be ninety one-hundredths (0.90) of one per cent of the gross income of any activity, notwithstanding any other provisions of this article; provided, that such tax shall apply only to gross income received prior to the first day of July, 1971. Persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, on and after the first day of July, 1971, be subject to the provisions of section 13-217. 
(Code 1971, § 23-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2j. 
Sec. 13-217. - Banking and other financial business; common council findings. 
(a)  Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of banking or financial business, from and after the first day of July, 1976, the tax shall be equal to one (1) per cent of the gross income received from interest, premiums, discounts, dividends, service fees or charges, commissions, fines, rents from real or tangible personal property however dominated, royalties, charges for bookkeeping or data processing, receipts from the sale of tangible personal property; provided, however, that gross income shall not include: 
(1)  Interest received on the obligations of the United States, its agencies and instrumentalities; 
(2)  Interest received on the obligations of this or any other state, territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision of any of the foregoing or of the District of Columbia, or; 
(3)  Interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or deeds of trust on residential property occupied by nontransients; 
Provided, however, that all interest derived on activities exempt under this subsection (3) above, shall be reported, as to amounts, on the return of a person taxable under the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Persons taxed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be taxed under sections 13-208 through 13-216. 
(c)  The council hereby finds and declares that it is in the intent of the council to subject national banking associations and other financial organizations to the tax imposed by this article, in accordance with the authorization contained in section 5,219 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, as amended by Public Law 91-156, enacted the twenty-fourth day of December, 1969. 
(Code 1971, § 23-17.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-2k. 
Sec. 13-218. - Exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be an exemption in every case of forty dollars ($40.00) in amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article. A person exercising a privilege taxable hereunder for a fractional part of a tax year shall be entitled to an exemption of the sum bearing the proportion to forty dollars ($40.00) that the period of time the privilege is exercised bears to a whole year. Only one exemption shall be allowed to any one person, whether such person exercises one or more privileges taxable hereunder. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Insurance companies which pay the state a tax upon premiums; provided, however, that such exemption shall not extend to that part of the gross income of insurance companies which is received for the use of real property, other than property in which any such company maintains its office or offices, in this state, whether such income be in the form of rentals or royalties; 
(2)  Nonprofit cemetery companies organized and operated for the exclusive benefit of their members; 
(3)  Fraternal societies, organizations and associations organized and operated for the exclusive benefit of their members and not for profit; 
(4)  Corporations, associations and societies organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes; 
(5)  Production credit association, organized under the provisions of the federal "Farm Credit Act of 1933"; provided, however, that the exemptions of this subsection shall not apply to corporations or cooperative associations organized under the provisions of section 19-4-1 et seq., of the Code of West Virginia. 
(Code 1971, § 23-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-3. 
Sec. 13-219. - Gross income from interstate or foreign commerce excluded. 
    The measures of the tax assessed in this article shall not include gross income derived from commerce between this state and other states of the United States or between this state and foreign countries. 
(Code 1971, § 23-19) 
Sec. 13-220. - Computation and payment of tax. 
(a)  The taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable in quarterly installments on or before the expiration of one (1) month from the end of the quarter in which they accrue. The taxpayer shall, within one (1) month from the expiration of each quarter, make a calculation of the tax for which such taxpayer is liable for such quarter, sign, and mail it together with a remittance, in the form required by section 13-230, of the amount of the tax to the office of the recorder-treasurer. In calculating the amount of the tax due for each quarter, the taxpayer may deduct one-fourth (1/4) of the total exemption allowed for the year. 
(b)  Any other provision of this section notwithstanding, the recorder-treasurer, if such officer deems it necessary to insure payment of the tax, may require the return and payment under this section for periods of shorter duration than quarter-year periods. 
(Code 1971, § 23-20; Ord. of 7-28-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-4. 
Sec. 13-221. - Return and remittance by taxpayer. 
    Quarterly returns shall be signed by the taxpayer, if made by an individual, or by the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation, if made on behalf of a corporation. If made on behalf of a partnership, joint venture, association, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, any individual delegated by such co-partnership, joint venture, association, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit shall sign the return on behalf of the taxpayer. The recorder-treasurer, for good cause shown, may extend the time for making a return on the application of any taxpayer and grant such reasonable additional time within which to make the same as may be, by such officer, deemed advisable. 
(Code 1971, § 23-21; Ord. of 7-28-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, ¶ 11-13-5. 
Sec. 13-222. - Erroneous computation. 
(a)  If the taxpayer shall make any clerical error which shall be apparent on the face of the return in computing the tax assessable against such taxpayer, the recorder-treasurer shall correct such error or reassess the proper amount of taxes, and notify the taxpayer of such action by mailing to the taxpayer promptly a copy of the corrected assessment, and any additional tax for which such taxpayer may be liable shall be paid within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of such statement. 
(b)  If the amount already paid exceeds that which should have been paid on the basis of the tax so recomputed, the excess so paid shall be immediately refunded to the taxpayer by the recorder-treasurer and shall be payable out of any funds available for the purpose. The taxpayer may, at such taxpayer's election, apply an overpayment credit to taxes subsequently accruing hereunder. 
(Code 1971, § 23-22) 
Sec. 13-223. - Assessment of tax when insufficiently returned. 
    If the recorder-treasurer believes that the tax imposed by this article is insufficiently returned to a taxpayer, either because the taxpayer has failed properly to remit the tax or has failed to make a return, or has made a return which is incomplete, deficient or otherwise erroneous, the recorder-treasurer may proceed to investigate and determine or estimate the tax liability of the tax-payer and make an assessment therefor. 
(Code 1971, § 23-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-224. - Jeopardy assessments. 
(a)  If the recorder-treasurer believes that the collection of any tax which such officer is required by this article to administer will be jeopardized by delay, such officer shall thereupon make an assessment of the tax, noting that fact upon the assessment. The amount assessed shall be immediately due and payable. Unless the taxpayer against whom a jeopardy assessment is made petitions for reassessment within twenty (20) days after service of notice of the jeopardy assessment, such an assessment becomes final. 
(b)  A petition for reassessment by a person against whom a jeopardy assessment has been made must be accompanied by such security as the recorder-treasurer may deem necessary to insure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-225. - Notice of assessment; petition for reassessment; hearing. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall give to the taxpayer written notice of any assessment made pursuant to this article. Unless the taxpayer to whom a notice of assessment is directed shall, within thirty (30) days after service thereof (except in the case of jeopardy assessments), either personally or by certified or registered mail, file with the recorder-treasurer a petition in writing, verified under oath by said taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent, having knowledge of the facts, setting forth with definiteness and particularly the items of the assessment objected to, together with the reason for such objections, the assessments shall become and be deemed conclusive and the amount thereof shall be payable at the end of the thirty (30) day period. In every case where a petition for reassessment as above described is filed, the recorder-treasurer shall assign a time and place for the hearing thereon and shall notify the petitioner of such hearing by written notice at least twenty (20) days in advance thereof, and such hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days from the filing of the petition for reassessment unless continued by agreement or by the recorder-treasurer for good cause. The hearing shall be informal and may be conducted by an examiner designated by the recorder-treasurer. At such hearing evidence may be offered to support the assessment or to prove that it is incorrect. After such hearing, the recorder-treasurer shall, within a reasonable time, give notice in writing of the decision. Unless an appeal is taken within thirty (30) days from service of this notice, the recorder-treasurer's decision shall be final. 
(Code 1971, § 23-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-226. - Appeal to circuit court and supreme court of appeals. 
(a)  An appeal may be taken by the taxpayer to the circuit court of the county within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer shall have received notice from the recorder-treasurer of such officer's determination as provided in section 13-225. 
(b)  The appeal shall be taken by written notice to the recorder-treasurer and served as an original notice. When the notice is so served it shall, with the return thereon, be filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and docketed as other cases with the taxpayer as plaintiff and the recorder-treasurer as defendant. The plaintiff shall file with such clerk a bond for the use of the defendant, with sureties approved by such clerk, in penalty double the amount of tax appealed from, and in no case shall the bond be less than fifty dollars ($50.00), conditioned that the plaintiff shall perform the orders of the court. 
(c)  When the circuit court has rendered its decree and a certified copy thereof has been filed in the recorder-treasurer's office, the recorder-treasurer shall then correct the assessment in accordance with such decree. An appeal may be taken by the taxpayer or the recorder-treasurer to the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1971, § 23-26) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-227. - Service of notices. 
    Any written notice required by this article shall, unless otherwise specifically provided, be served upon the taxpayer personally or by registered or certified mail. 
(Code 1971, § 23-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-228. - Tax year. 
    The assessment of taxes made and the returns required by this article shall be on a quarterly basis, irrespective of the taxpayer's fiscal year end. An annual return will not be required. 
(Code 1971, § 23-28; Ord. of 7-28-98) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-9. 
Sec. 13-229. - Tax cumulative. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes levied by law as a condition precedent to engaging in any business, trade or calling. A person exercising a privilege taxable under this article, subject to the payments of all licenses and charges which are conditions precedent to exercising the privilege taxed, may exercise the privilege for the current tax year upon the condition that such person pay the tax accruing under this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-13-10. 
Sec. 13-230. - Payment; surcharge for delinquency. 
(a)  Every remittance of taxes imposed by this article shall be made by bank draft, certified check, money order or certificate of deposit, to the recorder-treasurer, who shall issue a receipt therefor to the taxpayer and pay the money into the city treasury to be kept and accounted for as provided by law. 
(b)  If any taxpayer fails to make the return required by this article, or makes a return but fails to remit in whole or in part the proper amount of tax, there shall be added to the amount of the tax unpaid, from the date such tax should have been paid, a penalty in the amount of five (5) per cent of the tax for the first month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency and one (1) per cent of the tax for each succeeding month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency; provided, that if such failure is due to reasonable cause, the recorder-treasurer may waive or remit these penalties in whole or in part. 
(c)  If the failure to pay is due to fraud or intent to evade this article and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, there shall be added an additional penalty of twenty-five (25) per cent of the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties. 
(d)  The penalties so added shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and as a part of the tax. 
(Code 1971, § 23-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-231. - Tax constitutes debt; tax lien; recording lien. 
    A tax due and unpaid under this article shall be a debt due the city. It shall be a personal obligation of the taxpayer and shall be a lien upon the property of the taxpayer; provided, that such lien shall be subject to the restrictions and conditions embodied in the Code of West Virginia, Chapter 11, Article 10. 
(Code 1971, § 23-31) 
Sec. 13-232. - Collection by action or suit; injunction. 
(a)  The recorder-treasurer may collect any tax, interest and penalty due and unpaid under the provisions of this article by action in debt, assumpsit, motion for judgment or other appropriate proceeding in this county or in the county in which the taxpayer resides; or by a suit to enforce the lien therefor in any county in which property of the taxpayer may be found; or, if the tax due and unpaid under this article is three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less, by suit in the court of any justice having jurisdiction of the taxpayer of the taxpayer's property. If the failure of any taxpayer to comply with the provisions of this article shall have continued sixty (60) days, the recorder-treasurer may proceed to obtain an injunction restraining the taxpayer from doing business in this city until the taxpayer fully complies with the provisions of this article. In any proceeding under this section upon judgment or decree for the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be awarded such plaintiff's costs. 
(b)  In the event a business subject to the tax imposed by this article shall be operated in connection with a receivership or insolvency proceeding, the court under whose direction such business is operated may, by the entry of a proper order in the cause, make provision for the regular payment of such taxes as the same become due. 
(Code 1971, § 23-32) 
Sec. 13-233. - Collection by distraint. 
    The city may distrain upon any goods, chattels or intangibles represented by negotiable evidences of indebtedness, of any taxpayer delinquent under this article for the payment of all taxes and penalties accrued and unpaid, hereunder. The lien created by this article on real estate may be enforced by suit in equity and other means provided by law. 
(Code 1971, § 23-33) 
Sec. 13-234. - Payment when person sells out or quits business; lien; liability of successor. 
(a)  Any person exercising any privilege taxable under this article who shall sell out such person's business or stock of goods, or shall cease doing such business, shall file the return prescribed by section 13-221 and remit the entire tax that may be chargeable against such person because of all business done, within thirty (30) days after selling out the business or stock of goods, or ceasing to do such business. The tax imposed by this article shall be a lien upon the property of such person. 
(b)  The successor in business of any such person shall withhold so much of the purchase money as will satisfy the taxes and penalty which may be due until the former owner shall produce a receipt from the recorder-treasurer evidencing the payment of such taxes and penalty. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold purchase money as above provided, and the taxes and penalty shall remain unpaid after expiration of the thirty (30) day period allowed for payment thereof, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of all such taxes and penalty, and they shall be recoverable by the recorder-treasurer by action or suit as provided in section 13-232. 
(Code 1971, § 23-34) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 13-235. - Payment prerequisite to payments by city on contracts. 
    All officers and agents making contracts on behalf of the city shall withhold payment in the final settlement of such contract until the receipt of a certificate from the recorder-treasurer to the effect that all taxes levied or accrued under this article against the contractor have been paid. 
(Code 1971, § 23-35) 
Sec. 13-236. - Recordation of tax liens and releases thereof. 
    The recorder-treasurer, for the more effective collection of any tax imposed by this article, may file with the clerk of the county court a certified copy of the assessment of taxes under this article for recordation. A certificate so filed shall be recorded in the book in which similar certificates of the state are recorded and thereafter constitute binding notice of the lien created by this article upon all lands of the taxpayer located within the city as against all parties whose interest arose after such recordation. Upon payment of the taxes delinquent under this article, the lien of which shall have been recorded, the recorder-treasurer shall certify in duplicate the fact and amount of payment and balance due, if any, and shall forward the certificates, one to the taxpayer, and one to the clerk of the county court to be recorded in the book in which releases are recorded. From the date that such a certificate is admitted to record, the land of the taxpayer in the city shall be free from any lien for taxes under this article accrued to the date that the certificate was issued. 
(Code 1971, § 23-36) 
Sec. 13-237. - Administration; rules and regulations for procedures, etc.; enforcement in courts. 
    The administration of this article is vested in and shall be exercised by the recorder-treasurer, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules of procedure in conformity with this article, subject to the approval of the council, for the making of returns and for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder; and the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article in any of the courts of the state shall be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the recorder-treasurer, who shall require the assistance and act through the city solicitor. 
(Code 1971, § 23-37) 
Sec. 13-238. - Failure to make return; fraudulent return and other fraudulent acts; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to refuse to make the return provided to be made in section 13-221; or to make any false or fraudulent return or false statement in any return, with the intent to defraud the city, or to evade the payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this article; or for any person to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax, or any part thereof imposed by this article; or for the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of any corporation or association to make or permit to be made for any corporation or association any false return, or any false statement in any return required in this article, with the intent to evade the payment of any tax hereunder. 
(b)  Whoever violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 and such punishment shall be in addition to any surcharge for delinquency or other civil penalty imposed by this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-38) 
Sec. 13-239. - Tax credit. 
(a)  Definitions. The following shall apply to this article and section only: 
(1)  New business: New business shall be deemed as any new or existing commercial, wholesale, retail, manufacturing, or service entity which shall physically locate its principal place of business within the corporate limits of the City of Beckley or within specified commercial zones of the city, either by purchase of real property or by virtue of a lease of five (5) years or more duration, and which is subject to the city's business and occupation tax. New business shall also include existing commercial entities which are brought within the corporate limits of the city by way of annexation or minor boundary adjustment. 
No commercial entity which has conducted business within the corporate limits of the city currently or in the past, and which changes its name or changes its business structure shall be considered as a new business under this section, unless prior written approval has been given by the recorder-treasurer. 
Additionally, the acquisition and continued operation of an existing commercial entity by another entity subject to the business and occupation tax of the city, whether such acquisition be by purchase or lease, shall be considered as an expansion under the terms of this section. 
(2)  Expansion business: Expanded, expanding, or expansion business shall be deemed as the purchase or lease of property (as hereinafter defined) by a commercial entity currently conducting business within the corporate limits of the city or within a specified zone; which property is physically located within the city; and which purchase or lease is for the purpose of increasing the economic productivity of the business. 
(3)  Property: Property shall mean real property and improvements thereto, and/or tangible personal property, but only if such property was purchased or leased for use as a component part of an ongoing business operation located within the city or a particular zone. This term includes tangible personal property with respect to which depreciation is allowable in determining the personal income tax or corporate income tax liability of the business taxpayer, and has a useful life at the time the property is placed in service within the city of four (4) years or more. Property acquired by written lease for a primary term of five (5) years or longer, if used as a component part of an expansion by an existing business, shall be included within this definition. 
(4)  Business and occupation tax liability: As used within this article shall mean that annual tax computed by the application of the rates contained in sections 13-209, 13-210, 13-213, 13-214 and 13-215, less the amount of annual exemption allowed and determined under section 13-218. "Average business and occupation tax" liability shall be defined as the average dollar amount of city business and occupation tax liability incurred over the three-year period immediately preceding the date the taxpayer qualifies for the credit. 
(b)  Amount of tax credit. 
(1)  For new businesses within the corporate limits of the city which locate in zone B-3, the business entity will be allowed a fifty (50) per cent credit against the business and occupation tax liability annually for a period of five (5) consecutive years from the date the entity qualifies for the tax credit. 
For expanding businesses within the corporate limits of the city which locate in zone B-3, the business entity will be allowed a fifty (50) per cent credit against the increased business and occupation tax annual liability over and above that entity's average business and occupation tax liability, for a period of five (5) consecutive years from the date the entity qualifies for the credit. 
(2)  For new businesses within the corporate limits of the city which locate in any commercial zone other than B-3, the business entity will be allowed a thirty (30) per cent credit against the business and occupation tax annual liability for a period of five (5) consecutive years from the date the entity qualifies for the tax credit. 
For expanding businesses within the corporate limits of the city which locate in any commercial zone other than B-3, the business entity will be allowed a thirty (30) per cent credit against the increased business and occupation tax annual liability over and above that entity's average business and occupation tax liability, for a period of five (5) consecutive years from the date the entity qualifies for the credit. 
(3)  The owner of any new, newly remodeled or renovated multi-unit housing construction or newly remodeled or renovated commercial building development which shall be constructed within the corporate limits of the city, regardless of zone, will be allowed a fifty (50) per cent tax credit against the normal business and occupation tax annual liability on rental income for a period of five (5) consecutive years from the date the entity qualifies for the tax credit. 
(c)  Administration and enforcement of this section. The administration of this section is vested in, and shall be exercised by, the recorder, treasurer of the city, who in connection therewith shall prescribe all necessary forms and returns. The recorder-treasurer will promulgate all necessary rules and regulations, subject to the approval of common council, that are necessary for the making of returns, and for the enforcement of this section. 
The recorder-treasurer is hereby authorized to make any necessary determinations regarding forfeiture, qualification, or carryover of the tax credit authorized by this section, and, subject to review by common council, may determine that a particular tax credit application violates the spirit and intention of this section and deny the credit on that basis. 
(d)  Severability. If this section or any portion thereof, or the application of this section in any circumstance is held unconstitutional or invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect other sections of this chapter, and to this end each and every section, subsection, provision, clause, and phrase of this section is declared to be severable. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall be effective January 1, 1987. However, business taxpayers who may be qualified in calendar year 1986 and who had begun or were under construction with new or expanded facilities, or which had contracted for or leased tangible personal property on or after July 1, 1986, may qualify for the tax credit herein, as determined by the recorder-treasurer. 
(Ord. of 11-25-86) 
Cross reference- Business and occupation tax, § 13-200 et seq. 
Sec. 13-240. - Notice of delinquency. 
    On or after April 1 of each year, the official designated to collect a municipality's business and occupation taxes may prepare and publish a notice stating in effect that the business and occupation taxes assessed for the previous year are delinquent, and that, unless paid by April 30 will be included for publication in the forthcoming delinquent lists. Notice of delinquent taxes, if published, shall be published as a Class 11-0 legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of article three, chapter fifty-nine of the West Virginia Code, and the publication area for such publication shall be the municipality. 
(Ord. of 7-26-16) 
Sec. 13-241. - Delinquent lists. 
    The official designated to collect a municipality's business and occupation taxes, after ascertaining which of the business and occupation taxes are delinquent may, on or before the first day of May next succeeding the year for which the taxes were due, prepare a delinquent list, arranged alphabetically by name of the entity charged as of April 30. The delinquent list shall include an oath, and shall be subscribed before, and certified by, some person duly authorized to administer oaths, in form or effect as follows: 
I, ____________ , (municipal official title) of ____________ , do swear that the foregoing list is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, complete and accurate, and that I have received payment from none of the entities listed. 
(Ord. of 7-26-16) 
Sec. 13-242 - Publication and posting of delinquent tax lists. 
    A copy of each of the delinquent lists may be posted at the front door of City Hall at least two weeks before the session of Beckley Common Council at which they are to be presented for examination. At the same time a copy of each list may be published as a Class I-O legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of article three, chapter fifty-nine of the West Virginia Code, and the publication area for such publication shall be the municipality. Only the name of the entity failing to file tax returns and make payment need be published. To cover the costs of preparing, publishing, and posting the delinquent lists, a reasonable charge may be added to the taxes and interest already due. 
(Ord. of 7-26-16) 
Sec. 13-243. - Correction of delinquent lists by common council. 
    The official designated to collect the municipality's business and occupation taxes, on or before June 15, must present the delinquent lists to Common Council for examination. The Common Council having become satisfied that the lists are correct, or having corrected them if erroneous, shall direct the City Clerk (Recorder-Treasurer) to certify a copy of each list, pertaining to real property, to the Auditor not later than July first. The original lists shall be preserved by the City Clerk (Recorder-Treasurer) in his office, and the list of delinquent real estate shall be recorded, in a permanent book to be kept by him for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 7-26-16) 
Secs. 13-244-13-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORES 

Sec. 13-300. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Coin-operated device: No coin-operated device shall be construed to be a "store". 
    General store: Any store or any mercantile establishment in which goods, wares or merchandise of any kind are purchased, ordered, sold or offered for sale either at retail or wholesale. 
    Special store: Any store or any mercantile establishment in which goods, wares or merchandise of any kind, except cigarettes, tobacco products and soft drinks, are purchased, ordered, sold or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale, and which contains no coin-operated device owned and operated by the store proprietor. 
(Code 1971, § 11-70) 
Sec. 13-301. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain any general or special store in the city without first having obtained a license to do so from the recorder-treasurer as hereinafter provided in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-69) 
Sec. 13-302. - Stores exempt from store tax. 
    The establishment, operation or maintenance of stores by the following shall be exempt from the license tax imposed by this article: 
(1)  The United States of America and this state and its political subdivisions; 
(2)  Religious and charitable organizations; 
(3)  Any persons engaged within this city in the business of producing agricultural products who, individually or collectively, sell in such store only agricultural products which they have produced. 
(Code 1971, § 11-73) 
Sec. 13-303. - General store license tax. 
    Every person establishing, operating or maintaining one or more general stores within this city under the same general management, supervision or ownership shall pay for the privilege of establishing, operating or maintaining such stores an annual license tax of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each store. 
(Code 1971, § 11-71) 
Sec. 13-304. - Special store license tax. 
    Every person establishing, operating or maintaining one or more special stores within this city under the same general management, supervision or ownership shall pay for the privilege of establishing, operating or maintaining such stores an annual license tax of five dollars ($5.00) for each store. 
(Code 1971, § 11-72) 
Sec. 13-305. - License tax for part of year. 
    Each general and special store license issued after the first day of July of any year shall be charged for at the full rate and each license issued on or after the date of January and prior to the first day of July of any year shall be charged for at one-half (1/2) of the full rate. 
(Code 1971, § 11-74) 
Sec. 13-306. - Application for license-Filing; filing fee; payment of tax. 
    Any person desiring to establish, operate or maintain a general or special store in this city shall apply to the recorder-treasurer for a license so to do. The application for a license shall be made on the form which shall be prescribed and furnished by the recorder-treasurer and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the name and location of such store, and such other facts as the recorder-treasurer may require. If the applicant desires to operate more than one such store, such applicant shall make a separate application for each such store. Each such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for each license requested, and by the license tax prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-75) 
Sec. 13-307. - Same-Examination; return for correction; granting and display of license. 
    As soon as practicable after the receipt of any general or special store license application, the recorder-treasurer shall carefully examine such application to ascertain whether it is in proper form and contains the necessary and requisite information. If, upon examination, the recorder-treasurer shall find that any such application is not in proper form and does not contain the necessary and requisite information, the recorder-treasurer shall return such application for correction. If an application is found to be satisfactory and if the filing fee and license tax, as prescribed in this article, shall have been paid, the recorder-treasurer shall issue to the applicant a license for each store for which an application for license shall have been made. Each licensee shall display the license so issued in a conspicuous place in the store for which such license is issued. 
(Code 1971, § 11-76) 
Sec. 13-308. - Licenses nonassignable and nontransferable. 
    Licenses issued under this article shall not be assignable and shall not be transferrable. 
(Code 1971, § 11-77) 
Sec. 13-309. - License amendable upon change of location. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be altered so as to permit removal of the store to another location. In order to be effective at the new location, however, the certificate of license must show upon its face an endorsement of the change by the recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 11-78) 
Sec. 13-310. - License expiration date; duty of licensees to renew; requirements for renewal; cessation of business. 
    All general and special store licenses shall be so issued as to expire on the thirtieth day of June next following the date of issuance. On or before the first day of July of each year, every person having a license shall apply to the recorder-treasurer for a renewal for the license year next ensuing, unless such person has ceased to operate such store or does not propose to continue operation of the store during the license year next ensuing, in which event such person shall notify the recorder-treasurer that such person has ceased operation of the store or that such person proposes to cease operation of the store prior to the date for renewal of such license. All applications for renewal shall be made on the forms prescribed by the recorder-treasurer. Each application for a renewal shall be accompanied by a filing fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for each license requested and by the prescribed license tax. 
(Code 1971, § 11-79) 
Sec. 13-311. - Licenses and fees in addition to others. 
    The licenses and the license and filing fees provided in this article shall be charged and collected in addition to all other license fees or taxes which may be chargeable against or heretofore chargeable against any person from whom a license is required under the provisions of this article and shall likewise be charged in addition to license fees or taxes which may be hereafter chargeable for any purpose whatsoever against such person by ordinance hereafter enacted, unless such ordinance shall otherwise expressly provide. 
(Code 1971, § 11-80) 
Sec. 13-312. - Surcharge on overdue tax. 
    Any person who establishes, operates or maintains a general or special store without obtaining a license therefor or continues to operate such store after the termination of a license therefor shall, in addition to paying the license tax, be subject to a penalty of ten (10) per cent of such license tax for each month or part thereof during which such person is in default. This penalty shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(Code 1971, § 11-81) 
Sec. 13-313. - Collection of tax by court action. 
    The recorder-treasurer may collect any general or special store license tax and penalty unpaid under the provisions of this article by action in debt, motion for judgment or other appropriate proceeding, including suit in the court of any magistrate. 
(Code 1971, § 11-82) 
Secs. 13-314-13-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Intoxication, § 10-15; possession of alcoholic beverage in public place, § 10-12; driving under influence, § 14-502 et seq. 
State Law reference- Provisions as to the manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic liquor, W. Va. Const., Art. VI, § 46; W. Va. Code, § 60-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-400. - Compliance with law. 
    No person shall directly or indirectly manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for sale, furnish, or sell, or solicit the purchase of sale of any beer, wine, or intoxicating liquor in the city for delivery or use therein or in any other part of the state unless such person shall have fully complied with all applicable provisions of state law and this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-6) 
Sec. 13-401. - Intoxicating liquor and wine tax-Levy. 
    Pursuant to Chapter 8, Article 13, section 7 of the Code of West Virginia, there is hereby imposed a tax of five (5) per cent of the retail purchase price of any intoxicating liquors purchased from the alcohol beverage control commission or from any person licensed to sell wine at retail to the public under the provision of Chapter 60, Article 8 of the Code of West Virginia, within the corporate boundaries of the municipality. Such tax shall be levied upon the purchaser of said intoxicating liquor or wine, and shall be added to and collected with the retail purchase price of such intoxicating liquor or wine. Such tax shall be received by the municipality from the state treasury pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the alcohol beverage control commissioner; provided, however, that such tax shall not be collected on intoxicating liquors, other than wine sold by or purchased from holders of a license issued under the provisions of Chapter 60, Article 7 of the West Virginia Code; provided further, such tax shall be collected upon all sales of wine to holders of a license issued under the provisions of Chapter 60, Article 7 of the West Virginia Code from a wine distributor licensed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 60, Article 3 et seq. of the West Virginia Code. 
(Code 1971, § 23-44; Ord. of 9-27-83) 
Sec. 13-402. - Same-Certification by mayor; collection by state. 
    The mayor shall certify section 13-401 to the state alcohol control commission and provision for the collection and distribution of the tax hereby levied shall be made in the manner provided by Code of West Virginia, section 8-13-7. 
(Code 1971, § 23-45) 
Sec. 13-403. - Private clubs-Annual license fees. 
    There is hereby levied upon each private club dispensing alcoholic beverages licensed by the state under Chapter 60, Article 7, Code of West Virginia, as the following annual license fee: 
(1)  For a license issued to a fraternal or veterans' organization or a non profit social club, three hundred and seventy-five dollars ($375.00); 
(2)  For a license issued to a private club other than a private club of the type specified in subsection (1) of this section, five hundred dollars ($500.00) if such private club has less than one thousand (1,000) members and one thousand two hundred and fifty dollars ($1,250.00) if such a private club has one thousand (1,000) or more members. 
(Code 1971, § 11-86) 
Cross reference- Hours of clubs regulated, § 10-9. 
Sec. 13-404. - Same-Fees for licenses issued during first six months of year. 
    The fee for any license issued under section 13-403 after following the first day of January of any year and before the first day of July of such year shall be one-half of that prescribed by section 13-403. 
(Code 1971, § 11-87) 
Sec. 13-405. - Same-To whom fees payable; disposition of fees. 
    All license fees under section 13-403 shall be paid to the recorder-treasurer and credited to the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 11-88) 
Sec. 13-406. - Wine-Annual license tax. 
(a)  Tax imposed: There is hereby imposed an annual license tax upon distributors and retailers of wine within the city limits, and to such end, no person may engage in business in the capacity of distributor or retailer of wine as provided by Chapter 60, Article 8 of the West Virginia Code within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a license from the city, nor shall a person continue to engage in any such activity after such license has expired, been suspended or revoked. No person may be licensed in more than one of such capacities at the same time. 
(b)  Fees: The annual fee for license issued under subsection (a) hereof shall be as follows; 
(1)  Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per year for a distributor's license. 
(2)  One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for a retailer's license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-115(a), (b)) 
Sec. 13-407. - Same-License for each place; eligibility for license. 
(a)  A wine retailer who has more than one place of retail business shall obtain a license for each separate retail establishment. 
(b)  A retailer's license may be issued only to the proprietor or owner of a bona fide grocery store or wine specialty shop. 
(Code 1971, § 11-115(d)) 
Sec. 13-408. - Same-License period; license for less than full year. 
    The license period for a wine license shall begin on the first day of July of each year, and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year, and if the initial license is granted for less than a year, the fee shall be computed in proportion to the number of quarters remaining in the fiscal year, including the quarter in which application is made. 
(Code 1971, § 11-115(c)) 
Sec. 13-409. - Liquor license fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code §§ 60-3A-12(e) and 8-13-4, respectively, on and after July 1, 1999, any person, firm, or corporation desiring to conduct retail sales of liquor within the corporate limits of the City of Beckley, West Virginia, shall, after first being licensed by the State of West Virginia pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code § 60-3A-1 et seq., thereafter file as an applicant for retail liquor license with the recorder-treasurer of the City of Beckley. 
(b)  The annual retail license period shall be from the first day of July to the thirtieth day of June of the following year. The annual municipal license fee if an applicant holds a Class A retail license under the state law shall be the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per outlet. The annual municipal retail license fee if an applicant holds a Class B retail license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The annual retail license fee for the initial year of issuance shall be prorated based on the number of days remaining between the date of issuance and the following thirtieth day of June. 
(c)  A retail license shall expire on the thirtieth day of June of each year and may be renewed only upon the submission of an application and payment of the required annual fee to the recorder-treasurer of the City of Beckley, on or before July 1 of each year on such forms as the recorder-treasurer may prescribe. 
(d)  No person may sell liquor at any retail outlet within the city if the state retail license applicable to such outlet has been suspended or revoked or has expired. 
(e)  All retail liquor licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall expire and be of no further force or effect as of the first day of July, the year after they are issued, unless renewed from year to year, as hereinbefore provided. 
(f)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each day of noncompliance shall be construed a separate violation of this provision. 
(Ord. of 2-26-91; Ord. of 6-22-99) 
Secs. 13-410-13-449. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONINTOXICATING BEER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 11-16-3 et seq. 

Sec. 13-450. - License required; compliance with division. 
    No person shall manufacture, sell, possess for sale, transport or distribute nonintoxicating beer within the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this division and after first obtaining a city license therefor. 
(Code 1971, § 11-56) 
Sec. 13-451. - Definitions; state regulations. 
    The definitions relating to nonintoxicating beer, as well as all other provisions relating thereto, which are not specifically covered or provided for in this division, shall be in compliance with and pursuant to the general laws of the state relating thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 11-57) 
State Law reference- Definition of "nonintoxicating beer" and other words and phrases used in the nonintoxicating beer statute, W. Va Code, § 11-16-2. 
Sec. 13-452. - License period; fees. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed an annual license tax as follows upon all dealers in and of nonintoxicating beer, which license period shall begin on the first day of July of each year, and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year, and if a license is granted for a less period, the tax shall be computed quarterly, in proportion to the remainder of the fiscal year: 
(1)  Retail dealer, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each place of business; except that such license fee for social, fraternal or public clubs not operating for profit, and having been in continuous operation for two (2) years or more immediately preceding the date of application, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)  Distributor, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each place of business; 
(3)  Brewer, with place of business located within the city, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each place of manufacture. 
(Code 1971, § 11-58) 
Sec. 13-453. - Applications for license. 
    A license to manufacture, distribute or sell non-intoxicating beer shall be issued by the recorder-treasurer to any person who applies for a dispenser's license, and who submits a written application for a license, which application shall state under oath: 
(1)  As to individuals: 
(a)  That such person has been a resident of the state for two (2) years or more; the name and residence address of the applicant; and the length of time applicant has lived at such residence; 
(b)  That applicant is a citizen of the United States; 
(c)  The place of birth of the applicant, and if the applicant is a naturalized citizen, the time and place of such naturalization; and 
(d)  That the applicant has never been convicted of a felony, or of a violation of the federal or state liquor laws. 
(2)  As to all applicants: 
(a)  The location of the place or building where the applicant intends to operate; 
(b)  The name of the owner of the building, and if such owner is not the applicant, that such applicant is the actual lessee of the premises; 
(c)  That the place or building in which it is proposed to do business conforms to all laws of health and fire regulations applicable thereto, and is a safe and proper place or building, and is not within three hundred (300) feet of any school or church, measured from front door to front door along the street or streets; provided, that this requirement shall not apply to an applicant who holds a state class B license, or to any place now occupied by a beer licensee, so long as it is continuously so occupied; 
(d)  That the applicant is the only person in any manner pecuniarily interested in the business so asked to be licensed, and that no other person shall be in any manner pecuniarily interested therein during the continuance of the license; and 
(e)  That the applicant has not during five (5) years next immediately preceding the date of said application had a nonintoxicating beer license revoked, nor during the same period been convicted of any criminal offense. 
(Code 1971, § 11-59) 
Sec. 13-454. - Revocation of license; right to appeal. 
    The council may revoke any nonintoxicating beer license issued under the provisions of this division upon the following grounds, subject to an appeal of licensee to a court of competent jurisdiction whenever the licensee is aggrieved: 
(1)  When disorderly or immoral practices are permitted or intoxicating liquor is sold on the premises; 
(2)  Where the word "saloon" is printed, painted or placed upon the door, window or in any other public place on or about the premises or when the word "saloon" is used in any advertisement by the licensee; or 
(3)  When circumstances happen or become known to the council which, had they happened or been known at the time of the application for the license, would have legally justified a refusal of such license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-60) 
Sec. 13-455. - Unlawful acts of licensees. 
    It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any licensee, or licensee's servant, agent or employee, to sell, give or dispense, or any individual to drink or consume, in or on any licensed premises or in any rooms directly connected therewith, nonintoxicating beer on weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on any Sunday, except in duly licensed private clubs where the hours shall conform with the hours of sale of alcoholic liquors; 
Cross reference- Hours of clubs regulated, § 10-9. 
(2)  For any licensee, or licensee's servant, agent or employee, to sell, furnish or give any nonintoxicating beer or alcoholic liquors to any person visibly or noticeably intoxicated, or to any insane person, or to any habitual drunkard, or to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years; 
(3)  For any licensee to obstruct the view of the interior of the premises by enclosure, lattice, drapes, or any means which would prevent plain view of the patron occupying such premises. The interior of all licensed premises shall be adequately lighted at all times; provided, that provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the premises of a class B retailer or the premises of a duly licensed private club; 
(4)  For any licensee to permit loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct of any kind upon the premises or to permit the use of loud musical instruments if either or any of the same may disturb the peace and quietude of the community wherein such business is located; provided, that no licensee shall have in connection with the place of business any loudspeaker located on the outside of the licensed premises that broadcasts or carries music of any kind; 
(5)  For any licensee, or licensee's servant, agent or employee, or for any licensee by or through such servant, agent or employee, to allow, suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to loiter in or upon any licensed premises; except, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply where such person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is in or upon such premises in the immediate company of such person's parent or guardian, or where and while such person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is in or upon such premises for the purpose of and actually making a lawful purchase of any items or commodities therein sold, or for the purchase of and actually receiving any lawful service therein rendered, including the consumption of any item of food, drink or soft drink therein lawfully prepared and served or sold for consumption on such premises. 
(Code 1971, § 11-61; Ord. of 11-14-89) 
Sec. 13-456. - Violations. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this division or who makes a false statement concerning any material fact in submitting an application for a license, or for a renewal of a license, or in any hearing concerning the revocation thereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1971, § 11-62) 
Secs. 13-457-13-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COIN-OPERATED DEVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Coin-operated devices not construed to be stores, § 13-300 et seq. 

Sec. 13-500. - Devices generally-Fees. 
(a)  The annual license fee to keep or maintain an automatic baggage or parcel checking machine or device which is operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle and which is used for the storage of baggage or parcels of any character shall be fifty cents ($0.50) for each section of any such device. 
(b)  The annual license fee to keep or maintain any automatic toilet locker or device shall be fifty cents ($0.50) for every such locker or device. 
(c)  The annual license fee to keep or maintain any other automatic penny slot machine or device, which is not a gambling device under any law of this state, shall be at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) for each machine or device kept or maintained by the licensee. 
(d)  The annual license fee to keep or maintain any other automatic slot machine or device, which is not a gambling device as aforesaid, except coin-operated laundries and vehicle washing devices or dispensing devices used in connection therewith which are subject to a license under this article as hereinafter provided, shall be the rate of five dollars ($5.00) for each such machine or device kept or maintained by the licensee. 
(Code 1971, § 11-65(a)-(d)) 
Sec. 13-501. - Same-Exemptions for stamp machines and telephones. 
    The term slot machine or device as used in this article shall not be deemed to mean or include any pay telephone or postage stamp vending machine operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle. 
(Code 1971, § 11-65) 
Sec. 13-502. - Same-Exemption for stores; evidence of exemption. 
(a)  Except where the principal business of the operation of the store is the operation of such machines or devices, no license fee shall be required of persons keeping or maintaining machines or devices within the purview of section 13-500 which are owned by them in their own licensed stores. 
(b)  Any person exempt from such license shall obtain from the recorder-treasurer a license receipt, decalcomania stamp or other evidence of exemption at a cost not to exceed fifty cents ($0.50) each, showing that such person is so exempt, which shall be effective for the annual license period; but to obtain such license receipt or other evidence of exemption, such person shall make an affidavit and produce such other evidence as to the fact entitling such person to such exemption as the recorder-treasurer, in officer's discretion, may require, which shall be on a form to be prescribed by that officer. 
(Code 1971, § 11-66) 
Sec. 13-503. - Same-Application for and issuance of license; evidence of license to be affixed to machine. 
    Applications for the licenses required by section 13-500 shall contain the number of such machines or devices to be kept or maintained by the licensee within this city during the ensuing license year. One license certificate shall be issued to each person keeping or maintaining such machines or devices as aforesaid, but the recorder-treasurer shall issue to any such licensee a decalcomania stamp or other evidence of license for each such machine or device, which decalcomania stamp or other evidence of license shall be securely attached to the side or front of such machine or device properly protected and plainly visible. Every such machine or device shall also bear on the side or front thereof so as to be plainly visible the name and address of the person keeping or maintaining such machine or device. 
(Code 1971, § 11-67) 
Sec. 13-504. - Same-Responsibility of proprietor of premises; liability for fees; impoundment; sale. 
(a)  The proprietor or owner of the business conducted in the place where any machine licensed under section 13-503 is kept or maintained is charged with the responsibility of satisfying such person's self that the decalcomania stamp or other evidence of license is so attached before permitting its installation in such person's place of business, and in the event the owner of any automatic machine or device refuses, neglects or fails to pay the license fee due upon any such machine or device, then the proprietor or owner of the business conducted in the place where such machine is installed, operated or maintained shall be liable for the payment of such license fee. 
(b)  Upon the refusal or failure of the proprietor or owner to pay such fee, the recorder-treasurer may take such machine or device into possession and deliver it to the chief of police. The chief of police on such officer's own initiative, or, upon order or direction of the recorder-treasurer, may take such machine or device into possession, and in either event it shall be impounded until such license fee is paid. 
(c)  In the event the license fee and penalties are not paid to the recorder-treasurer within ten (10) days after the date of such impounding, then such officer shall sell such machine or device in the manner provided by law for the sale of personal property for taxes, and from the proceeds thereof shall discharge and pay the license fee due on such machine or device and the recorder-treasurer's costs, including cost of impounding, storage, penalties and other fees due the city and the balance, if any there be, shall be forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1971, § 11-68) 
Sec. 13-505. - Coin operated laundries and vehicle wash devices-License tax imposed; determination of ownership; exemption from tax imposed on slot machines. 
(a)  Coin-operated devices which wash, dry, clean or dry clean items of any description, including clothing, household items, automotive vehicles and boats, or which dispense merchandise for use in such washing, drying, cleaning or dry cleaning, are hereby subject to a license tax. 
(b)  All persons owning the aforementioned devices, or like washing devices, shall be liable for payment of such license tax. Ownership shall be deemed established by determining who is the purchaser by either a bill of sale, paid invoice or a conditional sales contract or agreement filed and recorded in the applicable county clerk's office in the county or in the office of the secretary of state. Leasing of machines will not be deemed a transfer of ownership. 
(c)  No machine or device taxed under the provisions of this section shall be subject to the provisions of sections 13-500 through 13-504. 
(Code 1971, § 11-31) 
Sec. 13-506. - Same-License fee; application for license. 
(a)  The annual license fee to own machines which are within the purview of section 13-505 and which are being operated in this city, whether operated by the owner or other persons, shall be as follows: Upon ten (10) or more machines, in any one location, the annual license fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). Upon less than ten (10) machines, in any one location, the annual license fee shall be three dollars ($3.00) for each machine; provided, that in no instance shall the annual license fee be less than fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(b)  Application for the license required herein shall be made upon forms provided by the recorder-treasurer. The applicant shall furnish such information as may be required by that officer. The completed application shall be subscribed and sworn to before a notary public. 
(Code 1971, § 11-32) 
Secs. 13-507-13-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT DEALERS AND VENDORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-600. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Hawker, peddler: Any person who shall carry goods, wares or merchandise from place to place, either in person or by agent or employee, and sell, for delivery at the same time, any such goods, wares or merchandise to any purchaser, at wholesale or retail, and any person who shall solicit for the purpose of rendering any service. 
    Sale: Any sale for money payment or for barter, and any offer to make such sale or any offer to render any service or the rendering thereof. 
    Itinerant vendor: Any person who engages or conducts within this city, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, a temporary or transient business of selling goods, wares and merchandise; and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, uses, leases or occupies, either in whole or in part, a room, building or other structure, or who uses, leases, or occupies for such purposes rooms in any hotel or lodging house, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise; and the person so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of those sections by reason of association temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part of the business of, or in the name of, any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Code 1971, §§ 11-36, 11-40) 
Cross reference- Definition of "itinerant dealer" in coins, etc., § 13-650. 
Sec. 13-601. - Hawkers and peddlers-License fees; display of license. 
(a)  The annual license fee to act as a hawker or peddler, if the person licensed travels without a motor vehicle, shall be ten dollars ($10.00); if such person travels with a motor vehicle of not more than one-half (1/2) ton capacity, fifteen dollars ($15.00); if such person travels with a motor vehicle of more than one-half (1/2) ton capacity, but not exceeding one (1) ton capacity, fifty dollars ($50.00); if such person travels with a motor vehicle of more than one (1) ton capacity, but not exceeding two (2) tons capacity, one hundred dollars ($100.00); and if such person travels with a motor vehicle of more than two (2) tons capacity, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional ton or fraction thereof over two (2) tons capacity; and the persons licensed shall pay at the same rate for each motor vehicle so used. 
(b)  Such person shall carry the license in some conspicuous place in such person's vehicle or about such person's pack, and in addition thereto shall cause to be painted or stenciled in a conspicuous place on the left-hand side of the vehicle the number of the license and the words "City of Beckley" and the license year for which the license is issued. 
(Code 1971, § 11-35) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to impose tax for vending of goods, wares, etc., on streets, § 21(13). 
Sec. 13-602. - Same-Exemptions; exemption receipt required; procedure to obtain exemption receipt. 
(a)  The provisions of section 13-601 shall not apply to any person who sells any goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered in the future; or to any of the following who offer immediate delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise being sold: 
(1)  Any person engaged within this city in the business or calling of agriculture, horticulture or grazing who sells individually or collectively, one or more for the other or others, the products derived from such business or calling aforesaid; 
(2)  Any person engaged in the maintenance or operation of retail merchandise store to exchange goods, wares or merchandise from such store for agricultural, horticultural or grazing products or to resell any such products received in due course of such business; nor to any other retail business concern established and operating continuously for one year or more within this city in the sale of any product over regular routes; 
(3)  Any wholesaler or jobber selling soft drinks or nonintoxicating beer for which such person is duly licensed by this city; 
(4)  Any person who sells petroleum products, ice, wood, meat, milk, ice cream, bread, cakes, pies and other bakery products, butter and eggs, manufactured, grown or produced by any such person and not purchased by such person for resale; 
(5)  Any sales by societies, groups or organizations acting for patriotic, charitable, religious or benevolent purposes; 
(6)  Any agent or sales person selling manufactured products, except green groceries and canned or bottled fruit products, produced by such person's employer, and who sells them to retail dealers for the purpose of resale; and 
(7)  Any person having a stock of goods or merchandise, or manufacturing or processing plant kept or operating at a fixed situs in the city, and declared for taxation in the county and using a vehicle over a fixed route for the purpose of selling or distributing, at wholesale such person's merchandise, stock of goods or plant products. 
(b)  Any person exempt from license as provided in the foregoing provisions of this section shall obtain from the recorder-treasurer a license receipt, without cost, showing that such person is so exempt, which shall be effective for the period as provided for annual licenses in this chapter, but to obtain such license receipt such person shall make an affidavit and produce such other evidence as to the fact entitling such person to such exemption as the recorder-treasurer in such recorder-treasurer's discretion may require, which shall be on a form to be prescribed by the recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 11-37) 
Sec. 13-603. - Itinerant vendors-License fee. 
    The annual license fee to carry on the business of itinerant vendor shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1971, § 11-38) 
Charter reference- Provisions authorizing city to impose tax on vendors of merchandise, § 21(13). 
Sec. 13-604. - Same-Bond required; where filed. 
(a)  In addition to the license required by section 13-603, every itinerant vendor shall execute a continuing bond in the form prescribed by the recorder-treasurer with satisfactory corporate surety in the penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), payable to the city, conditioned that such itinerant vendor will pay all damages accruing to anyone by reason of any act or action done, performed or taken by such itinerant vendor in or about the conduct of such business and further conditioned that such itinerant vendor will pay all taxes, fees and penalties imposed by this city; provided, that the aggregate liability of the surety for all such damages, taxes, fees and penalties shall, in no event, exceed the sum of the bond. 
(b)  This bond shall be filed with the recorder-treasurer and shall be open to inspection during business hours to any persons desiring to inspect it. 
(Code 1971, § 11-39) 
Cross reference- As to required statement under oath in fire sales and similar sales, see § 13-805. 
Sec. 13-605. - Same-Violations. 
    Every itinerant vendor who sells or exhibits for sale at public or private sale any goods, wares or merchandise without first obtaining a license therefor, and in all other respects complying with the provisions of this chapter, or who makes any false statement in reference to the matter set out in the permit application, and every person whether principal or agent who, by circular, handbill, newspaper or in any other manner advertises such sale as described in this section, before proper licenses are issued to the vendor and before such person has complied with the appropriate provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 1971, § 11-42) 
Sec. 13-606. - Same-Persons excluded. 
    The provisions of sections 13-603 through 13-605 shall not apply to sales made to persons by commercial travelers, or selling agents in the usual course of business; nor to bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample for future delivery; nor to hawkers or peddlers in the streets, from packs or vehicles; nor to persons selling meat or the products of the farm, garden or dairy; nor to any sales of goods, wares or merchandise on the grounds of any agricultural association during the continuance of any annual fair held by such association; nor to any sales by societies acting for patriotic, charitable, religious or benevolent purposes; nor to judicial sales directed by law or under the orders of any court; nor to the sales of the common necessities of life in any public market place. 
(Code 1971, § 11-43) 
Sec. 13-607. - Canvassers and solicitors-Duty to register; information required on registration; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any kind, or seeking information or donations, without first having registered in the office of the recorder-treasurer. The registrant shall give such person's complete identification and signature, the name of the employer, the nature of the products or services in which such person is interested, the names of the manufacturers of such products, or of the organization which such person is representing, and the proposed method of operation in the city. 
(b)  Each person required to register under the provisions of this section shall pay to the recorder-treasurer a registration fee of five dollars ($5.00) for the period expiring ninety (90) days after the date of registration. 
(Code 1971, §§ 11-93, 11-94) 
Sec. 13-608. - Same-Certificate. 
(a)  Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and who pays the fee provided shall be furnished a certificate indicating that such person has registered and showing the dates covered by such registration. 
(b)  Each person shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the city carry upon the person the registration certificate, which shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever such registrant is required to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(c)  Any registration under this division may be revoked by the mayor of the chief of police for any violation by the registrant of any provision of this Code or other ordinance or any state or federal law or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required for the original registration. 
(Code 1971, §§ 11-96, 11-97) 
Sec. 13-609. - Same-Persons exempted. 
    The provisions of sections 13-607 through 13-610 shall not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(Code 1971, § 11-96) 
Sec. 13-610. - When solicitation or private premises constitutes nuisance. 
    The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by canvassers, solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of such private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing, peddling or hawking thereof, is declared to be a nuisance in the absence of the registration or licensing and payment of the registration or license fee as required by this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-98) 
Sec. 13-611. - Soliciting money-Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor for any organization, or for any other person, to solicit on the streets of the city or within the corporate limits at any time for money, alms or otherwise, without a permit as provided herein; provided, no solicitation shall be permitted within the corporate limits on the travel portion of any streets, alleys, roads or roadways or any rights-of-ways. 
(Code 1971, § 11-90) 
Sec. 13-612. - Same-Application for permit and proof of statements therein; issuance or denial of permit. 
    Solicitation permits, which shall be valid and effective for not more than one week, shall be issued by the recorder-treasurer to such persons as apply therefor at such recorder-treasurer's office during regular business hours, where such applications are submitted not less than three (3) days before the day on which the applicant intends to begin the solicitation; provided, such permits shall, under no circumstances, be issued to any person who is receiving public assistance from this or any other state or from the federal government; provided further, applicants for solicitation permits shall disclose to the recorder-treasurer the purpose and persons to be benefited by such solicitations and shall, upon demand by the recorder-treasurer, be required to furnish proof that the funds obtained through such solicitations will in fact be used for the purpose and persons for which the funds are intended. If the applicant fails to furnish such information and proof, the recorder-treasurer shall refuse to issue such permit. 
(Code 1971, § 11-91) 
Sec. 13-613. - Begging as habitual occupation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to follow the practice of soliciting alms as an habitual occupation. 
(Code 1971, § 11-89) 
Charter reference- Council to restrain beggars, § 21(34). 
State Law reference- Provisions relative to begging by children, W. Va. Code, § 61-8-25. 
Secs. 13-614-13-649. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ITINERANT DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Pawnbroker as precious metals dealer, § 13-1222. 

Sec. 13-650. - Definition. 
    Itinerant dealer, within the meaning of this division, is a person who shall engage in an temporary or transient business in this city for the purchase of coins, gold, silver, platinum, gems or semiprecious stones. 
(Code 1971, § 11-104) 
Sec. 13-651. - Permit-Required. 
    No itinerant dealer may purchase coins, gold, silver, platinum, gems or semiprecious stones without a permit as provided herein. 
(Code 1971, § 11-105) 
Sec. 13-652. - Same-Issuance; specifications thereon. 
    A permit shall be issued by the recorder-treasurer to any person able to produce satisfactory evidence of good character, which permit shall designate the premises on which said person shall conduct the business and specify the dates upon which the business may be conducted. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be charged. 
(Code 1971, § 11-106) 
Sec. 13-653. - Same-Transferability; refund of fee; display. 
    The permit issued hereunder shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall there by any abatement of the fee upon such person by reason of the fact that the person shall have exercised the privilege for any period of less than that for which it was granted. The permit shall at all times be kept publicly exposed by the person on such person's business premises. 
(Code 1971, § 11-107) 
Sec. 13-654. - False statements on application render permit void. 
    Any false statement made on the application form voids the permit ab initio. 
(Code 1971, § 11-108) 
Sec. 13-655. - Records of purchases; delivery to chief of police. 
    The permit holder shall ascertain the name, address, and age of sellers by requiring an identifier issued by a governmental agency with a picture of the subject and one other corroborating means of identification. The permit holder shall record the items purchased, the price paid, and the seller's identity. Such records shall be delivered to the chief of police on the day of purchase. 
(Code 1971, § 11-109) 
Sec. 13-656. - Purchases from persons under eighteen. 
    No purchases may be made from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Code 1971, § 11-110) 
Sec. 13-657. - Bond. 
    Every person obtaining a permit shall, at the time of issuance of the permit and before the same shall be operative, enter with either one corporate or two (2) personal sufficient sureties into a joint and several recognizance to the city in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this division. 
(Code 1971, § 11-111) 
Secs. 13-658-13-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - JUNK DEALERS 

Sec. 13-700. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Itinerant junk collector: Only such persons who gather junk from place to place with the aid of a cart or other vehicle, who have no fixed place of business. 
    Junk: Old or scrap gold, copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, rubber, automobile parts, iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous metals. 
    Junk dealer: Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling junk as hereinabove defined. 
    Junk dealer's agent: Any person who buys or sells junk as hereinbefore defined for or on behalf of a junk dealer, as hereinabove defined, but the term "junk dealer's agent" shall not be construed to include any person regularly employed upon a salary by a regularly licensed junk dealer engaged in such business within the city. 
    Nonresident junk dealer or dealer's agent: Any person who acts as junk dealer or junk dealer's agent who is nonresident of the city, and any firm so engaged whose members are nonresidents of the city and all corporations which have not been admitted to hold property and transact business in the state. 
(Code 1971, § 11-45) 
Sec. 13-701. - Junk dealers, junk dealer's agents and itinerant junk collectors-Required to have license. 
    No person within the city shall engage in the business of junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector without a license therefor, which shall be issued as provided in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-44) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 11-12-7. 
Sec. 13-702. - License fees. 
    The annual license fee to act as a resident junk dealer shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); to act as a junk dealer's agent, ten dollars ($10.00); to act as a nonresident junk dealer or such dealer's agent who buys or solicits for the purchase of junk within the city, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); to act as an itinerant junk collector, two dollars ($2.00). 
(Code 1971, § 11-46) 
Sec. 13-703. - Certain convictions bar license. 
    No person who has been convicted of a felony shall be licensed as a junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector, and no person convicted of a misdemeanor in connection with the junk business within a five (5)-year period prior to application for a license shall be licensed as a junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector. 
(Code 1971, § 11-47) 
Sec. 13-704. - Requirements for resident license. 
(a)  No resident license shall be issued to any junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector who has not been a resident of the city for a period of at least one year prior to the application of such license. 
(b)  No corporation or firm shall engage in the business of junk dealer or junk dealer's agent in the city unless the officers or agents of such corporation or firm who engage in the business of junk dealer or junk dealer's agent, in behalf of such corporation or firm, shall be eligible to be duly licensed as resident junk dealers or junk dealer's agents in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 11-48) 
Sec. 13-705. - Junk dealer's agent must be eligible for resident dealer's or agent's license. 
    No person engaged in the junk business shall engage a person as a junk dealer's agent who is ineligible to receive a resident junk dealer's or junk dealer's agent's license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-49) 
Sec. 13-706. - Agent's certificate of authority required. 
    Every resident junk dealer shall certify to the recorder-treasurer the names of the agents for whom such dealer desires a license certificate, and shall give to each agent so engaged by such dealer a certificate of authority which the agent shall at all times keep with the license, and no such junk dealer's agent's license shall be valid and effective without such certificate of authority. 
(Code 1971, § 11-50) 
Sec. 13-707. - Certificates and affidavits required for issuance of license. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall not issue a junk dealer's agent's license until the applicant therefor shall first have presented a certificate from a duly licensed junk dealer showing such authorization, and no license shall be issued to a junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector unless such person shall file with the recorder-treasurer an affidavit setting forth that such applicant has not been convicted of a felony and that such applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor in connection with the junk business within a five (5)-year period prior to the time of the application, and, in the event that the application is for a resident dealer's license, that applicant has resided in the city for a period of one year next preceding the date of the application, which certificate and affidavit shall be filed by the recorder-treasurer in such officer's office. 
(Code 1971, § 11-51) 
Sec. 13-708. - Vehicle permits. 
    The recorder-treasurer shall assign to each license certificate a numerically designated permit, and such permit so given shall be plainly stenciled or printed as "Dealer's Permit No.", "Agent's Permit No.", "Itinerant Collector's Permit No.", "Nonresident Permit No.", as the case may be, upon both sides of all trucks or other vehicles used in the collecting and transporting of junk. 
(Code 1971, § 11-52) 
Sec. 13-709. - Restrictions as to nonresident licensees. 
    No nonresident licensee shall be permitted to maintain a fixed place of business within the city. Any nonresident junk dealer may purchase junk from any resident junk dealer without complying with the provisions of this article, but if such licensee comes into the city in any motor vehicle or horsedrawn vehicle such licensee shall not be permitted to transport from the city in such vehicle junk purchased from resident junk dealers, unless there is a compliance with this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-53) 
Sec. 13-710. - Nontransferability of license. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 1971, § 11-54) 
Sec. 13-711. - Licenses void when improperly issued. 
    Any license issued pursuant to this article, the issuance of which was based upon a false affidavit, and any other license improperly issued pursuant to this article shall be ipso facto void. 
(Code 1971, § 11-55) 
Secs. 13-712-13-799. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL SALES 

Sec. 13-800. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Advertise: Any notice of intention to sell, whether by word of mouth, newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, printed notice, printed display, billboard display, poster, radio announcement, television announcement, or by any other means of communication, oral, written or printed. 
    Sale; special sale: The sale or offer for sale to the public of goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description, upon the representation by the seller, either express or implied, that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing out, going out liquidation, wind-up, discontinuance conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale. "Sale" and "special sale" shall also include any sale or offer of sale published or advertised to be a "fire sale", "adjustment sale", "creditors' sale", "trustee's sale", "liquidation sale", "reorganization sale", "alteration sale", "executor's sale", "administrator's sale", insolvent sale", "insurance salvage sale", "mortgage sale", "assignee's sale", "adjustor's sale", "receiver's sale", "loss of lease sale", "going out of business sale", "wholesaler's close out sale", "creditor's committee sale", "forced out of business sale", "removal sale" and any and all sales of offers to sell published or advertised in such manner as to convey to the public that upon the termination of the sale of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise on hand, the business in connection therewith shall cease, be discontinued and abandoned. 
(Code 1971, § 21-1) 
Sec. 13-801. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales conducted by sheriffs or other public or court officials, nor to any person acting under the direction or authority of any state or federal court, selling goods, wares and merchandise in the course of official duties, nor to duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction sale. 
(Code 1971, § 21-3) 
Sec. 13-802. - License required. 
    No person shall publish, advertise, offer to sell or conduct any sale of the type defined in section 13-800 without securing a license therefor from the recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 21-4) 
Sec. 13-803. - Application for license-Contents; false statements constitute offense. 
    Each application for a license under this article shall contain a description of the place where the sale is to be held, the nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of the termination of the occupancy. The application shall contain an itemized list of all goods, wares and merchandise proposed to be sold, the place where such stock was purchased or acquired, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition. The itemization of goods, wares and merchandise proposed to be sold shall contain a listing of all goods, wares and merchandise which have been in stock for a period of fifteen (15) days or longer, prior to the application for license, and a listing of all goods, wares and merchandise received in stock within fifteen (15) days immediately preceding the application for license. The application shall state the form and content of all advertising proposed to be made or published in connection with the sale, and any additional information the recorder-treasurer may require. Any false statement made in connection with such application shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1971, § 21-6) 
Sec. 13-804. - Same-Fees; forfeiture of fee if license denied. 
    Upon filing an original application or a renewal application for a license to advertise and conduct a sale or special sale the application shall pay to the recorder-treasurer a fee in the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) for an original application and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each renewal. If any application or renewal application is disapproved, such payment shall be forfeited as and for the cost of investigating the statement contained in such application or renewal application. 
(Code 1971, § 21-7) 
Sec. 13-805. - Statement under oath required of itinerant vendors. 
    No itinerant vendor shall advertise, represent or hold forth a sale of goods, wares or merchandise as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor, administrator, receiver, attorney, manufacturer's wholesale or closing out sale, or a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or otherwise, unless before so doing such person shall state in writing, under oath, to the recorder-treasurer, at the time such person makes application for a license, all the facts relating to the reason and character of such special sale as advertised, held forth or represented, including a statement of the names of the persons from whom such goods, wares and merchandise were purchased, and the date of the delivery thereof to the person applying for license; the place, if any, where such goods, wares or merchandise were previously exposed for sale, and such details as are necessary to locate exactly and identify fully all such goods, wares and merchandise proposed to be sold. Such itinerant vendor shall also include in such statement the name and residence of the owner in whose interest the business is conducted, to be kept on file in the office of the recorder-treasurer, and a record shall be kept by that office of all such statements, in convenient form and open to public inspection. 
(Code 1971, § 11-41) 
Sec. 13-806. - Investigation of application; issuance, duration and renewal of license. 
    Upon receipt of an application and payment of the prescribed fee, the recorder-treasurer shall cause the application to be examined and investigated. If after such examination and investigation the recorder-treasurer is satisfied as to the truth of the statements contained in such application, and as to the form and content of the advertising to be used in connection with such sale, such officer may then issue a license permitting the advertising and conduct of such sale. Such license shall be for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, except that upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock itemized in the original application has not been disposed of, the recorder-treasurer may renew such license for an additional thirty (30)-day period, upon payment of the prescribed renewal fee. Such proof for a renewal license shall be furnished in a form approved by the recorder-treasurer. The application for renewal license shall contain an itemized list of goods, wares and merchandise proposed to be sold in the same manner as prescribed for the original application, and shall be verified by the applicant. The recorder-treasurer shall cause the application for renewal to be examined and investigated, and if satisfied as to the truth of the statements therein contained, the recorder-treasurer may then issue a renewal license for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days; provided, that not more than two (2) such renewals shall be granted for any such sale for the same location within a period of one year from the date of issuance of the first license. 
(Code 1971, § 21-8) 
Sec. 13-807. - Only goods itemized in application may be advertised or sold; suspension or revocation of license for cause. 
    No goods, wares or merchandise shall be advertised for sale, sold or offered for sale at any sale or special sale other than those goods, wares and merchandise itemized in the application for license or renewal license as prescribed in this article. The advertisement for sale, special sale or offer for sale of any goods, wares and merchandise at any sale or special sale, other than those itemized in the application for license or renewal license, by any licensee or licensee's servants, agents or employees shall operate automatically to cancel and revoke the grant of such license to such licensee made pursuant to the terms of this article. The recorder-treasurer is hereby further authorized to suspend, cancel or revoke for cause at any time any license granted pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 21-9) 
Sec. 13-808. - Display of license and stock list; right to inspect records and stock; manner of advertising. 
    Upon commencement of any sale, the license issued by the recorder-treasurer, together with a duplicate original of the stock list contained in the application, shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. At the close of each business week the stock listed so posted shall be revised by marking thereon those items sold or disposed of during such week. Suitable books and records as prescribed by the recorder-treasurer shall be kept by the licensee and shall at all times be available for the inspection of the recorder-treasurer or such officer's agents. The licensee shall permit the recorder-treasurer or such officer's agents to examine all merchandise on the premises for the purpose of comparison with the stock list. All advertisements or advertising and the language contained therein shall be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the application and the language of such advertisements shall not vary from the language as indicated in the application. 
(Code 1971, § 21-10) 
State Law reference- Provisions as to false representations in advertisements of goods for sale, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-38. 
Sec. 13-809. - Supervision and regulation by recorder; rules and regulations. 
    The recorder-treasurer is hereby authorized to supervise and regulate sales and special sales, to issue licenses therefor, to supervise and regulate advertising and to make and promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of such sales, special sales and the advertising in connection therewith, as will serve to prevent fraud on and deception of the public. 
(Code 1971, § 21-11) 
Secs. 13-810-13-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 13-900. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    Garage sale: Any sale entitled "garage sale", "yard sale", "lawn sale", "attic sale", "rummage sale", "flea market sale", or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale. 
    Goods: Any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
(Code 1971, § 11-116) 
Sec. 13-901. - License-Required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the city without first filing with the recorder-treasurer the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such recorder-treasurer a license to do so, to be known as a "garage sale license". 
(b)  The fee for such license shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
(Code 1971, § 11-117) 
Sec. 13-902. - Same-Frequency and term; display. 
(a)  Such license shall be issued to any one person only twice within a twelve (12)-month period and no such license shall be issued for more than four (4) consecutive calendar days. 
(b)  Each license issued under this article must be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale. 
(Code 1971, § 11-118) 
Sec. 13-903. - Same-Application information. 
    The information to be filed with the recorder-treasurer pursuant to this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Name of person conducting said sale; 
(2)  Name of owner of the property on which said sale is to be conducted, and consent of owner if applicant is other than the owner; 
(3)  Location at which sale is to be conducted; 
(4)  Number of days of sale; 
(5)  Date, nature of any past sale; 
(6)  Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other person conducting said sale and the dates of such sales; 
(7)  Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by any local, state or federal agency; and 
(8)  Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the information therein given is full and true and known to such person to be so. 
(Code 1971, § 11-119) 
Sec. 13-904. - Signs permitted. 
    During the period of the authorized license sale, licensee shall be permitted to place on the premises one nonelectric sign limited to six (6) square feet in area. No sign, symbol or notice shall be posted on any other premises or public or private right-of-way. 
(Code 1971, § 11-121) 
Sec. 13-905. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Any person selling or advertising for a sale any item or items of personal property which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in number. 
(Code 1971, § 11-120) 
Secs. 13-906-13-999. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PUBLIC UTILITIES TAX 

Sec. 13-1000. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Person: As defined in section 1-2, and specifically to include individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, the United States of America, this state, political subdivisions, boards, commissions, authorities, public corporations, corporations and combinations thereof, of whatever form and character. 
(b)  Public utility service: All services and tangible personal property purchased within the city from a seller, as hereinafter in this section defined, including, telephone, electric, and gas, including bottled or liquid gas, if the seller thereof is classified as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the public service commission of the state, water and sanitary sewer service, if purchased, used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Purchaser: Includes every person who purchases, uses or consumes a public utility service. 
(d)  Seller: Includes every person, whether a public service corporation, a municipality or private corporation, classified as a public utility and subject to the jurisdiction of the public service commission of the state, who sells, furnishes or supplies a public utility service. 
(Code 1971, § 23-46) 
Sec. 13-1001. - Imposition and levying of tax. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each purchaser of public utility service, an excise tax upon the privilege of purchasing, using or consuming, within the corporate limits of the city, such public utility service. Said tax shall be in the amount of two (2) per cent of the charge (exclusive of any federal or state tax thereon, imposed upon the purchaser) made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each public utility service, which tax in every case shall be collected by the seller and paid by the purchaser upon the amount of each periodic statement rendered such purchaser by the seller and shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and the seller. The tax imposed and levied by this article is in addition to all other taxes imposed and levied by the city, authorized by section 8-13-5a of the Code of West Virginia. 
(Code 1971, § 23-47) 
Sec. 13-1002. - Collection; time of payment; accounting; effective date of article; proration. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city, to collect from each purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for its public utility service, and the amount of tax actually collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the city, and each seller shall remit the amount of tax shown by said report to have been collected to the city on or before the last day of the second calendar month following the month in which collected, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has failed or refused to pay the tax so imposed and levied. The tax imposed and levied by this article shall apply to periodic statements rendered. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the recorder-treasurer of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 23-48) 
Sec. 13-1003. - Maintenance of records; inspection. 
    Each seller shall keep and maintain complete records showing all purchases of public utility service within the corporate limits of the city, which records shall show the charge made against each purchaser, the dates such public utility service was furnished, the date of payment therefor, and the amount of tax imposed hereunder, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable time, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make, at the expense of the city, such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1971, § 23-49) 
Sec. 13-1004. - Exemptions. 
    The tax hereby imposed and levied shall not apply to the following transactions, which transactions are hereby exempted from such tax: 
(1)  Purchases of tangible personal property such as appliances or the like, as distinguished from the public service supplied; 
(2)  Charges for telephone services which are paid by the insertion of coins into coin-operated telephones, and specific charges or tolls for telephone calls to points outside the corporate limits of this municipality; 
(3)  Purchases of this utility service by the United States of America, this state, and the political subdivisions, municipalities, boards, commissions, authorities and public corporations thereof; and 
(4)  Nonrecurring or one-time charges incidental to the furnishing of public utility service. 
(Code 1971, § 23-50) 
Sec. 13-1005. - Nonliability of utility; duty of municipality; refunds; rules and regulations. 
(a)  There shall be no liability upon the seller for erroneously collecting the tax hereby imposed and levied or for erroneously failing to bill for such tax as a result of a good faith mistake on the part of the seller. When any purchaser contends that such tax is not owed by such purchaser on the ground that the public utility service was not purchased, used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city, the seller shall refer the question to the recorder-treasurer of the city, and such seller shall thereafter collect or refrain from collecting such tax from such purchaser for such public utility services as instructed in writing to do by the recorder-treasurer of the city. All claims for refunds of any such tax shall be presented to the city and not to the seller. 
(b)  The recorder-treasurer shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-51) 
Sec. 13-1006. - Additional remedies. 
    Any amount of tax due and unpaid under this article shall be a debt due the city. In addition to all other methods hereinbefore, in this article, set forth and prescribed for the collection of the taxes due hereunder, the city, through its recorder-treasurer, is authorized and empowered to collect the same, in the same manner as other similar taxes are collected, and may impose and collect the same in the same manner and by the same remedies as are now, or may hereafter be, provided by law for the enforcement of liens and levies for state, county and municipal taxes. 
(Code 1971, § 23-52) 
Secs. 13-1007-13-1099. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - CAPITATION TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to levy tax, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-3. 

Sec. 13-1100. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Collector: The assessor of this county and such assessor's deputies. 
    Inhabitants: All persons who reside or are domiciled within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Twenty-one years of age: Any inhabitant shall be considered to have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years if such inhabitant has attained such age on or before January first of the year in question. 
(Code 1971, § 23-40) 
Sec. 13-1101. - Levied. 
    There is levied and shall be collected from each inhabitant of the city who has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years, an annual capitation tax of two dollars ($2.00), which shall be due and payable on the first day of January annually. 
(Code 1971, § 23-41) 
Sec. 13-1102. - Collection; percentage to collector. 
    The collector shall collect the capitation tax levied by this article in the manner authorized and provided by the statutory law of this state and in return for such services shall be entitled to receive from the city ten (10) per cent of all such capitation tax collected; provided, that the collector shall not be entitled to receive any commission on collections if such person fails to account for and turn over, within the time affixed by the statutory law of this state, any money collected by such collector under and by virtue of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-7-1. 
Sec. 13-1103. - Bond of county assessor. 
    The county assessor shall, in addition to other bonds required of such assessor, give bond in a penalty in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of such assessor's duties under this article. 
(Code 1971, § 23-43) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require county assessor to give bond for protection of city, W. Va. Code, § 11-7-1. 
Secs. 13-1104-13-1199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES 

Sec. 13-1200. - Barbering and beauty culture; compliance with state law. 
    No person, professionally or for a fee, shall practice barbering or beauty culture within the city unless such person has obtained and displays such person's state certificate of registration, and has complied with the provisions of West Virginia Code, Chapter 16, Article 14. 
(Code 1971, § 11-15) 
Sec. 13-1201. - Bowling alleys; billiard, pool, bagatelle and similar tables-License fees. 
    The annual license fee to keep or maintain a bowling alley or a billiard, pool or bagatelle table or table of like kind, for public use, where any charge is made for the use thereof, shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); but, if more than one such alley or table is kept or maintained in the same building by the same person, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first alley or table and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each additional alley or for each additional table. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16) 
Sec. 13-1202. - Same-Gambling and intoxicating liquor prohibited on premises. 
    No licensee under section 13-1201 or licensee's agents or employees shall permit any person in any manner to bet or wager anything of value upon any game played upon such alleys or tables. Such licensee, licensee's agents or employees shall not permit any person to bring any intoxicating liquors of any kind into such building or other place where such alleys or tables are located. 
(Code 1971, § 11-17) 
Sec. 13-1203. - Same-Persons under age eighteen on poolroom premises. 
    Persons keeping or maintaining billiard, pool or bagatelle tables or other tables of like kind, their agents or employees, shall not permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to play at such tables and shall not permit any such person under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain or loiter, whether playing at such tables or not, in the room where such tables are located. 
(Code 1971, § 11-18) 
Sec. 13-1204. - Same-Pool room hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any pool room within the city to operate such premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. of each day, or permit or allow the premises to be operated between those hours, or permit or allow any person not an employee of such owner or operator to loiter or remain in such pool room between those hours. 
(Code 1971, § 11-19) 
Sec. 13-1205. - Building contractors-Defined; license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the city as a building contractor without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this article. 
(b)  The term "building contractor", for the purposes of this article, shall mean and include any persons engaged in the business of cement or concrete contracting, either flat, form or wall work; of as a masonry contractor; or as a carpenter contractor; or as a general building contractor; and any person engaged in the construction, alteration or repair of buildings or other structures, or sidewalk or street pavements or public parks. Any person engaging in the construction, repair or alteration of any building, structure, or street or sidewalk or public park pavement in the city for which a permit is required under this Code or other ordinance shall be construed as doing business as a building contractor in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 11-20) 
Cross reference- See also § 4-660 et seq. 
Sec. 13-1206. - Same-Subcontractors. 
    Any person engaging as a subcontractor in the construction, repair or alteration of any building, structure, or street or sidewalk or public park pavement in the city for which a permit is required under this Code or other ordinance shall be construed as engaged in the business of a building contractor. 
(Code 1971, § 11-21) 
Sec. 13-1207. - Same-License fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a building contractor's license shall be: 
(1)  For concrete or cement contractor, per year ..... $25.00 
(2)  For masonry contractor, per year ..... 25.00 
(3)  For carpenter contractor, per year ..... 25.00 
(4)  For roofing, painting and all other building trade contractors other than general contractors, except heating, air conditioning, sheet metal work, plumbing and electrical contractor, per year ..... 25.00 
(5)  For general contractor, per year ..... 50.00 
(b)  However, any person having a general building contractor's license shall not be required to secure an additional license for the performance of carpentry, masonry, or cement work. 
(c)  Fees paid to the recorder-treasurer under the terms of this section shall be maintained in the separate fund mentioned in section 4-675 and shall be used only for the purposes specified in that section. 
(Code 1971, § 11-22) 
Sec. 13-1208. - Same-Revocation of license. 
    Any building contractor's license may be revoked by the building official for repeated violations of this Code or any ordinance relating to the construction of buildings, the use of streets, or the replacing of streets, sidewalks or parkways, or any other ordinance relating to the work performed by such contractor. Such revocation may be in addition to any penalty imposed for any such violation. 
(Code 1971, § 11-24) 
Sec. 13-1209. - Same-Requirement for doing work for city. 
    Before any building contractor doing any work for the city on any street or highway or on any building or premises owned by the city commences work, such contractor shall file with the recorder-treasurer a certificate or other proof showing that such contractor carries workers' compensation insurance and public liability insurance as required by terms of such contractor's contract and any ordinance relating thereto or to the work for which such contractor is employed by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 11-25) 
Sec. 13-1210. - Circuses, carnivals and itinerant shows-License fees for carnivals. 
    The license fee to exhibit a street or carnival show shall be five dollars ($5.00) a week for each showing or performance of each entertainment, performance or exhibition given at or in the vicinity of any such carnival. Each such entertainment, performance or exhibition shall require a separate license, whether or not shown under the same canvas and whether or not exhibited for additional compensation. Upon each showing or performance of any such entertainment, performance or exhibition being concluded, and the charging of another fee for admission, an additional license fee shall be required for any such further or additional showing or performance of such entertainment, performance of exhibition. 
(Code 1971, § 11-26) 
Charter reference- Provision authorizing regulation of carnivals, street fairs, etc., § 21, subdiv.(10). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 11-12-14. 
Sec. 13-1211. - Same-License fees for circuses and itinerant shows. 
    The license to exhibit a circus or menagerie, a circus and menagerie combined, wild west show or other itinerant show not exhibited in a theater, opera house or other permanent place for public shows, shall be based upon the number of railroad cars or motor trucks used to transport the property or equipment of such shows, but not including railroad cars or motor trucks used to transport the personnel thereof. If railroad cars are used the fee shall be four dollars ($4.00) for each car for each day on which any performance is given. If motor trucks are used the fee shall be three dollars ($3.00) for each truck for each day on which any performance is given. 
(Code 1971, § 11-27) 
Sec. 13-1212. - Same-License fees for concessions. 
(a)  To keep or maintain any concession stand selling service, goods, wares or merchandise such as food, soft drinks, ice cream, candy floss and the like, at or in the vicinity of any street or carnival show, the fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) a week for each such concession. 
(b)  To maintain any concession stand such as ball games, bingo, cane rack, penny pitch-till-you-win, striking machine, weighing machine, shooting gallery, artful dodger, bumper, fish pond, dart game or other legitimate game of skill, none of which shall be controlled by the operator, at or in the vicinity of any street or carnival show, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) a week for each such concession. 
(c)  To operate or maintain a candy wheel or any other legitimate merchandise wheel at or in the vicinity of a street or carnival show, when operated without control of the operator, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day. 
(d)  To operate or maintain rides of all kinds at or in the vicinity of a street or carnival show the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) each a week. 
(Code 1971, § 11-28) 
Sec. 13-1213. - Same-Prohibited activities and denial of license. 
    Such games as roll downs, blowers, spinners, swinging ball, creepers, race tracks, spot the spot, and all other games controlled by the operator are hereby forbidden and no license shall be granted to any circus, show or street carnival where such games are operated. 
(Code 1971, § 11-29(a)) 
Sec. 13-1214. - Same-Exemptions from license fees. 
    The provisions of sections 13-1210 through 13-1213 shall not apply to any patriotic, educational, literary, dramatic, musical or benevolent society, or volunteer fire company, not conducted for private profit, where such exhibitions are confined to one county, unless professional or paid talent, other than a director, is employed in such exhibitions. 
(Code 1971, § 11-30) 
Sec. 13-1215. - Collection agencies. 
    The annual license fee to engage in the business of a collection agency within this city shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). For purposes of this section, any person who engages in solicitation or collection by or through an agent operating within this city shall be considered to be engaging in the business of a "collection agency". 
(Code 1971, § 11-33) 
Sec. 13-1216. - Employment agents. 
    The annual license fee to conduct the business of an employment agent, to receive applications for employment, to hire or contract with persons for employment shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00), except that the annual license fee for an agency or registry for the employment of nurses, practical nurses or undergraduate nurses shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); provided, that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any such agency or registry operated by a registered professional nurses association or any district subdivision thereof for the exclusive benefit of its registrants and not for profit. 
(Code 1971, § 11-34) 
Sec. 13-1217. - Fire extinguishers, detectors, alarms and sprinklers-License required for sales and service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of the sale or service of any fire extinguisher, portable or fixed fire extinguisher systems, fire detection equipment, alarm systems or sprinkler system without a license therefor, which shall be issued as provided herein. 
(Code 1971, § 11-99) 
Sec. 13-1218. - Sales-Fees. 
    The annual license fee to engage in the business of the sale or service as provided in section 13-1217 shall be one dollar ($1.00) for the holder of a general store license in the city and ten dollars ($10.00) for all others. 
(Code 1971, § 11-100) 
Sec. 13-1219. - Approval of bureau of fire prevention-Code compliance. 
    All persons engaged in the sale and service of any fire extinguisher, portable or fixed fire extinguisher system, fire detection equipment, fire alarm system or sprinkler system in the city shall comply with applicable rules and regulations of the bureau of fire prevention of the city, all applicable codes including, but not limited to the life safety code, electrical code, housing code, building code and fire prevention code and all other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1971, § 11-101) 
Cross reference- Building code, § 4-9 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-301; fire prevention code, § 7-200; National Fire Codes, § 7-202 et seq.; housing code, § 4-400. 
Sec. 13-1220. - Same-Revocation of license. 
    The council may revoke any license issued under the provisions of sections 13-1217 through 13-1219, upon the following grounds, subject to an appeal of any licensee to a court of competent jurisdiction whenever any licensee is aggrieved: 
(1)  When the licensee fails to comply with any lawful order of the bureau of fire prevention; 
(2)  Whenever the licensee fails to comply with the provisions of section 13-1219; 
(3)  Whenever the sale or service by any licensee of any fire extinguisher, portable or fixed fire extinguisher system, fire protection equipment, fire alarm system or sprinkler system results in, either directly or indirectly, a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1971, § 11-102) 
Sec. 13-1221. - Same-Violation. 
    Whoever violates any provision of sections 13-1217 through 13-1220, or who makes a false statement concerning any material fact in submitting an application for a license, or for a renewal of a license, or in any hearing concerning the revocation thereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1971, § 11-103) 
Sec. 13-1222. - Pawnbroker-License fee; "Pawn-broker" defined. 
(a)  The annual license fee to engage in the business of pawnbroker shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  The word "pawnbroker" as used in subsection (a) of this section shall include any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal property, such as articles made of or containing gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or jewels of any description for the purpose of reducing or smelting them into any form different from their condition or construction when purchased, and reselling or marketing the product. 
(Code 1971, § 11-63) 
Cross reference- Itinerant precious metals dealer, § 13-650 et seq. 
Sec. 13-1223. - Same-Record of transactions required; reports to and inspections by police. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers licensed pursuant to section 13-123 shall keep a separate book open to inspection by a member of the police force or other city officer in which shall be written in the English language at the time of the pledge, purchase, or exchange of any article, a description thereof, including any model number, serial number, and other identification numbers, if applicable, and the name, description, and residence of the pledgor or person from whom purchased and received which shall be ascertained by requiring an identifier issued by a government agency with a picture of the subject and one other corroborating means of identification and the day and hour when such transaction was made. Each entry shall be numbered consecutively commencing with number one. 
(b)  When a permit holder purchases personal property, such as articles made of or containing gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals or jewels of any description for the purpose of reducing or smelting them into any form different from their condition or construction when purchased, and reselling or marketing the product shall keep the personal property in its original form for a period of ten (10) days before it may be altered in any way. 
(c)  A tag shall be attached to such article in some visible and convenient place with the number thereupon corresponding to the entry number of such book. 
(d)  All pawnbrokers shall provide the chief of police with a copy or summary of the records required to be kept as hereinabove described at such times and in such form as shall be designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1971, § 11-64; Ord. of 11-12-91) 
Sec. 13-1224. - Theater; motion picture show. 
    The annual fee for license to operate a theater or motion picture show in the city where admission is charged to the public shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(Code 1971, § 11-84) 
Sec. 13-1225. - Trading stamp sales or redemptions. 
    The annual license fee to sell or offer for sale merchants' trading stamps, premium stamps or stamps or certificates of like nature, or to undertake to redeem such stamps or certificates in money or goods, shall be one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00); provided, that this section shall not apply to any coupon or similar device issued and redeemed by a manufacturer or packer. 
(Code 1971, § 11-85) 
Secs. 13-1226-13-1299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - HOTEL TAX[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted on July 9, 1985, amended Ch. 23 of the 1971 Code by adding Art. V thereto. At the editor's discretion, the provisions of said ordinance have been designated as Art. XIII hereof. 

Sec. 13-1300. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article: 
    Consideration paid or consideration means the amount received in money, credits, property, or other consideration for or in exchange for the right to occupy a hotel room as herein defined. 
    Consumer means a person who pays the consideration for the use or occupancy of a hotel room. The term "consumer" shall not be construed to mean the government of the United States of America, its agencies or instrumentalities, or the government of the State of West Virginia or political subdivisions thereof. 
    Hotel means any facility, building, or buildings publicly or privately owned (including a facility located in a state, county, or municipal park), in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include, but not be limited to, boarding houses, hotels, motels, inns, courts, lodges, cabins, and tourist homes. The term "hotel" shall include state, county, and city parks offering accommodations as herein set forth. The term "hotel" shall not be construed to mean any hospital, sanitarium, extended care facility, nursing home, or university or college housing unit, or any facility providing fewer than three (3) hotel rooms, nor any tent, trailer, or camper campsites; provided, that where a university or college housing unit provides sleeping accommodations for the general nonstudent public for a consideration, the term "hotel" shall, if otherwise applicable, apply to such accommodations for the purposes of this tax. 
    Hotel operator means the person who is proprietor of a hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, trustee in possession, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, executor, or in any other capacity. Where the hotel operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed a hotel operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
    Hotel room means any room or suite of rooms or other facility affording sleeping accommodations to the general public and situated within a hotel. The term "hotel room" shall not be construed to mean a banquet room, meeting room, or any other room not primarily used for, or in conjunction with, sleeping accommodations. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, syndicate, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, receiver, corporation, guardian, trust, business trust, trustee, committee, estate, executor, administrator, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    State park means any state-owned facility which is part of this state's park and recreation system established pursuant to this Code. For purposes of this article, any recreational facility otherwise qualifying as "hotel" and situated within a state park shall be deemed to be solely within the county in which the building or buildings comprising said facility are physically situated, notwithstanding the fact that the state park within which said facility is located may lie within the jurisdiction of more than one county. 
    Tax, taxes, or this tax means the hotel occupancy tax authorized by this article. 
    Taxing authority means the City of Beckley, unless otherwise specified. 
    Taxpayer means any person liable for the tax authorized by this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85) 
Sec. 13-1301. - Rate of tax. 
    The rate of tax imposed shall be six (6) per cent of the consideration paid for the use or occupancy of a hotel room. Such consideration shall not include the amount of tax imposed on the transaction under Chapter 11, Article 15 of the Code of West Virginia, or charges for meals, valet service, room service, telephone service, or other charges or consideration not paid for use or occupancy of a hotel room. The tax shall be imposed on the consumer and shall be collected by the hotel operator as part of the consideration paid for the occupancy of a hotel room; provided, that the tax shall not be imposed on any consumer occupying a hotel room for thirty (30) or more consecutive days. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-56; Ord. of 6-12-07, § 1) 
Sec. 13-1302. - Consumer to pay tax; hotel or hotel operator not to represent that it will absorb tax; accounting by hotel. 
(a)  The consumer shall pay to the hotel operator the amount of tax imposed hereinunder, which tax shall be added to and shall constitute a part of the consideration paid for the use and occupancy of the hotel room, and which tax shall be collectible as such by the hotel operator who shall account for, and remit to the City of Beckley, all taxes paid by consumers. The hotel operator shall separately state the tax authorized by this article on all bills, invoices, accounts, books of account, and records relating to consideration paid for occupancy or use of a hotel room. The hotel operator may commingle taxes collected hereunder with the proceeds of the rental of hotel accommodations unless the City of Beckley shall, by ordinance, order, regulation, or otherwise, require in writing the hotel operator to segregate such taxes collected from such proceeds. The city's claim for the hotel tax shall be enforceable against, and shall be superior to, all other claims against the monies so commingled excepting only claims of the state for monies held by the hotel pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11, Article 15, of the Code of West Virginia. All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the hotel until the same shall have been remitted to the City of Beckley as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  A hotel or hotel operator shall not represent to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that it will absorb all or any part of the tax or that the tax is not to be considered an element in the price to be collected from the consumer. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-57) 
Sec. 13-1303. - Occupancy billed to government agencies or employees. 
(a)  Hotel room occupancy billed directly to the federal government shall be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for by a federal government employee for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this tax. 
(b)  Hotel room occupancy billed directly to the State of West Virginia or its political subdivisions shall be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for by an employee of the state for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this tax. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-58) 
Sec. 13-1304. - Collection of tax when sale on credit. 
    A hotel operator doing business wholly or partially on a credit basis shall require the consumer to pay the full amount of tax due upon a credit sale at the time such sale is made or within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-59) 
Sec. 13-1305. - Receivership bankruptcy; priority of tax. 
    In the distribution, voluntary or compulsory, in receivership, bankruptcy or otherwise, of the property or estate of any person, all taxes due and unpaid authorized under this article shall be paid from the first money available for distribution in priority to all claims and liens except taxes and debts due to the United States which under federal law are given priority over the debts and liens created by municipal ordinance or order of the county commission for this tax and taxes and debts to the State of West Virginia. Any person charged with the administration or distribution of any such property or estate who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any taxes accrued and unpaid which are chargeable against the person whose property or estate is in administrative or distribution. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-60) 
Sec. 13-1306. - Failure to collect or remit tax; liability of hotel operator. 
    If any hotel operator fails to collect the tax authorized by this article or shall fail to properly remit such tax to the city, he shall be personally liable for such amount as he failed to collect or remit; provided, that such hotel operator shall not be held liable for failure to collect such tax if the hotel operator can by good and substantial evidence prove the refusal of the purchaser to pay this tax despite the diligent effort in good faith of the hotel operator to collect the tax. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-61) 
Sec. 13-1307. - Total amount collected to be remitted. 
    No profit shall accrue to any person as a result of the collection of the tax authorized under this article. Notwithstanding that the total amount of such taxes collected by a hotel operator may be in excess of the amount for which a consumer would be liable by the application of this levy for the occupancy of a hotel room or rooms, the total amount of all taxes collected by any hotel operator shall be remitted to the City of Beckley as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-62) 
Sec. 13-1308. - Tax return and payment. 
    Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, rule, or regulation of the taxing authority, the tax authorized by this article shall be due and payable in monthly installment son or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued; provided, that for credit sales in which the tax authorized by this article is not collected by the hotel operator at the time of such sales, such tax shall not, for the purpose of this article, be regarded as having accrued until the date on which it is either received by the hotel operator or upon the expiration of the thirty-day payment period set forth in section 13-1304 of this article, whichever shall first occur. The hotel operator shall, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, prepare and deliver to the taxing authority a return for the preceding month, in the form prescribed by the taxing authority. Such form shall include all information necessary for the computation, collection, and subsequent distribution of the tax as the taxing authority may require. A remittance for the amount of the tax due shall accompany each return. Each return shall be signed by the hotel operator or his duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-63) 
Sec. 13-1309. - Keeping and preserving of records. 
    Each hotel operator shall keep complete and accurate records of taxable sales and of charges, together with a record of the tax collected thereon, and shall keep all invoices and other pertinent documents in such form as the taxing authority may require. Such records and other documents shall be preserved for a period of not less than three (3) years, unless the taxing authority shall consent in writing to their destruction within that period or shall require that they be kept for a longer period. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-64) 
Sec. 13-1310. - Liability of officers. 
    If the taxpayer is an association or corporation, the officers thereof actually participating in the management or operation of the association or corporation shall be personally liable, jointly and severally, for any default on the part of the association or corporation; and payment of tax, fines, additions to tax or penalties which may be imposed by state law, municipal ordinance, or other authority may be enforced against such officers as against the association or corporation which they represent. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-65) 
Sec. 13-1311. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse to collect or to pay the tax or to willfully refuse to make the return required to be made by this article; or to willfully make any false or fraudulent return or false statement in any return with the intent to defraud any taxing authority; or to willfully evade the payment of the tax, or any part thereof; or for any person to willfully aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax, or any part thereof; or for any officer, partner, or principal of any corporation or association to willfully make or willfully permit to be made for such corporation or association any false return, or any false statement in any return authorized by this article, with the intent to evade the payment of this tax. 
(b)  Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of this article shall for the first offense be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or both fined and imprisoned. For each offense after the first offense, such person shall be guilty of a felony, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or imprisoned in the penitentiary not less than one nor more than three (3) years, or in the discretion of the court be confined in the county jail not more than one year, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(c)  Every prosecution for any offense arising under this article shall be commenced within three (3) years after the offense was committed, notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary. 
(d)  Proceedings against any person under this section shall be initiated in the county of this state wherein such person resides if any element of the offense occurs in such county of residence, or if no element of the offense occurs in such county of residence, then in the county where the offense was committed. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the term: 
(1)  "Willfully" means the intentional violation of a known legal duty to perform any act, required to be performed by any provision of this article, in respect of which the violation occurs; provided, that the mere failure to perform any act shall not be a willful violation under this article. A willful violation of this article requires that the defendant has had knowledge of or notice of a duty to perform such act, and that the defendant, with knowledge of or notice of such duty, intentionally failed to perform such act. 
(2)  "Evade" means to willfully and fraudulently commit any act with the intent of depriving the state of payment of any tax which there is a known legal duty to pay. 
(3)  "Fraud" means any false representation or concealment as to any material fact made by any person with the knowledge that it is not true and correct, with the intention that such representation or concealment be relied upon by the state. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-66) 
Sec. 13-1312. - Effective date of article; administration; rules and regulations. 
    This article shall be and become in effect from the 9th day of July, 1985, and all taxes prescribed hereunder shall be calculated beginning with said date. The City of Beckley, through its recorder-treasurer, is authorized and empowered to collect the same, in the same manner as other similar taxes are collected, and may impose and collect the same in the same manner and by the same remedies as are now, or may hereafter be, provided by law for the enforcement of liens and levies for the state, county, and municipal taxes. The recorder-treasurer shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-67) 
Sec. 13-1313. - Incorporation of West Virginia Code. 
    To the extent applicable to municipalities, those portions of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, designated as Chapter 7, Article 18, sections 13 and 14, are hereby incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 7-9-85, § 23-69) 
Secs. 13-1314-13-1399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAXES 

Sec. 13-1400. - Council findings. 
(a)  The Municipal Home Rule Board on September 14, 2015, approved the city's home rule plan thereby allowing the city to enact a consumers sales and service tax and a use tax pursuant to W. Va. Code § 8-l-5a without the limiting restrictions in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-1 et .seq. In accordance with its home rule plan, the Common Council of the City of Beckley, West Virginia, hereby finds and declares that the adoption by this city for its consumers sales and service tax and use tax provisions of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended relating to imposition, administration, collection and enforcement of the state consumers sales and service tax codified in W. Va. Code § 11-15-1 et seq., the state use tax codified in W. Va. Code § 11-15A-1 et seq., and the streamlined sales and use tax act codified in W. Va. Code § 11-15B-1 et seq. will (1) simplify collection of the taxes, (2) simplify preparation of consumers sales and use tax returns by taxpayers, and (3) improve enforcement of the city's sales and use taxes. 
(b)  The Common Council does, therefore, declare that this article be construed so as to accomplish the foregoing purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1401. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms used in this article or in the administration, collection and enforcement of the taxes imposed by this article and not otherwise defined in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in articles nine, ten, fifteen, fifteen-a and fifteen b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended. 
(b)  As used in this article: 
(1)  Business includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in by any person with the object of gain or economic benefit, direct or indirect, and all activities of the state and its political subdivisions which involve sales of tangible personal property or the rendering of services when those service activities compete with or may compete with the activities of other persons. 
(2)  "City" or "this city" means the City of Beckley, West Virginia. 
(3)  "Code of West Virginia" or "W. Va. Code" means the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended. 
(4)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership or any other legal entity, including this state or its political subdivisions or an agency of either, or the guardian, trustee, committee, executor or administrator of any person. 
(5)  "Purchase" means any transfer, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration; 
(6)  "Purchase price" means the measure subject to the taxes imposed by this article and has the same meaning as sales price; 
(7)  "Purchaser" means a person who purchases tangible personal property, custom software or a service taxed by this article. 
(8)  "Sale," "sales" or "selling" have the meaning ascribed to those terms in article fifteen-b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia. 
(9)  "Sales and use taxes" means the taxes imposed by sections 13-1402 and 13-1403 of this article. 
(10)  "Sales price" has the meaning ascribed to that term in article fifteen-b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia. 
(11)  "Sales tax" means the tax levied by section 13-1402 of this article. 
(12)  "Service" or "selected service" have the meaning ascribed to those terms in article fifteen-b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia. 
(13)  "State sales tax" means the tax levied by article fifteen, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia. 
(14)  "State use tax" means the tax levied by article fifteen-a, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia. 
(15)  "Tax" means the taxes imposed by this article and includes additions to tax, interest and penalties levied under article ten, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended. 
(16)  "Tax Commissioner" means the Chief Executive Office of the Tax Division of the Department of Revenue of this state, as provided in W. Va. Code § 11-1-1. 
(17)  "This state" means the State of West Virginia. 
(18)  "Ultimate consumer" or "consumer" means a person who uses or consumes services or tangible personal property or custom software. 
(19)  "Use" for purposes of the tax imposed by section 13-1403 of this article means and includes: 
a.  The exercise by any person of any right or power over tangible personal property or custom software incident to the ownership, possession or enjoyment of the property, or by any transaction in which possession of or the exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software or the result of a taxable service is acquired for a consideration, including any lease, rental or conditional sale of tangible personal property or custom software; or 
b.  The use or enjoyment in this state of the result of a taxable service. As used in this definition, "enjoyment" includes a purchaser's right to direct the disposition of the property or the use of the taxable service, whether or not the purchaser has possession of the property. 
The term "use" does not include the keeping, retaining or exercising any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software or the result of a taxable service for the purpose of subsequently transporting it outside the city for use thereafter solely outside this city. 
(20)  "Use tax" means the tax imposed by section 13-1403 of this article. 
(21)  "Vendor" means any person engaged in this city in furnishing services taxed by this article or making sales of tangible personal property or custom software. "Vendor" and "seller" are used interchangeably in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1402. - Imposition of consumers sales and service tax. 
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property or customer software and for the privilege of furnishing certain selected service, a vendor doing business in this city shall collect from the purchaser the taxes imposed by this section and pay the amount of taxes collected to the tax commissioner at the same time and in the same manner as the consumers sales and service tax imposed by article fifteen, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended. The rate of tax shall be one percent of the sales price, as defined in section two, article fifteen-b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended, of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service purchased. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1403. - Imposition of use tax. 
    An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the use in this city of tangible personal property, custom software and the results of taxable services, to be collected and paid to the tax commissioner as agent for the city in the same manner that state use tax is collected under article fifteen-a and article fifteen-b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended. The rate of tax shall be one percent of the purchase price, as defined in article fifteen-b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service used within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1404. - Calculation of tax on fractional parts of a dollar. 
    The tax computation under section 13-1402 and section 13-1403 of this article shall be carried to the third decimal place and the tax rounded up to the next whole cent whenever the third decimal place is greater than four and rounded down to the lower whole cent whenever the third decimal place is four or less. The vendor may elect to compute the tax due on a transaction on a per item basis or on an invoice basis provided the method used is consistently used during the reporting period but the method used shall be the same as that used for purposes of computing the state sales or use tax. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1405. - State and local sales and use tax bases. 
    The taxable base of the taxes imposed by sections 13-1402 and 13-1403 of this article shall be identical to the sales and use tax base of this state except as provided in section 13-1406 of this article unless otherwise prohibited by federal law as required by W. Va. Code § 11-15B-34. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1406. - Exceptions. 
    The taxes imposed by this article do not apply to: 
(1)  The sale or use of motor fuel, as defined in article fourteen-c, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended. 
(2)  The sale or use of motor vehicles upon which the tax imposed by section three-c, article fifteen, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended, is paid. 
(3)  The purchase or use of any tangible personal property, custom software or service that the city is prohibited from taxing under the laws of this state or of the United States. 
(4)  The sales tax imposed by section 13-1402 does not apply to any transaction that is exempt from the tax imposed by article fifteen, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia. 
(5)  The use tax imposed by section 13-1403 does not apply to any purchase upon which the sales tax imposed by section 13-1402 has been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1407. - Credit for local sales tax lawfully paid to another municipality. 
(a)  A person is entitled to a credit against the use tax imposed by section 13-1403 of this article on the use of a particular item of tangible personal property, custom software or results of a taxable service equal to the amount, if any, of sales tax lawfully paid to another municipality for the acquisition of that property, custom software or service: Provided, that the amount of credit allowed may not exceed the amount of use tax imposed by section 13-1403 on the use of the tangible personal property, custom software or results of the taxable service in this city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Sales tax" includes a sales tax or compensating use tax imposed on the sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or the results of a taxable service by the municipality in which the sale occurred; and 
(2)  "Municipality" includes municipalities of this state or of any other state of the United States. 
(c)  No credit is allowed under this section for payment of any sales or use taxes imposed by this state or any other state. For purposes of this paragraph, "state" includes the 50 states of the United States and the District of Columbia but does not include any of the several territories organized by Congress. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1408. - Local rate and boundary database and changes. 
(a)  The tax commissioner is required by W. Va. Code § 11-15B-35 to maintain a database for all jurisdictions levying a sales or use tax in this state. The recorder-treasurer shall furnish the tax commissioner with information the tax commissioner requires for that database that will allow the tax commissioner to maintain a database that assigns each five-digit and nine-digit zip code within the city to the proper rate of tax. If any nine-digit zip code area includes area outside this city, the single state and local rate assigned to that area in the tax commissioner's database will be the lowest rate applicable to that area: Provided, that, when sales occur at and are sourced to a physical location of the seller located in the city in that nine-digit zip code area, the seller shall collect the tax imposed by section 13-1402 of this article. 
(b)  Whenever boundaries of the city change, whether by annexation or de-annexation, the recorder-treasurer shall promptly notify the tax commissioner in writing of the change in boundaries and provide the tax commissioner with the nine-digit zip code or codes for the area annexed or de-annexed any other information the tax commissioner may require to maintain the database. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1409. - State level administration. 
(a)  The tax commissioner is responsible for administering , collecting and enforcing the taxes imposed by this article as provided in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-6 and § 11-15B-33. The city may enter into a written agreement with the tax commissioner that will allow employees of the city auditing a vendor with a physical location in the city for compliance with the city's business and occupation tax to also audit that location for compliance with the sales and use tax laws of this state and this city and to share that information with the tax commissioner. 
(b)  The tax commissioner may retain from collections of the taxes imposed by this article the fee allowed by W. Va. Code § 11-10-11c or by any other state law or legislative rule. 
(c)  The tax commissioner shall deposit all the proceeds from collection of the taxes imposed by this article, minus any fee for collecting, enforcing and administering taxes retained under this section, in the subaccount for this city established in "municipal sales and services tax and use tax fund," an interest bearing account created in the state treasury pursuant to W. Va. Code § 8-13C-7. All moneys collected and deposited in the subaccount for the city shall be remitted at least quarterly by the state treasurer to the recorder-treasurer, as provided W. Va. Code § 8-13C-7. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1410. - Administrative procedures. 
    Each and every provision of the West Virginia Tax Procedure and Administration Act set forth in article ten, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia applies to the administration, collection and enforcement of the sales and use taxes imposed pursuant to this article, except as otherwise expressly provided in article thirteen-c, chapter eight of the Code of West Virginia, with like effect as if that act were applicable only to the taxes imposed by this article and were set forth in extenso in this article, as provided in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-6. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1411. - Criminal penalties. 
    Each and every provision of the West Virginia Tax Crimes and Penalties Act set forth in article nine, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia applies to the administration, collection and enforcement of the sales and use taxes imposed pursuant to this article with like effect as if that act were applicable only to the taxes imposed pursuant to this article and were set forth in extenso in this article, as provided in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-6: Provided, that the criminal penalties imposed upon conviction for a criminal violation of this article may not exceed the maximum penalties allowed by law for that violation. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1412. - Automatic updating. 
    Any amendments to articles nine, ten, fifteen, fifteen-a and fifteen-b, chapter eleven of the Code of West Virginia shall automatically apply to a sales or use tax imposed pursuant to this article, to the extent applicable, as provided in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-6. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1413. - Deposit of taxes collected in special revenue funds. 
(a)  There is hereby established a special revenue fund in the City Treasury which shall be designated and known as the City Sales and Use Tax Fund. The City Sales and Use Tax Fund shall consist of: 
(1)  All revenues received from collection of the City's sales and use taxes, including any interest, additions to tax and penalties deposited with the recorder-treasurer; 
(2)  All appropriations to the fund; 
(3)  All interest earned from investment of the fund; and 
(4)  Any gifts, grants or contributions received and placed by the City into the City Sales and Use Tax Account. 
(b)  Revenues in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund shall not be treated by any person to be a general revenue of the city. Revenues in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund shall be disbursed in the manner and consistent with the priorities set forth for in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Revenues in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund shall be used: 
(1)  First, to satisfy the debt service requirements each fiscal year on any bonds issued by, or other obligations incurred by, the city, from time to time, allocated or tied to such dedicated revenue account including any refunding bonds; to finance municipal civic improvement projects; as well as city-wide infrastructure and economic development projects; and, for any other economic development or public safety projects, including the funding of any reserve funds relating to any such bonds or other obligations, and/or to make lease payments which secure bonds issued to finance improvements to such projects; and 
(2)  Second, after providing for payment of first priority items, any unencumbered revenue in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund may periodically be transferred as necessary or convenient to the City's General Revenue Account. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1414. - Severability and savings clause. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable. This Common Council declares that it would have adopted this article irrespective of the invalidity of any particular portion thereof and intends that the invalid portions should be severed and the balance of the article be enforced. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Sec. 13-1415. - Effective date; notification of tax commissioner. 
(a)  This article shall become effective upon its passage by the Common Council of the City of Beckley, West Virginia, in December of 2015. However, the Common Council hereby suspends imposition and collection of the sales and use taxes imposed by this article until July 1, 2016, or such later first day of July as required by the legislative rule codified in W. Va. Code St. R. § 110-28-1 et seq. 
(b)  Upon passage of this ordinance the city's Recorder-Treasurer shall forthwith send to the tax commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance, the rate and boundary database required by section 13-408 of this article and any other information the tax commissioner may reasonably require to administer, collect and enforce the sales and use taxes imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-8-15(2)) 
Chapter 14 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Urban mass transportation authority. § 2-8 et seq.; junked or abandoned automobiles, § 8-210; garbage hauling vehicles, § 8-213 et seq.; unloading heavy materials on streets, § 12-7; use of motor vehicles, etc. in city parks, § 11-6; removal of barricades, § 12-9; glass, etc. on streets, § 12-10; parade permits, § 12-18; tampering, etc. with motor vehicle, §§ 10-22, 10-23. 
State Law reference- General authority of city to enact traffic regulations, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8; authority of city to regulate use of streets, crosswalks and public places belonging to city, § 8-12-5(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of a fire department, duly chartered rescue squad, police department, ambulance service, state, county, or municipal agency, and such privately-owned ambulances, tow trucks, wreckers, flag car services, vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles, service vehicles of a public service corporation, postal service vehicles, and snow removal equipment. 
    Bicycle: Any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having at least two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than fifteen (15) inches in diameter. 
    Bus: Any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than seven (7) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Business district: The territory contiguous to and including a street when within any six hundred (600) feet along such street there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the street. 
    City bus: Any bus operated by any person, authorized and franchised to do business within the city. 
    Congested business area: The area designated as such on the official map of the city which is on file in the office of the recorder-treasurer. 
    Controlled-access highway: Any highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Crosswalk: That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; also any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Digger/derrick line truck means a truck which is specifically designed and used for transporting and setting utility poles. 
    Driver or operator: Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Explosives: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. 
    Farm tractor: Any motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines, and other implements of husbandry. 
    Flammable liquid: Any liquid which has a flash point of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device. 
    Gross weight: The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Inter-city bus: Any bus which is not a city bus, as defined in this section, excepting school buses. 
    Intersection: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street or highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street or highway by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets or highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Metal tire: Any tire the surface of which in contact with the street is wholly or partly of metal or other hard nonresilient material. 
    Motorcycle: Any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor-driven cycle: Any motorcycle, including any motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) horsepower and any bicycle with motor attached. 
    Motor vehicle: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and any vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Official traffic control device: Any sign, signal, marking or device not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Oversize vehicle means any vehicle including construction or farming equipment: 
(1)  Whose authorized gross vehicle weight as reflected upon the registration card for such vehicle by the West Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles is equal to or greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds; or 
(2)  A vehicle having more than two (2) axles; or 
(3)  Whose height exceeds eight (8) feet; or 
(4)  A trailer which is detached from a truck tractor or other means of locomotion; or 
(5)  A truck tractor; or 
(6)  A road tractor; or 
(7)  A trailer; or 
(8)  A semitrailer; or 
(9)  A bus; or 
(10)  A school bus; or 
(11)  A pole trailer; or 
(12)  A digger/derrick line truck. 
    Owner: A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagee of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagee shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Park, when prohibited: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Passenger van means any van or other motor vehicle owned by any agency, business, or other legal entity and operated for the purpose of transportation of children under the age of eighteen (18) years, other than a van utilized for private use, taxicab, bus, or school bus. Passenger vans include, but are not limited to, vehicles used by daycare centers, after-school centers, and nursery schools. 
    Pedestrian: Any person afoot. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Pneumatic tire: Any tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load. 
    Pole trailer: Any vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
    Police officer: Any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private property means real estate in private ownership without regard to the manner in which it is used. 
    Private road or driveway: Any way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Railroad: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad signs or signal: Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Railroad train: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
    Recreational equipment means and includes the following: 
(1)  Travel trailer which means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer; 
(2)  Pickup camper which means a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses; 
(3)  Motorized home which means a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
    Residence district: The territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district when the property on such street for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Residential street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way, whether publicly or privately maintained, located within any subdivision, development, or other similar area used primarily for residential purposes when any part thereof is open to the common use of those living in said area for the purpose of vehicular travel. 
    Right-of-way: The privilege of the immediate use of the street. 
    Road tractor: Any motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Roadway: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a street or highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus: Every motor vehicle owned by or under contract to a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to and from school. 
    Semitrailer: Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Sidewalk: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Solid tire: Any tire of rubber or other resilient material, which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load. 
    Stop, when prohibited: Any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Stop, when required: Complete cessation of movement. 
    Street or highway: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Through street: Any street or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Traffic: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic-control signal: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Trailer: Any vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck: Any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Truck tractor: Any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1971, § 13-1; Ord. of 1-11-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions relating to parking meters, § 14-840. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-1-1-17C-1-59. 
Sec. 14-2. - Chapter refers to vehicles upon streets; exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter relating to the operations of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets except: 
(1)  Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(2)  The provisions of section 14-502 through 14-504 and the provisions of sections 14-507 through 14-517 shall apply upon streets and elsewhere throughout the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-1. 
Sec. 14-3. - Obedience to Code and state law. 
    This Code hereby adopts and incorporates as if fully written herein the following Chapters of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended: 
(1)  Chapter 17A; and 
(2)  Chapter 17B; and 
(3)  Chapter 17C; and 
(4)  Chapter 17D. 
    To the extent that there is any conflict between the provisions of this Code and the aforementioned Code, and to the extent that provisions in this Code are superseded by the State Code, the State Code shall prevail. 
    It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this chapter with respect to particular offenses, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 13-3; Ord. of 11-24-87; Ord. of 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-4. - Obedience to chapter required for public officers and employees; exceptions as to persons making street repairs. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this section and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(Code 1971, § 13-4) 
State Law reference- Similar law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-4. 
Sec. 14-5. - Obedience to orders of police officers required. 
    No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 13-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-3(c). 
Sec. 14-6. - Drivers of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the speed limits so long as such driver does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement of turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle, or in the case of a police vehicle, a blue light, except that a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red or blue light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1971, § 13-6) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-5. 
Sec. 14-7. - Persons riding animals; animal-drawn vehicles. 
    Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1971, § 13-7) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-6. 
Sec. 14-8. - Push carts in congested business district. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use or transport any material by push carts or hand carts of any kind or description upon the streets or sidewalks in the congested business district except when such push cart or hand cart is utilized to transport merchandise from or to a motor vehicle. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the "congested business area" shall be construed to mean the area designated as such on the official map of the city on file in the office of the recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 22-23) 
Sec. 14-9. - Rights of real property owners. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner and not as matter of right from prohibiting such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in this chapter, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. 
(Code 1971, § 13-8) 
Sec. 14-10. - Accidents-Driver's duty to stop, give information and render aid. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle shall immediately stop such driver's vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible and park such driver's vehicle so as not to unnecessarily obstruct traffic. Such driver shall then give such driver's name, address and the registration number of the vehicle such driver is driving and shall upon request exhibit such driver's operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
(Code 1971, § 13-32) 
State Law reference- Duties of drivers involved in accidents, W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-11. - Same-When collision is with unattended vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of such fact and such driver's name and address or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving such driver's name and address and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 13-33) 
Sec. 14-12. - Same-When collision is with property other than a vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a street shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of such driver's name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle such driver is driving and shall upon request and exhibit such driver's operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(Code 1971, § 13-34) 
Sec. 14-13. - Impoundment of vehicles-Authorized; procedure; redemption. 
(a)  Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge, or causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with street cleaning or snow removal operations. 
(2)  When any vehicle has been abandoned or junked on private or public property as provided in section 8-210 or in violation of BOCA Property Maintenance Code as adopted in section 4-9. 
(3)  When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of the owner. 
(4)  When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to display the current lawfully required license plates. 
(5)  When any vehicle has been used in, or connected with, the commission of a felony, or when any vehicle is evidence of a crime and is necessary for the prosecution of a crime. 
(6)  When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable or violates equipment provisions of this traffic code or West Virginia Code Article 17C-15 whereby its continued operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb, or property. 
(7)  When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill, injured, or arrested operator. 
(8)  When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to stop in case of an accident or collision. 
(9)  When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving without a lawful license or while his license has been suspended or revoked. 
(10)  When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for violations of this chapter or other specific ordinances have been issued and the owner or operator thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required or fines due have not been paid. 
(11)  When any vehicle is parked on, or in front of, a public or private driveway so as to prohibit vehicular ingress or egress to such property, without the consent of the person having the right to the possession of the property. 
    Such officer is hereby authorized to do such act, including entry into such vehicle which must be reasonably necessary to effect such impounding. 
    Any vehicle removed under authority of subsection (a)(2) hereof shall be disposed of as provided under West Virginia Code Article 17-24. 
(b)  Any person having the right to possession thereof and desiring to obtain the release of such impounded vehicle shall first pay the actual towing charge and, in addition thereto, shall pay the storage charge for the time such impounded vehicle is in storage. In addition to such towing and storage charges, the person redeeming a vehicle shall pay the amount due for any fines assessed for violations of this chapter or any other traffic ordinance or law. 
(Code 1971, § 13-21; Ord. of 1-27-98) 
Cross reference- Declaration of nuisance, § 8-200. 
State Law reference- Removal of illegally parked vehicles, W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-2; removal of vehicles parked, etc., on controlled-access highways, see § 17C-13-5. 
Sec. 14-13.1. - Post-storage hearings for impounded vehicles. 
(a)  Right to hearing. As to any vehicle impounded pursuant to any ordinance of the city, by its agents or employees, a person who has a legal entitlement to possession of the vehicle has a right to a post-seizure administrative hearing to determine whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle if such person files a written demand. Such written demand shall be made within five (5) days after such person has learned such vehicle has been impounded or within five (5) days after notice is given in conformity with section 14-14, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. 
(1)  A hearing shall be conducted before the municipal police judge within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of a written demand therefor from the person seeking the hearing unless such person waives the right to a speedy hearing. Saturdays, Sundays, and city holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the seventy-two-hour period. The sole issue before the police judge shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. 
(2)  "Probable cause to impound" means such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient breach of local, state, or federal law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle. 
(3)  The police judge shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules or evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person has the right to possession of the vehicle. The police department shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. At the conclusion of the hearing, the police judge shall prepare a written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and the registered owner of the vehicle, if not the person requesting the hearing, and a copy to the city police department. The police judge's decision in no way affects the criminal proceeding in connection with the impound in question and that any criminal charges involved in such proceeding may only be challenged in the appropriate court. The decision of the police judge is final. Failure of the registered or legal owner, or their agent to request or attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(c)  Decision of the police judge. The police judge shall only determine that, as to the vehicle in issue, either there was probable cause to impound the vehicle or there was no such probable cause, and in the event that the police judge determines that there was no probable cause, the police judge shall prepare and date a certificate of no probable cause, copies of which shall be given to the possessor of the vehicle and the police department. Upon receipt of the possessor's copy of such certificate, the garage having custody of the vehicle shall release the vehicle to its possessor. Upon a finding of no probable cause, towing and storage fees shall be paid by the city in accordance with arrangements made between the city and the garage. If the possessor fails to present such certificate to the garage having custody of the vehicle within twenty-four hours of its receipt, excluding such days when the garage is not open for business, the possessor shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. Such certificate shall advise the possessor of such requirement. 
(Ord. of 1-27-98) 
Sec. 14-14. - Same-Notice to owners of sale of vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle which has been impounded by a police officer remains in the possession of the city unclaimed by any person having the right to the possession of such vehicle, for a period of ten (10) days, written notice of such impounding shall be given to such person if such person's name and address can be reasonably ascertained by the police department. If such name and address cannot be reasonably ascertained, a newspaper notice of such impounding shall be published at least one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
    The notice shall: 
(1)  Contain a description of such motor vehicle, including the year, make, model, manufacturer's serial or identification number or any other number which may have been assigned to such motor vehicle by the commissioner of motor vehicles and any distinguishing marks; 
(2)  Set forth the location of the facility where such motor vehicle is being held and the location where such motor vehicle was taken into custody and possession; 
(3)  Inform the person having right to possession of his/her right to reclaim such motor vehicle within thirty (30) days after date of the impoundment, upon payment of all towing, preservation, storage charges, fines, and court costs resulting from taking and placing such motor vehicle into custody and possession; 
(4)  Inform the person having any legal entitlement to possession of the vehicle that a request for a post-storage hearing for impounded vehicles must be made in writing within five (5) days to the municipal court; and 
(5)  State that the failure of the persons to exercise their right to reclaim such motor vehicle within such thirty-day period shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title, and interest in such motor vehicle and of their consent to the sale or disposal of the motor vehicle at a public auction or to a licensed salvage yard or demolisher. 
(b)  A copy of such notice shall also be sent in the mail to the garage or storage facility where the vehicle is being stored. 
(Code 1971, § 13-22; Ord. of 1-27-98) 
Sec. 14-15. - Same-Sale of unclaimed vehicles; disposition of proceeds. 
    If any vehicle impounded and stored under the provisions of this article is not claimed by the owner, operator, or other person entitled to the possession thereof within thirty (30) days from and after the date the same is impounded and after notice has been given in conformity with section 14-14, such vehicle may be sold at public auction by the chief of police of the city, or by the persons storing the same under provisions of this article, said sale shall be in accordance with all terms of this Code and the West Virginia Code. But before any such sale shall be made, ten (10) days' notice of the date, place, and purpose of such sale with a description of the vehicle to be sold shall be served upon the owner of record of such vehicle by registered mail at his last known address and like notice of such shall be published once each week for two (2) successive weeks prior to the date of such sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. If the owner of any such vehicle is unknown, then no notice to such owner shall be necessary, but the newspaper publication shall be made and the facts with regard to the ownership of the vehicle set forth in such notice. 
    In the making of any sale hereunder, the chief of police may continue the same by verbal announcement at the time and place of such sale, and in the making of any such sale of any such vehicle, he may act by agent or attorney. 
    The proceeds from any such sale of such vehicle shall be applied first to the costs of such sale; second, to the hauling, towing, and storage charges thereof; third, to the payment of any fines and costs incurred by reason of any violation of the provisions of this traffic code or other ordinance of the city; and fourth, to the payment of any bona fide lien owner who intervenes or establishes a bona fide claim to such sum. Any balance remaining shall be paid to the owner of such vehicle, if he is known, or if unknown shall be held by the city subject to the right of the owner or lienor to receive such proceeds within a period of six (6) months, but not thereafter from the date of sale. 
(Code 1971, § 13-23; Ord. of 1-27-98) 
Sec. 14-16. - "Curb service" on public areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for druggists, merchants and other persons to sell, deliver or serve articles of food or drink to customers in parked motor vehicles on public streets, sidewalks or other public areas, a service commonly known as "curb service." 
(Code 1971, § 22-22) 
Sec. 14-17. - Penalties. 
    Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days; for a second such conviction within one year thereafter such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment for not more than twenty (20) days or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1971, § 13-9) 
Sec. 14-18. - Immobilization of vehicles authorized; procedure; removal of device. 
(a)  Any unattended motor vehicle found parked at any time upon any public thoroughfare of the city, any parking lot or facility owned by the city, or parked in a spot marked monthly rental parking only, against which there are two (2) or more unpaid citations or repeatedly parked in spots marked monthly parking only, or other persons charging that such vehicle was parked, spotted, or standing in violation of any law, ordinance or local authority of the city, and which citations contain notices that the vehicle may be towed or immobilized for repeated violations of the parking regulations of the city, may be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its operation by a member of the city police department or any other agent assigned to traffic duty. No such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or other mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. 
(b)  Notice of immobilization. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this article, the member of the city police department or the agent assigned to traffic duty immobilizing the vehicle, shall cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual to the effect that such vehicle has been immobilized for failure to pay the two (2) or more unpaid citations or repeatedly parked in spots marked monthly rental parking only, and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to such vehicle. 
(c)  Release of vehicle. Vehicles immobilized pursuant to this article will be released to their lawful owner, or person entitled to possession, upon showing adequate evidence of a right to its possession and paying all accrued fines and costs for each outstanding unpaid citation and a "boot" fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00); or by requesting, in writing, a hearing before the police court to contest the validity of the immobilization. Such request for a hearing shall be accompanied by a bond to cover the potential fines for the criminal charges which caused the immobilization. The release shall be signed by an authorized officer. 
(Ord. of 6-13-89) 
Sec. 14-19. - City not liable for damages. 
    The city, its agents, officers, or employees shall not be liable for any damages to persons or property resulting directly or indirectly from any act done or performed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-27-98) 
Sec. 14-20. - Authority of mayor. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to rent suitable spaces in garages, parking lots, or elsewhere for the storage and safekeeping of the vehicles impounded under the provisions of this article, and he is also authorized to enter into contracts and agreements for the removal, towing, and storage of vehicles coming within the provisions hereof, with persons having equipment suitable for the hauling away and towing of such vehicles. The mayor is also authorized to issue and promulgate any suitable rules and regulations which he may deem proper or necessary in order to fulfill, advance, and carry into effect the purposes and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-27-98) 
Secs. 14-21-14-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL COMMITTEE ON PARKING FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Feb. 25, 1997, repealed former Art. II of this chapter and enacted a new Art. II as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 14-200-14-207, pertained to the traffic-control commission and derived from the 1971 Code, §§ 13-10-13-16. 

Sec. 14-201. - Powers and duties of city council; city council's committee on parking facilities. 
    The traffic-control commission and the board of commissioners of municipal public automobile parking facilities are hereby abolished and all authority held thereunder is hereby transferred and given over to the City of Beckley's city council committee on parking facilities hereinafter created. 
    The power shall be vested in the city council to take all steps and proceedings and to make and enter into all contracts or agreements necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties and the execution of its powers to establish, operate and finance, under the provisions of Chapter 8, Article 16 of the Code of West Virginia, vehicle parking facilities now existing or hereafter to be constructed and acquired pursuant to Chapter 8, Article 16 of the Code of West Virginia, including but not limited to buildings, surface lots, meters or other facilities (herein collectively "parking facilities") appropriate for that purpose. In such respect there is hereby created the City of Beckley's city council committee on parking facilities ("the parking committee") which shall consist of nine (9) members, seven (7) members which shall be comprised of the common council of the City of Beckley to act as such parking committee along with the mayor and city treasurer. The parking committee shall, from its membership, select a chairman and vice-chairman and a secretary to record the actions and decisions of said parking committee. 
    The parking committee may employ engineers, architects, inspectors, superintendents, managers, collectors, attorneys and such other personnel as in its judgment may be necessary in the execution of its powers and duties, and may fix their compensation, all of whom shall do such work as the parking committee may direct. All such compensation and expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of this section shall be paid solely from funds provided under the authority of Chapter 8, Article 16 of the Code of West Virginia, and the parking committee shall not exercise or carry out any authority or power given to it so as to bind the city beyond the extent to which money shall have been, or may be provided under that West Virginia Code provision. No contract or agreement with any contractor or contractors for labor or materials, either or both, exceeding in the amount of the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be made without advertising for bids, which bids shall be publicly opened with power in the parking committee to reject any and all bids, After the construction, installation and completion of any parking facilities of the acquisition thereof, the parking committee shall operate, manage and control the same, and may order and complete any extensions, betterments and improvements of and to such parking facilities that the parking committee may deem expedient, if funds therefor be available or are made available, as provided by Chapter 8, Article 16 of the West Virginia Code, and shall establish rules and regulations for the use and operation of the parking facilities, and do all things necessary or expedient for the successful operation thereof; provided, however, all such operation, management and control of said parking facilities, including the collection and accounting for the income and revenue therefrom, and disbursements for operation and maintenance in connection therewith shall be consistent and in accordance with any ordinances heretofore or hereinafter adopted by the city council and pursuant to which the City of Beckley has authorized and issued, or may authorize and issue bonds or refunding bonds which by their terms are payable from and secured by the revenue and income of said parking facilities. 
    All rates and charges currently in effect for parking within the city shall remain in full force and effect upon the adoption of this article. Thereafter, the parking committee shall, in addition to the duties set forth herein, from time to time, review such rates and charges and recommend to the city council such new rates and charges it believes should be in effect, and upon approval thereof by the city council the same shall become effective as new rates and charges so provided by ordinance adopting the same. 
(Ord. of 2-25-97) 
Sec. 14-202. - Management of and regulations governing city owned meters, surface lots and parking buildings. 
(a)  All parking meters, lots and buildings owned or operated by the city shall be operated under the control and management of the parking committee, not withstanding any other provisions to the contrary hereinbefore enacted, which is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations governing such usage not inconsistent herewith. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle or other conveyance so as to occupy or use space in such parking meter, lots, or buildings without making proper payment of the appropriate fees or charges therefor as are provided and required by ordinance. Motor vehicles shall be parked, placed, handled and drove into, from, in and on such parking facilities in accordance with the applicable laws and ordinances of the city, and in accordance with the rules and regulations respecting usage of such parking facilities which are adopted and promulgated by the parking committee, and in accordance with the directions, instructions and order of the official city attendants of each of such lots stationed thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person or vehicle to block any driveway or passageway in or upon such parking facilities, or for persons to leave or park cars thereon contrary to the applicable ordinances, rules and regulations and instruction of attendants, as aforesaid, or without paying the required rental fees. 
(b)  Any or all of the lots may be leased to merchants, governmental units or business associations for mutually agreed upon covenants and amounts approved by the parking committee; provided that such groups do not impose parking fees upon the general public for parking privileges. Any such lease shall be subject to approval by the parking committee. 
(c)  Removal of any vehicle from any surface parking lot or building shall terminate the right of the user of that vehicle created by prior payment of rental fees, other than as to pre-paid contract parkers. No vehicle shall be reparked on any city parking lot on the same day except upon payment of the rental fees applicable to such space or lot as hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. of 2-25-97) 
Secs. 14-203-14-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL MAPS AND FILE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Provision as to authority of council to regulate use of streets, § 21(5). 
Cross reference- Loading zone record, § 14-816. 
State Law reference- Authority, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8. 

Sec. 14-300. - Traffic-control maps. 
    There are hereby established two (2) traffic control maps, one to be designated "Traffic-Control Map/Other Than Parking" and the other to be designated "Traffic-Control Map/Parking Areas." Such traffic-control maps shall show at all times the city's current traffic-control areas as indicated below: 
(1)  Traffic-control map-other than parking: 
(a)  Through streets; 
(b)  Stop intersections; 
(c)  Yield right-of-way intersections; 
(d)  Traffic-control signals; 
(e)  One-way streets and alleys; 
(f)  Turn signs; 
(g)  Streets where certain trucks are prohibited. 
(2)  Traffic-control map-parking areas: 
(a)  Bus stops; 
(b)  Loading zones; 
(c)  Prohibited and limited parking areas; 
(d)  Angle parking areas; 
(e)  Parking meter zones. 
    The traffic-control maps shall be prepared and kept on file in the police department and they shall be maintained by the police department. The traffic-control maps existing as of the effective date of this Code are hereby adopted and continued in full force and effect for the purposes for which they were, respectively, ordained. 
(Code 1971, § 13-17) 
Sec. 14-301. - Traffic-control file. 
(a)  There is hereby established a "Traffic-Control File" which shall be prepared and kept up to date by the police department, and maintained in the police department office. The traffic control file shall constitute the permanent and official record of: 
(1)  Through streets; 
(2)  Stop intersections; 
(3)  Yield right-of-way intersections; 
(4)  Traffic-control signals; 
(5)  One-way streets and alleys; 
(6)  Turn signs; 
(7)  Streets where certain trucks are prohibited; 
(8)  Bus stops; 
(9)  Loading zones; 
(10)  Prohibited and limited parking areas; 
(11)  Angle parking areas; 
(12)  Parking meter zones; 
(13)  Zones of quiet; 
(14)  Play streets. 
(b)  The traffic-control file shall also include the following information: 
(1)  Type of traffic-control designation; 
(2)  Complete description of the street or area affected; 
(3)  Effective date of council action authorizing designation; 
(4)  Date proper signs and markings were erected; 
(5)  Date recorded upon traffic-control maps. 
(c)  The traffic-control file compiled and presented effective February 1, 1988, is hereby adopted and continued in full force and effect for the purpose for which it was ordained. 
(Code 1971, § 13-18; Ord. of 4-12-88) 
Sec. 14-302. - Amendments-How made; conditions precedent to taking effect; where recorded. 
(a)  Amendments to the traffic-control maps and the traffic-control file established by this article shall be made by ordinance passed by the council. Upon the effective date of such ordinance and upon the erection of proper signs and markings giving notice thereof, amendments shall be in full force and effect. All such amendments shall be recorded on the official traffic-control maps and the official traffic-control file. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, amendments to the traffic-control file relating to zones of quiet and play streets shall, be made by the mayor or chief of police, and upon the erection of proper signs and markings giving notice thereof, such amendments shall be in full force and effect. All such amendments shall be recorded in the official traffic-control file. 
(Code 1971, § 13-19) 
Sec. 14-303. - Same-Experimental, and requirements therefor. 
    Experimental amendments to the traffic-control maps and the traffic-control file established by this article may be effected by motion or resolution of the council. Upon the effective date of such motion or resolution and upon the erection of proper signs and markings giving notice thereof such experimental amendments shall be in full force and effect for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. All such experimental amendments shall be recorded as such in the official traffic-control file. 
(Code 1971, § 13-20) 
Secs. 14-304-14-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Requirement that traffic control devices conform to state specifications, W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-3; placement of traffic control devices on state highways within city, § 17C-3-2. 

Sec. 14-400. - Obedience to traffic control devices mandatory. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 13-24) 
Cross reference- Compliance, § 14-530 et seq. 
Sec. 14-401. - Signs to be legible and in place; exceptions. 
    No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1971, § 13-25) 
Sec. 14-402. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used, and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green alone, "Go," or green arrow: 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under section 17C-12-2 of the Code of West Virginia, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(b)  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal: 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited. 
(b)  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(3)  Red alone or "Stop:" 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until the green or "Go" is shown alone. 
(b)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless such person can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Red with green arrow: 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(b)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless such person can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Yellow when shown with the red signal: 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing such signal shall not enter the nearest crosswalk at an intersection nor proceed beyond such other points as may be indicated by a clearly visible line while this signal is displayed, but is advised that another signal indication which will permit a traffic movement is about to be displayed. 
(b)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless such person can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(6)  Yellow when shown alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal is warned that either a red or flashing red signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such traffic will be required to obey the ensuing red or flashing red signal, as the case may be. 
(7)  Green arrows alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal may enter the intersection only to make the movement or movements indicated by the arrows, but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk. This signal will normally be used only at intersections where one-way street operation is involved. 
(8)  Signals at places other than intersections: In the event an official traffic-control signal or flashing red signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1971, § 13-26) 
Sec. 14-403. - Flashing signals. 
    Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red "stop signal": When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow "caution signal": When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
Sec. 14-404. - Lane-control signals. 
    Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs they shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Opaque arrow on green, green arrow on opaque background, or green alone: Drivers of vehicles facing such signals are permitted to use the lane or lanes over which the signal is displayed providing that no intersection traffic control signal gives a stop indication affecting the lane or lanes involved. 
(2)  Opaque "X" on red, red "X" on opaque background, or red alone: Drivers of vehicles facing such signal are prohibited from using the lane over which the signal is displayed. 
(Code 1971, § 13-28) 
Sec. 14-405. - Pedestrian-control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait," or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  "Walk:" Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  "Wait" or "Don't Walk:" No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially complete the crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Wait" or "Don't Walk" signal is showing. 
(Code 1971, § 13-29) 
Sec. 14-406. - Unauthorized signs, signals or markings; removal by chief of police. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to streets of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(b)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove such nuisance or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1971, § 13-30) 
Sec. 14-407. - Interference, etc., with devices, signs or signals. 
    No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, damage, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 13-31) 
Secs. 14-408-14-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Rules applicable to bicycle riders, § 14-900 et seq. 
State Law reference- Operators to be licensed, W. Va. Code, § 17B-2-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-500. - Operator's licenses. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle upon any street in the city without such operator's or chauffeur's license as may be required by the laws of the state or this Code or other ordinance. 
(Code 1971, § 13-46) 
Sec. 14-501. - Reckless driving. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property, and any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of reckless driving. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Code 1971, § 13-48) 
Sec. 14-502. - Driving under influence of alcohol, controlled substances or drugs. 
(a)  It is unlawful and punishable as provided in subsection (c) of this section for any person to drive any vehicle in the city while such person is: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol; 
(2)  An habitual user or under the influence of any controlled substance or under the influence of any other drug to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or 
(3)  Under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug to a degree which renders such incapable of safely driving. 
(4)  An habitual user of narcotic drugs or amphetamine or any derivative thereof. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly permits such person's vehicle to be driven in the city by any other person who is under the influence of alcohol, or under the influence of any controlled substance, or under the influence of any other drug, or who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or amphetamine or any derivative thereof, or under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days and shall be fined not less then one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  A person found in violation and found guilty of any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be imprisoned for not less than one (1) day nor more than thirty (30) days, which jail term shall include actual confinement of not less than twenty-four (24) hours, and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Any person in violation of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall, for the second offense under this section, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, and the court may, in its discretion, impose a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), nor more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). 
(e)  The sentences provided herein upon conviction for a violation of this section are mandatory and shall not be subject to suspension or probation; provided that the court may apply the provisions of Chapter 62, Article 11A of the West Virginia Code to a person sentenced or committed to a term of six (6) months or less. 
(f)  The fact that any person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, a controlled substance or a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, the term "controlled substance" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 60A-1-101 of the West Virginia Code. 
(Code 1971, § 13-49; Ord. of 11-22-83) 
Sec. 14-503. - Implied consent for chemical test for intoxication. 
(a)  Any person who drives a motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways of this city shall be deemed to have given consent by the operation thereof, subject to the provisions of this section, to a chemical test of either such person's blood, breath or urine, for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of such person's blood whenever such person shall be lawfully arrested by a police officer for the offense of driving a motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways of this city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The test shall be incidental to a lawful arrest and shall be administered at the direction of the arresting police officer having reasonable grounds to believe the person to have been driving a motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The police department shall designate which one of the aforesaid tests shall be administered; provided, that if the test so designated is a blood test and the person so arrested refuses to submit to such blood test, then the police department shall designate in lieu thereof, either a breath or urine test, and notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, such refusal to submit to a blood test only shall not result in the suspension of the arrested person's operator's or chauffeur's license, or junior or probationary operator's license, or nonresident privilege to drive. The person arrested shall be told that such refusal to submit to the test finally designated as provided in this section, will result in the suspension of such person's operator's or chauffeur's license, or junior or nonresident privilege to drive, for a period of six (6) months. 
(b)  Only a doctor of medicine or osteopathy, or registered nurse, or trained medical technician at the place of such person's employment, acting at the request and direction of the police officer, may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content thereof. These limitations shall not apply to the taking of a breath test or a urine specimen. In withdrawing blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content thereof, only a previously unused and sterile needle and sterile vessel may be utilized and the withdrawal shall otherwise be in strict accord with accepted medical practices. A nonalcoholic antiseptic shall be used for cleaning the skin prior to venapuncture. The person tested may, at such person's own expense have a doctor of medicine or osteopathy, or registered nurse, or trained medical technician at the place of doctor's, nurse's or technician's employment, of such person's own choosing, administer a chemical test in addition to the test administered at the direction of the police officer. The failure or inability of the person arrested to obtain an additional test shall not preclude the admission into evidence at any administrative or judicial proceedings of the results of the test taken at the direction of the police officer. Upon the request of the person who is tested, full information concerning the test taken at the direction of the police shall be made available to such person. No person who administers any such test upon the request of a police officer, no hospital in or with which such person is employed or is otherwise associated or in which such test is administered, and no other person by whom or with whom such person is employed or is in any way associated, shall be in anywise criminally liable for the administration of such test, or civilly liable in damages to the person tested, unless for gross negligence or wilful or wanton injury. 
(c)  If any person under arrest as specified in subsection (a) of this section refuses to submit to the test finally designated in the manner provided in such subsection (a) hereof, no test shall be given, but the arresting officer shall submit to the state commissioner of motor vehicles a sworn statement that: 
(1)  Such officer had reasonable grounds to believe such person had been driving a motor vehicle upon a highway or street within the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor; 
(2)  Such person was lawfully placed under arrest for the offense of driving a motor vehicle upon a highway or street within the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor contrary to the provisions of section 14-502; 
(3)  Such person refused to submit to the test finally designated in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section; and 
(4)  Such person was told that such person's operator's or chauffeur's license, or junior or probationary operator's license, or nonresident privilege to drive, would be suspended for a period of six (6) months if such person refused to submit to the test finally designated in the manner provided in such section (a). The letter transmitting such sworn statement to the state commissioner of motor vehicles shall inform the commissioner that the sworn statement is furnished for such commissioner's action thereon as provided in sections 17C-5A-3 and 17C-5A-4 of the Code of West Virginia. 
    Any person who is unconscious or who is otherwise in a condition rendering such incapable of refusal, shall be deemed not to have withdrawn consent for a test of such person's blood, breath or urine as provided in this section and the test may be administered although such person is not told that such person's failure to submit to the test could result in the suspension of such person's operator's license, or nonresident privilege to operate a motor vehicle, for a period of six (6) months. 
    A suspension hereunder shall, unless otherwise provided by the state commissioner of motor vehicles, run concurrently with the period of any suspension or revocation imposed in accordance with other provisions of this Code and growing out of the same incident which gave rise to the arrest for driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and the subsequent refusal to undergo the test finally designated in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Upon trial for the offense of driving a motor vehicle on the public streets or highways within the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, evidence of the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time of the arrest or of the acts alleged, as shown by a chemical analysis of such person's blood, breath or urine, is admissible, if the sample or specimen was taken within two (2) hours from and after the time of arrest or of the acts alleged, and shall give rise to the following presumptions or have the following effect: 
(1)  Evidence that there was, at the time, five hundredths of one (0.05) per cent or less, by weight, of alcohol in such person's blood, shall be prima facie evidence that the person was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor; 
(2)  Evidence that there was, at that time, more than five hundredths of one (0.05) per cent and less than ten hundredths of one (0.10) per cent, by weight, of alcohol in the person's blood shall be relevant evidence, but it is not to be given prima facie effect in indicating whether the person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor; 
(3)  Evidence that there was, at that time, ten hundredths of one (0.10) per cent or more, by weight, of alcohol in such person's blood, shall be admitted as prima facie evidence that the person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. Per cent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon milligrams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood. 
    A chemical analysis of a person's blood, breath or urine, in order to give rise to the presumptions or to have the effect provided for in subsection (d) subparagraphs (1), (2) and (3) of this section, must be performed in accordance with methods and standards approved by the state department of health. A chemical analysis of blood or urine to determine the alcoholic content of blood shall be conducted by a qualified laboratory or by the state police scientific laboratory, of the criminal identification bureau of the department of public safety. 
    The provisions of this section shall not limit the introduction in any administrative or judicial proceeding of any other competent evidence bearing on the question of whether the person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(Code 1971, § 13-50) 
Sec. 14-504. - Right to demand test. 
    Any person lawfully arrested for driving a motor vehicle on the public streets or highways within the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and who is not tested at the direction of the arresting police officer under the provisions of section 14-503, or who is lawfully arrested as aforesaid by any other police officer, shall have the right to demand that a sample or specimen of such person's blood, breath or urine be taken within two (2) hours from and after the time of arrest, and that a chemical test thereof be made. The analysis disclosed by such chemical test shall be made available to such arrested person forthwith upon demand. 
(Code 1971, § 13-51) 
Sec. 14-505. - Fee for withdrawing blood sample and making urine test. 
    A fee not exceeding five dollars ($5.00) shall be allowed to the person withdrawing a blood sample or administering a urine test at the request and direction of a police officer in accordance with the provisions of section 14-503. If the person whose blood sample was withdrawn or whose urine was tested was arrested and charged with a violation of section 14-502, the city shall pay the fee, and if such person is subsequently convicted of such charge, such fee shall be taxed as a part of the costs of the criminal proceeding and shall be paid, notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-52) 
Sec. 14-506. - Judicial review. 
    Nothing herein contained shall deprive any person whose operator's or chauffeur's license, or junior or probationary license, or nonresident privilege to drive, has been so suspended, from availing such person's self of any administrative or judicial review as provided for in section 17C-5A-4 of the Code of West Virginia. 
(Code 1971, § 13-53) 
Sec. 14-507. - Keeping to right; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(Code 1971, § 13-62) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-1. 
Sec. 14-508. - Passing in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1971, § 13-63) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-2. 
Sec. 14-509. - Overtaking and passing-On left generally. 
    Subject to the limitations, exceptions and special rules contained in this chapter, the following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall give a mechanical signal and pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on mechanical signal and shall not increase the speed of such person's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 13-64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-3. 
Sec. 14-510. - Same-Limitations on passing on left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred (100) feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1971, § 13-65) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-5. 
Sec. 14-511. - Same-On right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a street with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main travelled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 13-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-4. 
Sec. 14-512. - Driving to left of center. 
(a)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction; 
(2)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing; 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 13-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-6. 
Sec. 14-513. - No-passing zones. 
    Upon those portions of any street where the state department of highways has determined that overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and has indicated by appropriate signs or markings clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person on the roadway the beginning and end of such zones, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 13-68) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-7. 
Sec. 14-514. - Rotary traffic islands. 
    A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1971, § 13-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-8(c). 
Sec. 14-515. - Roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(Code 1971, § 13-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-9. 
Sec. 14-516. - Rules for vehicles following other vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street. 
(b)  The driver of any motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residential district and which is following another motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or other vehicle. 
(c)  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1971, § 13-71) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-10. 
Sec. 14-517. - Divided streets. 
    Whenever any street has been divided into two (2) roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every traffic shall be driven only upon the right hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a cross-over or intersection established by public authority. 
(Code 1971, § 13-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-11. 
Sec. 14-518. - Starting stopped vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1971, § 13-74) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-7. 
Sec. 14-519. - Right turns. 
    Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 13-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-2. 
Sec. 14-520. - Left turns on two-way roadways. 
    At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(Code 1971, § 13-76) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-3. 
Sec. 14-521. - Left turns on other than two-way roadways. 
    At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1971, § 13-77) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-4. 
Sec. 14-522. - Turning on curve or grade crest prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of, grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred (500) feet. 
(Code 1971, § 13-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-6. 
Sec. 14-523. - Turning movements, slowing and stopping, and required signals therefor. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in sections 14-519 through 14-522, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(b)  No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(c)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(d)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Code 1971, § 13-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-8. 
Sec. 14-524. - Special stops required-When emerging from alleys, driveways or buildings; crossings on approach of train; driving around barriers. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from any alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or private driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(b)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than fifteen (15) feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until such person can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a person flagging gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  Any approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(c)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1971, § 13-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-12-1, 17C-12-6. 
Sec. 14-525. - Same-Upon meeting a stopped school bus; requirements for school buses. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching warning signal lights, as referred to in section 17C-12-8 of the Code of West Virginia, and such driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed, or the visual signals are no longer actuated. 
(b)  Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. When a contract school bus is being operated upon a highway for purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from school, all markings thereon indicating "school bus" shall be covered or concealed. Any school bus sold or transferred to another owner by a county board of education, agency or individual shall have all flashing warning lights removed, all lettering removed or permanently obscured, and such bus shall be painted a color other than chrome yellow before sale or transfer is made except when sold or transferred for the transportation of school children. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate any flashing warning signal light on any school bus except when the bus is stopped on a street for the purpose of permitting school children to board or alight from the bus. 
(Code 1971, § 13-93) 
Sec. 14-526. - Same-Passenger vehicles at grade crossings. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, or of any vehicle owned by an employer which, in carrying on such employer's business or in carrying employees to and from work is carrying more than six (6) employees of such employer, before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until such driver can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(b)  No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed. 
(Code 1971, § 13-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-3. 
Sec. 14-527. - Same-Moving heavy equipment over grade crossings. 
(a)  No person shall operate or move any crawler type tractor, steam shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating speed of ten (10) or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of less than one-half (1/2) inch per foot of the distance between any two (2) adjacent axles, or in any event of less than nine (9) inches, measured above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section. 
(b)  Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide protection at such crossing. 
(c)  Before making any such crossing the person operating or moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the vehicle or equipment not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor more than fifty (50) feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely. 
(d)  No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal or crossing gates or a person flagging or otherwise of the immediate approach of a railroad train or car. If a person flagging is provided by the railroad, movement over the crossing shall be under such person's direction. 
(Code 1971, § 13-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-4. 
Sec. 14-528. - Slow, stop and turn signals-By hand and arm or by signal device; when signal device must be used. 
    Any stop or turn signal when required by this division shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or mechanical signal device, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then such signals must be given by such a lamp or signal device. 
(Code 1971, § 13-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-9. 
Sec. 14-529. - Same-Method of giving hand and arm signals. 
    All signals herein required to be given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1971, § 13-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-10. 
Sec. 14-530. - Compliance with signs, signals and devices-Stop signs. 
    Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in the event there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting street where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting street before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
(Code 1971, § 13-82) 
Cross reference- Compliance mandatory, § 14-400. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-5. 
Sec. 14-531. - Same-Yield right of way; speed limit. 
    Every operator of a vehicle shall slow to ten (10) miles per hour or less at properly authorized and posted "Yield Right-of-way" signs and shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic on the intersecting street. 
(Code 1971, § 13-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-3. 
Sec. 14-532. - Same-Quiet zones. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet upon any street or portion of street, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency. 
(Code 1971, § 13-84) 
Sec. 14-533. - Same-Play streets. 
(a)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area and then such drivers shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(b)  The mayor or chief of police is authorized to establish play streets. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area and then such drivers shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1971, §§ 13-85, 22-20) 
Sec. 14-534. - Same-One-way roadways. 
    Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(Code 1971, § 13-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-8(b). 
Sec. 14-535. - Right-of-way-Approaching and entering intersection; exception at through streets. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different street. 
(b)  When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are modified at through highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated. 
(Code 1971, § 13-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-1. 
Sec. 14-536. - Same-Turning left when within intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from such opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicles making the left turn. 
(Code 1971, § 13-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-2. 
Sec. 14-537. - Same-At through highway or stop intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by section 14-530 at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from such through street or which are approaching so closely thereon as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver having so yielded may proceed when safe to do so. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through street and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but then may proceed. 
(Code 1971, § 13-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-3. 
Sec. 14-538. - Same-Driving from private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such street. 
(Code 1971, § 13-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-4. 
Sec. 14-539. - Same-Procedure required on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light, or blue light in the case of a police vehicle, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle other than a police vehicle, and when the driver is giving mechanical signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the streets. 
(Code 1971, § 13-91) 
Cross reference- Drivers of authorized emergency vehicles, § 14-6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-5. 
Sec. 14-540. - Driving onto or from restricted access roadways. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1971, § 13-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-12. 
Sec. 14-541. - Requirements as to unattended vehicles. 
    No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street. 
(Code 1971, § 13-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-1. 
Sec. 14-542. - Limitations on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back it unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 13-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-2. 
Sec. 14-543. - Safety equipment and requirements for motorcyclists and motorcycles. 
(a)  No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle unless such person is wearing, securely fastened on such person's head by either a neck or chin strap, a protective helmet designed to deflect blows, resist penetration and spread impact forces. Any helmet worn by a motorcycle operator or motorcycle passenger shall meet the performance specifications established by the United States of America Standards Institute "Specifications for Protective Headgear for Vehicle Users, Standard Z-90.1-1966." Helmets worn by motorcycle operators and motorcycle passengers shall be coated with a reflectorized substance, or have attached thereto, a reflectorized material, on both sides and the back thereof, with a minimum of ten (10) square inches of coated substance or attached material in each of the three (3) locations. 
(b)  No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle unless such person is wearing safety, shatter-resistant eyeglasses (excluding contact lenses), or eyegoggles or a face shield that complies with the performance specifications established by the United States of America Standards Institute "Specifications for Head, Eye and Respiratory Protection Z2.1959." In addition, if any motorcycle be equipped with a windshield or windscreen, the windshield or windscreen shall be constructed of safety, shatter-resistant material that complies with the performance specifications established by the United States of America Standards Institute" Safety Glazing Materials for Glazing Motor Vehicles Operated on Land Highways, Standard Z-26.1-1966" 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorcycle on which the handlebars or grips are more than fifteen (15) inches higher than the uppermost part of the operator's seat when the seat is not depressed in any manner. 
(d)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride in a seated position facing forward and only upon a permanent operator's seat attached to the motorcycle. No operator shall carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride, on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride behind the operator upon the permanent operator's seat if it is designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle to the rear of the operator's seat and equipped with footrests designed and located for use by the passenger or in a sidecar firmly attached to the motorcycle. No more than two (2) persons, the motorcycle operator and one passenger, shall ride the same motorcycle at the same time. No person shall ride sidesaddle on a motorcycle seat. 
(e)  Every motorcycle shall be equipped with a rearview mirror affixed to the motorcycle handlebars and adjusted so that the motorcycle operator shall have a clear view of the road and condition of traffic behind the motorcycle for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet. 
(Code 1971, § 13-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-3. 
Sec. 14-544. - Driver to have unobstructed view and control over driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver' control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 13-100) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-4. 
Sec. 14-545. - Number of persons permitted on front seat. 
    No more than three (3) persons, including the operator, shall ride, or be permitted by such operator to ride, in the seat with the operator of any motor vehicle while it is being operated on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-101) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-5. 
Sec. 14-546. - Riding on exterior of vehicle. 
    No passenger shall ride, nor shall the operator permit any passenger to ride, on the exterior of any motor vehicle while such vehicle is being operated on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-6. 
Sec. 14-547. - Coasting prohibited. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
(b)  The driver of a commercial vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
(Code 1971, § 13-103) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-8. 
Sec. 14-548. - Following and parking near fire apparatus. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official government business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1971, § 13-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-9. 
Sec. 14-549. - Driving over fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1971, § 13-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-10. 
Sec. 14-550. - Heavy trucks prohibited on certain streets; exceptions. 
(a)  Trucks having a load capacity exceeding fifteen (15) tons are prohibited from utilizing those streets designated by the council upon the traffic-control maps and in the traffic-control file as streets where heavy trucks are prohibited. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit a truck having a load capacity in excess of fifteen (15) tons from using the streets so designated where necessary to make a local delivery or pickup. 
(Code 1971, § 13-106) 
Sec. 14-551. - Dropping or tracking of dirt, etc., prohibited; duty of offenders to remove substances dropped or tracked; street sprinklers. 
(a)  No vehicle or conveyance shall be driven or moved on any street in such a manner that sand, dirt, rubbish or any offensive substance is dropped, sifted or tracked upon any street or sidewalk except that water may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  The owner or operator of such vehicle or conveyance shall remove any sand, dirt, rubbish or any offensive substance dropped, sifted or tracked on any street or sidewalk upon request of any city official. 
Secs. 14-552-14-574. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Speed at "yield" intersections, § 14-531. 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-1 et seq. 
Annotation- For a case sustaining trial court's instruction that chief of police had right to arrest persons charged with violation of city speed limit ordinance in such officer's presence, and to confine them in jail until they could be brought before police judge, subject, however, to their right to have a reasonable opportunity to give bail, see Moran v. City of Beckley, 67F. (2d) 161. 

Sec. 14-575. - Duty to drive safely with regard to conditions and potential hazards. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle on a street, alley, public way or municipal property at a greater speed than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the streets, alleys, public ways or municipal properties in compliance with all legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Code 1971, § 13-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-1(a). 
Sec. 14-576. - Duty to slow down for curves, intersections, etc. 
    The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of section 14-575, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street conditions. 
(Code 1971, § 13-55) 
Sec. 14-577. - Minimum permissible speed. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to comply with the law. 
(Code 1971, § 13-56) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-3a(a). 
Sec. 14-578. - Maximum limits. 
(a)  Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with section 14-575, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, maximum speed limits within the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fifteen (15) miles per hour: When passing a school building or the grounds thereof during school recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening and closing hours; on all municipal property; on all municipal parks; on all municipal parking lots or areas; and on all public grounds and properties; except as specifically noted otherwise in this section. 
(2)  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour: In any business or residence district, except as specifically noted otherwise in this section. 
(3)  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour: 
(a)  On W. Va. route 3 (bypass) from the west corporation line to Sunrise Avenue; 
(b)  On W. Va. route 3 (bypass) from the intersection of Beaver Street and Fayette Street to the east corporation line; 
(c)  On alternate U.S. route 21 (business route) from the south corporation line to Koch Avenue; 
(d)  On City Avenue; 
(e)  On West Virginia route 16 from the intersection of Fourth Street to the north corporation line. 
(4)  Forty (40) miles per hour: 
(a)  On U.S. route 21 (bypass) from the north corporation line to the south corporation line. 
(b)  For trucks only, on West Virginia route 16, from the intersection of Fourth Street to the south corporation line. 
(5)  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour: Passenger vehicles only, on West Virginia route 16, from the intersection of Fourth Street to the south corporation line. 
(Code 1971, § 13-57) 
Sec. 14-579. - Nonpassenger vehicles with pneumatic tires. 
    Subject to all other speed restrictions of this chapter, no person shall drive a vehicle not designed for carrying passengers and equipped with pneumatic tires at a speed in excess of: 
(1)  Twenty (20) miles per hour in any business district; 
(2)  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any residence district; 
(3)  Trucks licensed at four thousand (4,000) pounds gross vehicle weight or less shall be permitted the same speed as passenger cars. 
(Code 1971, § 13-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-4. 
Sec. 14-580. - Vehicles without pneumatic tires. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with other than pneumatic tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten (10) miles per hour. 
(Code 1971, § 13-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-5(a). 
Sec. 14-581. - Crossing bridges or elevated structures. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a street at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure, when such structure is signposted. 
(Code 1971, § 13-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-5(b). 
Sec. 14-582. - Presumptive evidence of speed obtained by microwave devices. 
    The speed of a motor vehicle may be approved by evidence obtained by use of any device designed to measure and indicate and record the speed of a moving object by means of microwaves, when such evidence is obtained by police officers of the city. The evidence so obtained shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of such vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 13-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-7. 
Secs. 14-583-14-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 14-600. - Subject to traffic-control signals. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as provided in section 14-402 unless required by any provision of this chapter to comply strictly with such signals; but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 13-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-1. 
Sec. 14-601. - Use of crosswalks in business districts. 
    Pedestrians shall not cross any street in a business district except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1971, § 13-109) 
Sec. 14-602. - Use of right half of crosswalk. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1971, § 13-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-5. 
Sec. 14-603. - Right-of-way-In crosswalks; when vehicle drivers not to overtake and pass vehicles stopped at crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision shall not apply under the conditions stated in subsection (b) of section 14-604. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 13-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-2. 
Sec. 14-604. - Same-Other than at crosswalks; loitering, etc., in roadway other than at safety zone prohibited; when use of crosswalk mandatory. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than in a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. 
(b)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 1971, § 13-112) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-3. 
Sec. 14-605. - Drivers' duties to pedestrians. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 13-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-4. 
Sec. 14-606. - Use of sidewalks required. 
    Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along or upon an adjacent roadway. 
Code 1971, § 13-114) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-6(a). 
Sec. 14-607. - Walking along left side of roadway. 
    Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a street shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1971, § 13-115) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-6(b). 
Sec. 14-608. - Hitchhiking. 
    No person shall solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 13-116) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-6(c). 
Sec. 14-609. - Drivers' duties to, and safeguards for, blind and incapacitated persons; penalty. 
(a)  Whenever a pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross a public street at or near an intersection or crosswalk, guided by a guide dog, or carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color, or white tipped with red, the driver of every vehicle approaching such intersection or crosswalk shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injuring or endangering such pedestrian, and if injury or danger to such pedestrian can be avoided only by bringing the vehicle to a full stop, the driver shall do so. No person who is not totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street, shall carry in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color, or white tipped with red. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to deprive any totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person, not carrying such a cane or walking stick or not being guided by a dog, of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians crossing the streets, nor shall the failure of such totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a cane or walking stick, or to be guided by a guide dog upon the streets or sidewalks of this city be held to constitute or be evidence of contributory negligence. 
(c)  Whoever violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days, or both. 
(Code 1971, § 13-117) 
State Law reference- For state "White Cane Law", which requires vehicle drivers to take certain precautions concerning blind persons, etc., W. Va. Code, § 5-15-1 et seq. 
Secs. 14-610-14-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EQUIPMENT; SAFETY PROVISIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Motorcycle equipment, § 14-543; bicycle equipment, § 14-904 et seq. 
State Law reference- Lights, equipment and safety provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-1 et seq.; inspection of vehicles, W. Va. Code, § 17C-16-1 et seq.; motor vehicle safety responsibility law, W. Va. Code, § 17D-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-700. - Vehicle registration plates and state vehicle inspection certificates. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any street in the city unless such person shall display thereon such registration plate, and in such manner as may be required by the laws of this state. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move on any street any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or pole trailer, or any combination thereof, unless the vehicle bears a current certificate of inspection as required by Chapter 17C, Article 16 of the Code of West Virginia. 
(c)  No person shall drive or move or for any owner knowingly to permit to be driven or moved upon any street any vehicle of a type required to be registered as required by the laws of the state, which is not registered or for which a certificate of title has not been issued or applied for or for which the appropriate fee has not been paid when and as required by the laws of the state, except as otherwise provided by the laws of the state. 
(d)  No owner or operator of any vehicle required to be inspected as required by Chapter 17C, Article 16 of the Code of West Virginia, shall operate or permit to be operated such vehicle without having displayed thereon a current and valid certificate of inspection and approval or fail to produce same upon demand of any authorized person as designated by law. 
(e)  Every person convicted of a violation of any of subsections (a) through (d) or for operating a vehicle on a city street without having displayed thereon a current and valid certificate of inspection and approval or for failure to produce such certificate upon demand by an authorized person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(f)  Every owner or registrant of a motor vehicle required to be registered and licensed in this state and city shall maintain security as provided in section 17D-2A-3 of the West Virginia Code, in effect continuously throughout the registration or licensing period, except in case of a periodic use or seasonal vehicle, in which case the owner or registrant is required to maintain security upon the vehicle only for the portion of the year the vehicle is in actual use. No person shall knowingly drive or operate upon any road or highway in this city any motor vehicle upon which security is required by the provisions of Chapter 17D-2A-3 unless such security is in effect. The certificate of issuance provided pursuant to section 17D-2A-4 of the Code of West Virginia, or other proof of insurance and security shall be carried by the insured in the appropriate vehicle for use of proof of security; provided that an insured shall not be guilty of a violation of this subsection (f) if such insured furnishes proof that such insurance was in effect within five (5) days of being cited for not carrying such difference or other proof in such vehicle. As used in this subsection, "proof of insurance" means a certificate of insurance, an insurance policy, or a mechanically reproduced copy of an insurance policy. 
(g)  In addition to any other penalty provided for violation of any of the provisions of sections 17D-2A-1 through 17D-2A-9 of the Code of West Virginia, any person who violates any provision of subsection (f) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned in the county jail not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than six (6) months, or both fined and imprisoned. The arrest procedures authorized in section 17C-19-4 of the Code of West Virginia shall apply to the enforcement of the provisions of subsection (f) of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 13-47; Ord. of 2-14-84) 
Sec. 14-701. - Brakes. 
    Every motor vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped with such brakes as are required by state law, functioning in good order at all times. 
(Code 1971, § 13-118) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-15-31, 17C-15-32. 
Sec. 14-702. - Chains and cleats not to damage street or sidewalk. 
    No person shall drive any tractor, traction engine or vehicle equipped with chains or cleats upon any street or sidewalk in the city in such manner as to damage the paving of such street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1971, § 13-119) 
Sec. 14-703. - Lights-Number and type required. 
    Every motor vehicle operated on any street within the city shall be equipped with not less than two (2) headlights mounted on the right and left of the front thereof with clear bulb and lens of sufficient illuminating power to render clearly discernible a substantial object on the street ahead for a distance of two hundred (200) feet, and a rear or tail light mounted on the rear thereof with red lens and a clear light illuminating the rear plates of such vehicle so that the characters thereon shall be visible for a distance of fifty (50) feet; provided, that motorcycles shall be equipped with one such headlight and one rear light with red lens and a clear light illuminating the registration plates of such motorcycle. 
(Code 1971, § 13-120) 
State Law reference- Lights, reflectors, W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-15-2-17C-15-30. 
Sec. 14-704. - Same-Permissive additional lights; authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  No more than two (2) additional fog lights and two (2) spotlights of either clear or amber color, visible from the front, may be used on any motor vehicle. Authorized emergency vehicles may use a red spotlight visible from the front for identification purposes and such red spotlight so visible from the front may be used only by authorized emergency vehicles. Trucks may use as many marking lights as are necessary. 
(b)  In addition to required headlights and permissive spotlights or fog lights, a motor vehicle may be equipped with parking lights visible from the front and rear thereof, of colors to conform with driving lights. 
(Code 1971, § 13-121) 
Sec. 14-705. - Same-Horse-drawn vehicles. 
    Every horse-drawn vehicle, when operated at night on any street within the city, shall display a clear light visible to the front for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet, and at the rear a red light or reflector visible for a distance of two hundred (200) feet. 
(Code 1971, § 13-122) 
Sec. 14-706. - Same-When lighted lamps required. 
    All lights required in this article shall be kept lighted from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise on every vehicle while operated on any street; provided, that the state laws governing lights on vehicles shall apply whenever applicable within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-2. 
Sec. 14-707. - Horns and other warning devices. 
    Motor vehicles shall be equipped with a suitable signal horn so as to produce an abrupt sound sufficiently loud to serve as an adequate warning of the approach of such vehicle or as a warning of danger, and the use of such signaling device for purposes other than those set forth in this section is hereby expressly prohibited: 
(1)  When approaching or passing other vehicles or pedestrians, a driver of a vehicle may sound a short signal of such driver's intention to approach or pass. 
(2)  Vehicles used in connection with any parade, official escorts or other procession when previously approved and authorized by the chief of police shall not use horns and other sounding devices intermittently or continuously while in such parade, escort or procession. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to vehicles of the police and fire departments and other authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1971, § 13-124) 
State Law reference- Horns, etc., W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-33. 
Sec. 14-708. - Sirens and exhaust whistles prohibited; exceptions. 
    Sirens and exhaust whistles shall not be used on vehicles operated within the city except on vehicles of the police and fire departments or other authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1971, § 13-125) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-33(b), (c). 
Sec. 14-709. - Cut-outs; mufflers; racing motor, etc. 
    A driver shall not use the cut-out of a motor while operating such vehicle on any street within the city or operate a motor vehicle without a proper muffler functioning in good order, or race the motor of any motor vehicle so as to cause a backfire or other loud noise. 
(Code 1971, § 13-126) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-34. 
Sec. 14-710. - Permit required for use of sound apparatus. 
    No vehicle equipped with sound, musical, loud-speaking or other loud noise producing devices or apparatus shall be operated upon the streets or other places within the city, except after first having obtained permission from the mayor or the chief of police and under such restrictions as they may impose. 
(Code 1971, § 13-127) 
Cross reference- Noise generally, § 8-9 et seq. 
Sec. 14-711. - Mufflers required on motorcycles. 
    Every motorcycle shall be operated as quietly as possible at all times within the city and when so operated shall be equipped with a muffler. 
(Code 1971, § 13-128) 
Sec. 14-712. - Excessive smoke and gas. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to use or to permit any vehicle or device or apparatus therewith to emit smoke, steam, noxious gas, fumes or vapors other than those produced by ordinary combustion for power purposes on the streets or in any public place within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-129) 
Sec. 14-713. - Vehicles transporting explosives. 
    Any person operating any vehicle transporting any explosives as a cargo or part of a cargo upon a street shall at all times comply with the provisions of Chapter 7 of this Code and of the fire prevention code therein adopted. 
(Code 1971, § 13-130) 
Sec. 14-714. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted June 10, 1986, repealed § 14-714, pertaining to persons on toy vehicles, etc, not to cling to other vehicles, which derived from § 13-131 of the 1971 Code. Provisions regulating clinging to vehicles are contained in § 14-901 
Sec. 14-715. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted June 10, 1986, repealed § 14-715, pertaining to toy vehicles and roller skates on streets and sidewalks, which derived from § 22-21 of the 1971 Code. Related provisions are contained in Article IX of this chapter. 
Secs. 14-716-14-799. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-800. - Manner of parking outside business or residence districts. 
(a)  Upon any street outside of a business or residence district no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the street when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of the street, but in every event an unobstructed width of the street opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of two hundred (200) feet in each direction upon such a street. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a street in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. 
(Code 1971, § 13-145) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va Code, § 17C-13-1. 
Sec. 14-801. - Removal of improperly parked vehicles; when tow away authorized. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street in violation of section 14-800 such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move it, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of such street. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
(Code 1971, § 13-146) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va Code, § 17C-13-2; removal of parked vehicles, § 17C-13-5. 
Sec. 14-802. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
(9)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance, when properly signposted. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of the curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(15)  Within twenty (20) feet of any mail receptacle served regularly by a carrier using a motor vehicle for daily deliveries, if such parking interferes with or causes delay in the carrier's schedule. 
(16)  No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. 
(17)  No vehicle shall be allowed to remain upon the street in such manner as to unreasonably obstruct the right of ingress or egress to a public or private driveway. 
(18)  On that portion of any street, alley, thoroughfare, parking lot, or other areaway, either public or private, that is situated beneath any fire escape, stairway, ladder, or similar device intended for use as a fire escape; provided, that this provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(19)  In a space specifically marked or designated for handicapped parking, either by a sign or by painting on the pavement, unless such vehicle displays a special registration license plate or special vehicle decal designating that the vehicle is operated or owned by a physically handicapped or physically disabled person as such are defined in section 17C-13-6 of the West Virginia Code. 
(20)  In a space specifically marked or designated monthly rental parking either by sign or by painting on pavement, unless such vehicle displays a parking permit obtained from the City of Beckley, any person in violation of subparagraph (20) shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00). 
(21)  In a fire lane, either public or private, that is required under the State Building Code, section F-311.0 or the National Fire Prevention Code, section 3-5 and marked by appropriate signage. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under such person's control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  The provisions of section 17C-13-6(c) and (d) of the West Virginia Code are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(d)  Any person found in violation of paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00), or imprisoned in the county jail for more than thirty (30) days, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(Code 1971, § 13-147; Ord. of 10-23-84; Ord. of 6-13-89; Ord. of 1-11-94) 
State Law reference- Similar law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-3. 
Sec. 14-803. - Right and left parallel parking; angle parking. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the curb side wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb. 
(b)  Subsection (a), above, shall not prohibit stopping, standing or parking on the left hand side of a one-way street, and shall not prohibit angle parking, where such one-way streets and angle parking areas are authorized and properly posted or marked. 
(Code 1971, § 13-148) 
State Law reference- Similar law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-4. 
Sec. 14-804. - In public alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon or within a public alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, or block such alley. 
(Code 1971, § 13-149) 
Sec. 14-805. - When street posted for cleaning, etc.-Prohibited. 
    No person shall park upon any street or alley after signs forbidding parking have been placed thereon by any employee of the city at the direction of the mayor, chief of police or the director of public works advising the public that the street or alley shall be left clear for the purpose of cleaning, clearing, sweeping, repairing or for any other governmental function of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-150) 
Sec. 14-806. - Same-Removal of vehicles. 
    If the signs provided in section 14-805 designate a time for removal of vehicles, all vehicles parked upon any street or alley after the time prescribed by such signs shall be considered in violation of section 14-805. 
(Code 1971, § 13-151) 
Sec. 14-807. - Storing of vehicle on street prohibited; exceptions; when impoundment authorized. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "store" shall mean: 
(1)  To leave a vehicle on a street, sidewalk or public alley unattended for a period longer than twenty-four (24) hours; 
(2)  To stop or park a vehicle on a street, sidewalk or public alley for the purpose of making repairs or adjustments thereon by a garage or mechanic, other than emergency repairs necessary to move a vehicle which has been temporarily stopped by a mechanical failure; 
(3)  The placing on a street, sidewalk or public alley of a vehicle constituting a part of the inventory or stock of or under the control of a person in the business of dealing or trading in vehicles, for longer than one (1) hour; or 
(4)  The placing on a street, sidewalk or public alley of any disabled or wrecked vehicle, or any vehicle not self-propelled and not actually in use, for a period of longer than one (1) hour. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store any vehicle on the streets, sidewalks or public alleys within the city; provided, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the owner of a passenger automobile from leaving it in front of such person's residence as a part of the normal use thereof so long as it shall not be in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Any vehicle stored in violation of this section may at the discretion of the chief of police be removed from the streets, sidewalks or public alleys and impounded in conformity with the provisions of section 14-13. 
(Code 1971, § 13-152) 
Cross reference- Disabled or wrecked vehicles, § 8-200. 
Sec. 14-808. - All night in congested business area. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or allow any vehicle to remain parked between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. on the streets within the congested business area as defined in section 14-1. 
(Code 1971, § 13-153) 
Sec. 14-809. - On private property without permission. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon the private property of another person without permission. 
(Code 1971, § 13-154) 
Sec. 14-810. - Vehicles laden with explosives or flammable liquids; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, motor-driven or otherwise, on any street or alley within the city that is laden with any dynamite, nitroglycerin, monobell, gun powder or any other such explosive, ammunition, fireworks or any flammable or combustible liquids or materials such as gasoline or naphtha. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park any empty vehicle, motor-driven or otherwise, which transports flammable or combustible liquids or materials such as gasoline or naphtha, which vehicle has a capacity exceeding five thousand (5,000) gallons. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months. 
(Code 1971, § 13-155) 
State Law reference- Fire prevention code, § 7-200; flammable liquids code, § 7-202. 
Sec. 14-811. - Bus stops-Establishing; marking. 
    The chief of police shall have authority to establish and lay off upon the streets of the city such number of city bus stops as in such chief's opinion are necessary for the convenience of the public. In designating such stops the chief shall indicate by appropriate markings the area in which public buses may stop to receive and discharge passengers and shall indicate by large letters painted within the area that such area is a bus stop and that parking therein by vehicles other than such buses is prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 13-141) 
Sec. 14-812. - Same-Required use. 
    The driver of a city bus shall not stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a stop or stand officially designated and appropriately assigned to such bus. 
(Code 1971, § 13-142) 
Sec. 14-813. - Same-Restricted use by other vehicles. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a city bus in a bus stop, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately assigned, except that the driver of a private passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually loading and unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus waiting to enter or about to enter such stop or stand. 
(Code 1971, § 13-143) 
Sec. 14-814. - Same-Boarding and discharge of passengers by intercity buses. 
    Intercity buses shall not take on or discharge passengers within the city other than at the stations from which and to which they operate within the city in that area bounded by Hill Street and Croft Street on the north, Church Street and Williams Street on the east, Second Street on the south and Oakwood Avenue on the west. 
(Code 1971, § 13-144) 
Sec. 14-815. - Loading zones-How established and abolished; limitations as to curb space and use; signs. 
(a)  Loading zones may be established and abolished by the chief of police upon approval of such action by the council. Such zones shall be for the sole purpose of providing on-street facilities for the loading and unloading of commodities and equipment in the conduct of business, and where no adequate off-street loading facilities are available. 
(b)  The chief of police, with the approval of the council, may, with respect to the establishment of any such loading zone, prescribe limitations as to curb space and the time of day within which such loading zone may be used, which shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1971, § 13-134) 
Sec. 14-816. - Same-Record book to be maintained. 
    The police department shall keep an accurate record entered in an appropriate book marked "Loading Zone Record" of all loading zones established under this article showing the date when such loading zone was established, its location, and the special limitations, if any, attached thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 13-135) 
Sec. 14-817. - Same-"No parking" areas at entrances to certain buildings; record to be maintained by chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police, with the approval of the council, may establish "no parking" areas appropriately marked at the principal street entrances to all schools, hospitals, post offices, churches, theaters, hotels, libraries, passenger transportation depots, government-owned and occupied buildings and eleemosynary institutions, with such conditions as may be considered proper by the chief of police approved by the council. 
(b)  The chief of police shall maintain in such chief's office a current list of all "no parking" areas established pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1971, § 13-136) 
Sec. 14-818. - Same-Citizens may request establishment. 
    Any citizen may apply for the establishment of a loading zone. Such application shall be submitted in writing to the chief of police on a form to be prescribed by such person and approved by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 13-137) 
Sec. 14-819. - Same-Permitted and prohibited uses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle, except while it is being used in the business of loading and unloading, to stand or be parked at any time, in any space designated as a loading zone by the chief of police under and pursuant to the provisions of this article, except as permitted thereunder. In no case shall a lawful stop within a loading zone exceed fifteen (15) minutes except where special permission from the chief of police has been obtained for such extension. Where a loading zone is established in any area in which parking is otherwise prohibited, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, or park a vehicle for any purpose or any length of time in such loading zone except during the hours and for the purposes prescribed for the lawful use of such zone. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing or parked in violation of this section, such officer is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move it, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of such street. 
(Code 1971, § 13-138) 
Cross reference- Impounding vehicle, § 14-13. 
Sec. 14-820. - Loading permits-When required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle used for the transportation of merchandise or materials to back into the curb to take or discharge loads, in places where and at hours when stopping for the purpose of loading and unloading of merchandise and materials is permitted, unless such owner holds a permit from the chief of police granting such person such loading privilege. 
(Code 1971, § 13-138) 
Sec. 14-821. - Same-To be kept on person or in vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver of a vehicle backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load to fail to have such loading permit in such person's possession or on the vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 13-140) 
Sec. 14-822. - Prohibiting parking on private property. 
(a)  No person shall park or owner allow his or her vehicle to be parked upon a private parking lot without being authorized, licensed, or invited to park a vehicle, where a notice against entering or remaining in the private parking lot during stated times, and said times are given by actual communication to such person by posting of said notice in a conspicuous place. 
(b)  The said notice prohibiting parking shall state the times that the parking is prohibited and that any person allowing a vehicle to stay on the lot after said time and/or the owner of said vehicle shall be subject to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. of 9-14-93) 
Sec. 14-823. - Parking of oversize vehicles or recreation equipment in residential districts-prohibitions; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park any oversize vehicle or recreational equipment upon any residential street, or sidewalk, or street within a residential zone area: R-1, R-2, R-3, or O/R as defined in Chapter 15. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), a person may stand or park an oversize vehicle or recreation equipment while loading or unloading such vehicle or while the oversize vehicle or recreation equipment is being used in the performance of a service to, or upon, property in the block where the oversize vehicle or recreation equipment is parked subject to all other provisions regulating parking; provided, that when so parked, the oversize vehicle or recreation equipment shall be constantly attended by its operator and such time period is limited to that as may be required in the usual course of business for making a delivery of merchandise or unloading of merchandise. 
(c)  No person shall stand or park any oversize vehicle or recreation equipment in any residential zone area, R-1, R-2, R-3, or O/R between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. with an auxiliary motor or air conditioning unit in operation. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), a person may petition common council for a permit to park an oversize vehicle or recreation equipment subject to the prohibitions of this section in a residential zone area. Such permit will only be given upon a showing of good cause. Such permit shall show, upon its face, any restrictions on such operation which may include limitations on the hours, months, or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the preservation of the public peace, property, health, and safety. 
    Every such permit shall expire at midnight on June 30 of the fiscal year for which it was issued. Upon granting the permits, the applicant shall be issued one permit sticker which shall be prominently displayed on the driver's side door of each permitted vehicle. The application for the permit and the permit sticker shall be of a form and design approved by the chief of police. 
(e)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle parked or standing on any state or federal highway routes within the city. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) by the Municipal court judge. 
(g)  This section does not prohibit: 
(1)  The operation, parking, or standing of authorized emergency vehicles upon any street in the city; and 
(2)  The operation, parking, or standing of oversize vehicles operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or supplier, while engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction of streets, street improvements, or public utilities within the city. 
(Ord. of 1-11-00; Ord. of 8-12-03, § 2) 
Sec. 14-824. - Time limit parking zones, penalties. 
(a)  Time limit parking zones which allow parking of any vehicle for a limited duration may be established and abolished by the chief of police upon approval of such action by common council. Such areas shall be for the sole purpose of providing on-street parking facilities of limited duration for the convenience of the public. In designating such parking zones, the city shall indicate, by appropriate marking within the area, the time limit allowed and that parking therein by vehicles in excess of the posted time is prohibited. 
(b)  Except on Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. in any area designated upon the traffic control map and file as a limited parking area or time limit parking zone and so marked. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of subsection (b) of this section shall be fined an amount not exceeding ten dollars ($10.00); provided, that in the event a person violating any such provision shall place in a proper envelope the sum of three dollars ($3.00) for each offense, and shall deposit such envelope in one of the boxes provided for that purpose, or shall turn it over to the police department headquarters, or shall mail, by the United States mail, postage prepaid, to the police department headquarters, within the same seventy-two-hour period within which the offense occurred, then such payment may be accepted by the police department as payment in full for the commission of such offense; provided further, that the police department records shall be considered conclusive as to whether the offender has complied with a seventy-two-hour period, and no person shall have authority to accept, on the part of the police department, such reduced payment as satisfaction in full of the regular fine when the police department records indicate that such payment has not been received during the seventy-two-hour period previously described. 
(Ord. of 10-24-00) 
Secs. 14-825-14-839. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish municipal parking facilities and use parking meter revenue therefor, W. Va. Code, § 8-16-1 et seq. 
Annotations- For case holding that, under Ch. 68, Acts of 1935, regular session, as amended (see W. Va. Code, § 8-16-1 et seq.), city had power to acquire and operate off-street parking facilities and to finance the cost thereof by issuance of bonds and the revenue derived therefrom, see State v. Chambers, 138 W. Va. 701; for a case holding that the sections of this division have as their overall purpose the alleviation of congested parking conditions in the city, and the enactment thereof was in the exercise of a valid police power of the city, see State v. Chambers, 138 W. Va. 701. 

Sec. 14-840. - Definitions; parking meter zones to be designated upon traffic control map. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
    Operator: Any individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Park or parking: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or the involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle. 
    Parking meter: Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this division placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this division. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the city and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
    Parking meter space: Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meter. 
    Parking meter zone: Any restricted street or municipal parking lot area upon which parking meters are installed and in operation. Parking meter zones shall be designated upon the traffic control map. 
    Street: Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or other public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
    Vehicle: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Code 1971, § 13-156) 
Sec. 14-841. - Designation, marking and manner of parking in parking spaces. 
    The chief of police is hereby directed to mark off individual parking meter spaces in the parking meter zones designated upon the traffic control map and in such other zones as may hereafter be established, such parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street or parking lot area. At each space so marked off it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. 
(Code 1971, § 13-157) 
Sec. 14-842. - Installation of parking meters; responsibility for control, maintenance, etc. 
    In parking meter zones the chief of police shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the curb, sidewalk or municipal parking lot area immediately adjacent to each parking meter space, such parking meters to be placed not more than two (2) feet from the curb, nor more than four (4) feet from the front line of each on-street parking meter space, as indicated. The chief of police shall be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of such parking meters. 
(Code 1971, § 13-158) 
Sec. 14-843. - Indicating expiration of parking time, etc.; parking thereafter. 
    Each parking meter device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coins, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed on the meter. Each such device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired and in such cases the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in this division. 
(Code 1971, § 13-159) 
Sec. 14-844. - Placing in operation; duty of driver to deposit coin; overtime parking. 
    Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the fire or police department or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking meter space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the meter such proper coins of the United States as is required for such parking meter and as is designated by proper directions on the meter, and when required by the directions on the meter, the operator of such 
    vehicle, after the deposit of the proper coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon, and failure to deposit such proper coin, and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required, shall constitute a violation of this division. Upon the deposit of such coin, and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so required, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street or municipal parking lot in which such parking space is located; provided, that any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as such occupancy of the space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set for such parking space, and if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Code 1971, § 13-160) 
Sec. 14-845. - Operating hours and coin provisions to be prescribed and indicated on meters. 
    Hours of operation and coin provisions of on-street and off-street parking meters shall be as authorized by the council, subject to the approval of bonding authorities where necessary. Such authorized hour and coin provisions shall be indicated upon the instruction plate attached to each meter. 
(Code 1971, § 13-161) 
Editor's note- Sections 5.01 to 5.03 of Ordinance adopted June 24, 1965, which relates to parking facilities revenue bonds and which is on file in the office of the recorder-treasurer, provides minimum rates for off-street parking facilities which may not be reduced without consent of bondholders, but may be revised upward. The "bonding authorities" here referred to is the State Sinking Fund Commission. 
Sec. 14-846. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person: 
(1)  To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in such person's name or operated by such person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone. 
(2)  During the periods for regulated parking indicated upon the meter, to permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space. 
(3)  To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(4)  To deface, damage, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(5)  To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metal substance, or other substitute for lawful coins. 
(Code 1971, § 13-162) 
Sec. 14-847. - Penalties for certain violations; reduced penalties for prompt payment, and procedure therefor. 
    Whoever violates section 14-846 or subsections (1), (2) or (3) of section 14-846 shall be fined not exceeding ten dollars ($10.00); provided, that in the event a person violating any such provision shall place in a proper envelope the sum of three dollars ($3.00) for each such offense, and shall deposit such envelope in one of the boxes provided for that purpose, or shall turn it over to the police department headquarters, or shall mail, by the United States mail, postage prepaid, to the police department headquarters, within the same seventy-two-hour period within which the offense occurred, then such payment may be accepted by the police department as payment in full for the commission of such offense; provided further, that the police department records shall be considered conclusive as to whether the offender has complied with a seventy-two-hour period and no person shall have authority to accept on the part of the police department such reduced payment as satisfaction in full of the regular fine when the police department records indicate that such payment has not been received during the seventy-two-hour period previously described. 
(Code 1971, § 13-163; Ord. of 6-13-89) 
Sec. 14-848. - Collection and deposit of coins from parking meters. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to designate some member of the police department to make regular collections of the money deposited in parking meters, and it shall be the duty of such persons so designated to make such collections and, to deposit such funds with the city treasurer. 
(Code 1971, § 13-164) 
Sec. 14-849. - Use of parking meter revenue. 
    The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this division are the estimated amounts required to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets, and to cover the costs for the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking spaces and parking meters described in this division, and also the cost of supervising and regulating the vehicles in the parking meter zones created by this division; provided, that the revenue from the off-street parking facilities which is pledged to secure principal and interest on parking facilities refunding bonds of the city shall be used only for the purposes for which so pledged. 
(Code 1971, § 13-165) 
State Law reference- Use of parking meter revenue for municipal parking facilities, see W. Va. Code, § 8-16-3. 
For a case holding that city has power to devote parking meter revenue to cost of installing and operating off-street parking facilities, but suggesting that parking meters may not be installed as a means to impose an excise tax, see State v. Chambers, 138 W. Va. 701. 
Sec. 14-850. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1971, § 13-166) 
Sec. 14-851. - Construction of division; reservation of powers. 
(a)  Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for bus stops, taxicab stands and other matters of similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans, or other commercial vehicles. 
(b)  This division shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the police power of the city for the preservation and protection of public safety, and all of the provisions shall be liberally construed with a view to the effectuation of such purpose. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall not restrict the council from entering into agreements for monthly, weekly or daily rates for rental of off-street municipal parking areas, subject to the approval of bonding companies where necessary. 
(Code 1971, § 13-167) 
Sec. 14-852. - Penalties when not otherwise provided. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this division, where another penalty is not provided, shall, upon conviction, be fined not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Code 1971, § 13-168) 
Secs. 14-853-14-874. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Feb. 25, 1997, repealed former Art. VIII, Div. 3, §§ 14-875-14-883, of this chapter, which pertained to the board of commissioners of municipal public automobile facilities and derived from the 1971 Code, §§ 13-169-13-177. 

Secs. 14-875-14-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, AND OTHER PERSONALLY PROPELLED VEHICLES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Sale of bicycles, § 10-37 et seq. 

Sec. 14-900. - When and where applicable. 
    The regulations in this article are applicable to bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, and other personally propelled vehicles. For the purpose of this article, a "personally propelled vehicle" includes any type of vehicle, whether motor drive or propelled by individual effort and contains one, two (2), three (3) or four (4) wheels, or any coaster, or sled, or toy vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 4-9; Ord. of 6-10-86, § 2) 
State Law reference- Similar law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-1(c). 
Sec. 14-901. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or other personally propelled vehicle shall attach said device or such person's self to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 4-17; Ord. of 6-10-86, § 3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-114. 
Sec. 14-902. - Compliance required; parents and guardians to permit no violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 4-8) 
State Law reference- Similar law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-1(a), (b). 
Sec. 14-903. - Applicability of city and state traffic laws. 
    Every person propelling or riding a bicycle upon a public roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this Code and other ordinances and state laws applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions with reference to equipment of a vehicle other than a bicycle and except those provisions which by their nature would have no application or which are otherwise covered by special regulations in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 4-10) 
State Law reference- Bicycle riders granted all the rights and being subject to all the duties of vehicle drivers, W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-2. 
Sec. 14-904. - Lights and reflectors-Types; when required. 
    Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(Code 1971, § 4-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-7(a). 
Sec. 14-905. - Same-Hours during which lamps must be lighted. 
    The lights required in this article shall be kept lighted from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise on every bicycle while operated on any street; provided, that the state laws governing lights on vehicles shall apply whenever applicable within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 4-5) 
State Law reference- When lighted lamps required, W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-2. 
Sec. 14-906. - Warning bell or signal. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. 
(Code 1971, § 4-6) 
Sec. 14-907. - Brakes. 
    Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1971, § 4-7) 
Sec. 14-908. - Use of bicycle paths required where available. 
    Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 4-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-5(c). 
Sec. 14-909. - Manner of riding on roadways. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of a roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(Code 1971, § 4-12) 
State Law reference- Similar law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-5(a), (b). 
Sec. 14-910. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or other personally propelled vehicle, except wheelchairs, on any sidewalk on Neville Street (between Third Avenue and Heber Street), on Main Street (between Heber Street and Kanawha Street), on Heber Street (between Earwood Street and Shoemaker Square), on McCreery Street (between Heber Street and Kanawha Street), on Fayette Street (between McCreery Street and Prince Street), on Prince Street (between Kanawha Street and Cedar Street), or in Shoemaker Square. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or other personally propelled vehicles on any pedestrian pathway or fitness trail or other pathways designed primarily for use by pedestrians. 
(c)  Upon the apprehension and citation of a person violating this section the police shall have the authority to immediately impound the vehicle, skateboard, roller skates or other personally propelled vehicle pending disposition by the municipal judge. 
(d)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate the provisions of this section and every person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of this section shall for a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and impoundment of the bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or other personally propelled vehicle for three (3) months; for a second such conviction within six (6) months thereafter, such person shall be punished by fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); and upon a third or subsequent conviction, such person shall be punished by fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Upon the impoundment of any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or other personally propelled vehicle, said bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or other personally propelled vehicle shall not be released from impoundment unless to the custody of the parent of any child below the age of eighteen (18) years, or the guardian of any ward below the age of eighteen (18) years, and only when said parent or guardian appears with said child or ward before the municipal judge. 
(Code 1971, § 4-13; Ord. of 6-10-86, § 4) 
Sec. 14-911. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of an ordinance adopted June 10, 1986, repealed § 14-911, concerning areas prohibited to riding and parking of bicycles, as derived from § 4-14 of the 1971 Code. 
Sec. 14-912. - Use of seats; number of riders. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more passengers at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1971, § 4-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions W. Va. Code, 17C-11-3. 
Sec. 14-913. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebar. 
(Code 1971, § 4-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-6. 
Secs. 14-914-14-999. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROHIBITION OF OPERATION AND USE OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-1000. - When and where applicable; prohibition; enforcement; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  The riding, operation, or other use of all-terrain vehicles for transportation or recreational purposes, within or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, and other realty-owned, leased, or controlled property by the City of Beckley or any of its boards, authorities, or commissions is prohibited. 
(b)  Any violation of paragraph (a) above shall constitute the commission of a misdemeanor criminal offense, and any officer of the police department of the city or any other officer of any other police agency exercising proper jurisdiction within the corporate limits of Beckley is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a citation and to charge any such person who commits a violation of paragraph (a) above. Any person convicted of a first offense established hereunder shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person convicted of a second or further offense established hereunder shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(c)  For the purpose of this Code section, the term "all-terrain vehicle" shall be as defined in W. Va. Code, § 17A-1-1(ii), and the term "motor vehicle" shall be as defined in W. Va. Code, § 17A-1-1(b). 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code section, it shall not be an offense for any person to lawfully ride or operate any such all-terrain vehicle upon any governmentally-owned realty not owned or controlled by the City of Beckley or any of its boards, authorities, or commissions located within the corporate limits of the City of Beckley. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code section, it shall not be an offense for any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the State of West Virginia, to ride, operate, or otherwise use an all-terrain vehicle upon a designated parade route, when such person is a duly registered and recognized participant in any such permitted parade, provided that such all-terrain vehicle riding or operation occurs in conjunction with said parade. 
(f)  The federal government, the State of West Virginia, and its political subdivisions are exempt from the prohibitions contained herein, when any such all-terrain vehicle is used for government purposes. 
(g)  Nothing contained within this Code section is intended, nor shall be construed, so as to create or form the basis for any civil or administrative liability whatsoever on the part of the City of Beckley or any of its officers, officials, employees, or agents for any injury or damage resulting to any person as a consequence of any action or inaction on the part of the City of Beckley related, in any manner, to the enforcement or non-enforcement of this Code section by the city's officers, officials, employees, or agents. 
(h)  The parent or other guardian of any person not having attained the age of eighteen (18) years shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such minor to violate any provision within this Code section. Any such authorization or knowingly permitting any such minor to violate the provisions of this Code section shall constitute a criminal violation hereof and shall subject such parent or guardian to the criminal penalties set forth in this Code section. The citing of any parent or guardian pursuant to this paragraph shall not be reason to prohibit the police officer from also citing the driver of said all-terrain vehicle. 
(i)  The provisions of this Code section are severable and, in the event that any provision or part hereof shall be held invalid for any reason by any court exercising competent jurisdiction, then such invalidity shall not be deemed to affect or impair any of the other provisions of this Code section not specifically held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City of Beckley that this Code section would have been adopted if any such invalid provision or part hereof had not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 10-8-02) 
Secs. 14-1001-14-1099. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PROHIBITION OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND CERTAIN ANIMALS ON "RAILS TO TRAILS" 

Sec. 14-1100. - Prohibition; enforcement; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized vehicle on the "Rails to Trails". Motorized vehicle shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles, buses, bicycles if any form of motor is used to propel said bicycles, all-terrain vehicles, motor-driven cycles, trailers, semi-trailers, road tractors, farm tractors, riding lawn mowers, sport utility vehicles, go-carts, motorized carts, and any other form of motor vehicle propelled by gas, electricity, and/or battery. Authorized emergency vehicles and authorized maintenance vehicles are exempt from this section. A motorized wheelchair is permitted when occupied and operated by a person whose medical condition requires the use of the wheelchair. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have horses, ponies, or other types of animals (with the exception of dogs and cats) on the "Rails to Trails" for any purpose. Every person convicted of a violation of this subsection (c) of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 5-24-05; Ord. of 7-12-05) 
Chapter 15 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 13, 2002, amended Ch. 15 of this Code in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 15, §§ 15-1-15-26, 15-200-15-206, 15-301-15-336, 15-401-15-404, 15-501-15-524, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1971 Code, App. A, §§ 1-4, 6, 7, 9, 11-23; and ordinances adopted Oct. 14, 1986; Jan. 27, 1987; March 10, 1987; June 22, 1993; Oct. 25, 1994; June 13, 1995; June 25, 1996; May 15, 1997; Sept. 12, 2000; and Oct. 12, 2000. 
Cross reference- Urban mass transportation authority, § 2-8; fire limits, § 4-5; approval of planning commission for blacktop aprons, etc., § 4-6; floodplain district, § 4-700 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is enacted for the general purpose of dividing the city into zones or districts, restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, and other specified uses; to regulate the intensity of the use of lot areas and so regulate and determine the area of open spaces surrounding such buildings; to establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for specified manufacturing, business, residential and other uses within such areas; to fix standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein; to prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of such districts, respectively; to prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder; to limit congestion in the public streets by providing for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of vehicles; providing for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and structures; and prescribing penalties for the violation of the chapter; to lessen congestion; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the city; and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-2. - Title and identification; duties, etc., of planning commission and board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  This chapter and ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto, shall be known, and may be cited hereafter as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Beckley, West Virginia - 1971." Whenever the word "city" appears in this chapter, it shall be deemed to refer to the City of Beckley, West Virginia; the word "council" refers to the common council of the City of Beckley; the word "commission" refers to the City of Beckley planning commission (as specified in West Virginia Code, section 8-24-51); the word "board" refers to the City of Beckley board of zoning appeals (as specified in West Virginia Code, section 8-24-51); the word "district" refers to a section of the city for which uniform regulations governing the use, right, area, size, and intensity of use of buildings and land and open spaces about buildings are herein established; the words "zoning map" refer to a map entitled, "City of Beckley, West Virginia, Zoning Map," updated 1966, and any amendments thereto; the words "comprehensive plan" refer to the complete plan or any of its parts, for the development of the city, adopted by the council of the city in accordance with the authority conferred by Article 24 of Chapter 8 of the Code of West Virginia. 
(b)  The powers, duties, and limitations of the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be as prescribed in said Article 24 of Chapter 8, which statute is adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1971, App. A, § 2; Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined; words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure," the word "lot" shall include the word "plot"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
    Accessory building or use: A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use. It shall be located in a side or rear yard only, not less than five (5) feet from a property line. It shall be ten (10) feet from the main building or use unless the exterior wall closest to the main structure is constructed of non-combustible material with not less than a two-hour fire rating, or may be attached to the main building, with a non-combustible, two-hour rated exterior connecting wall. Accessory buildings less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet shall not require a building permit, unless with electrical or plumbing elements. Accessory buildings one hundred fifty (150) square feet or more shall require a building permit, verification of a roof rafter or truss design on not less than thirty (30) pounds per square inch live load and an approved foundation plan. A ground mounted satellite receiver or dish in excess of twenty-four (24) inches in diameter shall be considered as an accessory building and shall be so regulated by this chapter. 
    Acreage: Any tract or parcel of land which has not been subdivided and platted. 
    Acute care facility: Hospital care given to patients who generally require a stay of up to seven (7) days, or more, and that focuses on a physical or mental condition requiring immediate intervention and constant medical attention, equipment and personnel. 
    Adult amusement or entertainment: Amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainment. 
    Adult bookstore/adult novelty store/adult video store: An establishment which utilizes ten (10) per cent or more of its gross public floor area for the purpose of retail sale, and/or rental, and/or display by image-producing devices, of sexually-oriented material for any consideration; or ten (10) per cent or more of the stock-in-trade consists of sexually-oriented materials. 
    Adult cabaret: A building or portion of a building regularly featuring dancing or other live entertainment if the dancing or entertainment that constitutes the primary live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein; or a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or which exhibit films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult day care center: A day care facility that is maintained for the whole or part of a day for the care or supervision of adults, and providing day care services, including monitoring of clients, social and recreation services, food and nourishment, and health support services. The operation of the facility shall not include overnight occupancy by the clients. Adult day care may be operated within structures on church premises or publicly owned community centers, provided such uses are lawfully permitted and operating in the underlying zoning district. 
    Adult mini motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel: A hotel, motel, or similar establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertised the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult novelty store: See "adult bookstore." 
    Adult theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who expose specified anatomical areas, or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specific sexual activities. 
    Adult video store: See "adult bookstore." 
    Agricultural implement sales and service: A use primarily engaged in the sale or rental of farm tools and implements, feed, grain, tack, animal care products, and farm supplies. This definition excludes the sale of large implements, such as tractors and combines, but includes food sales and farm machinery repair services that are accessory to the principal use. 
    Alley: A public or private thoroughfare having a minimum width of ten (10) feet and a maximum width of twenty (20) feet which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Alteration: As applied to a building or other structure, is a change or rearrangement in the structural parts of or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another. 
    Antique shop: A place offering primarily antiques for sale. An antique, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or similar item with collectible value that is at least thirty (30) years old. 
    Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for a single family. 
    Architectural review program and summary of guidelines: A document or documents prepared by the historic landmark commission outlining the general restoration theme of Courthouse Square and by which the design standards committee judges acceptability and appropriateness of plans and specifications submitted by a property owner, and which is available upon request at the office of the zoning officer for the city, or from any member of the historic landmark commission and which is incorporated herein by reference. 
    Auto convenience market: A place where gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, or other minor accessories are retailed directly to the public on the premises in combination with the retailing of items typically found in a convenience market or supermarket. 
    Automobile repair: General repair, engine rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting of motor vehicles. 
    Automobile, sales and service: The use of any building or portion thereof, or other premises or portion thereof, for the display, sale, rental or lease of new or used motor vehicles as an ancillary use of a zoning lot, and any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
    Automobile service station: A place where gasoline stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, or motor oil and lubricants or grease for operation of automobiles, are retailed directly to the public on premises, and including minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including automobile repairs and rebuilding. When the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. 
    Auto wrecking or junkyard: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building, or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof; and including any farm vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging and scavenging of any other goods, articles, or merchandise. 
    Basement: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground, a basement shall be counted as a story for purpose of height measurement. 
    Bed and breakfast: A private, owner-occupied business, providing overnight accommodations, with six (6) or fewer rooms, where breakfast or light meals are served. 
    Bicycle trail: All thoroughfares that explicitly provide for bicycle travel including facilities existing within street and highway rights-of-way and facilities along separate and independent corridors. 
    Block: An area of land entirely bounded by streets or other barriers to the continuity of development. 
    Board of zoning appeals: A local body of five (5) members, appointed by the city council, whose responsibility is to hear appeals from decisions of the zoning officer, recommend specific conditions for conditional uses, and to consider requests for variances and conditional uses from the terms of the City of Beckley zoning ordinance. 
    Boarding house: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where means of lodging are provided for compensation for four (4) or more persons, but not exceeding ten (10) persons. 
    Brew pub: An establishment which contains a full-service standard restaurant and alcoholic beverages. This establishment also contains a microbrewery as an accessory use provided that sales of the microbrewery products are less than fifty (50) per cent of total sales. This microbrewery shall be for the brewing of handcrafted, natural beer intended for retail consumption on the premises and on any premises that has a license as a standard full-service restaurant owned and operated in its entirety by the same corporate ownership and management as the brew pub. 
    Brewery, micro: A facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year. The development may include other uses such as a standard restaurant, bar, or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district. 
    Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and designed or intended for the shelter, support, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, or chattels. 
    Building area: The buildable area of a lot is the space remaining after the minimum open space requirements of this chapter have been complied with. 
    Building code: The various codes of the city adopted to safeguard life and property through ensuring the quality of construction of all structures erected or renovated throughout the city including all aspects of safe building construction and mechanical operations in accordance with standard safe practices embodied in widely recognized standards of good practice for building construction and all aspects related thereto. The building code regulates construction and requires building permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, plumbing permits and other permits to do work. Whenever any municipal ordinance or regulation of any agency thereof is more stringent or imposes a higher standard than is required by the state building code, other state or county law, the provisions of the municipal ordinance or regulation of any agency thereof governs if they are not inconsistent with the laws of West Virginia and are not contrary to recognized standards and good engineering practices. In any question, the decision of the state fire commission determines the relative priority of any such state law, county or municipal ordinance or regulation of any agency thereof and determines compliance with state building code by officials of the state, counties, municipalities and political subdivisions of the state. 
    Building height: The vertical measurement from grade to the highest point of the roof beams in flat roofs; to the highest point on the deck of mansard roofs; to a level midway between the level of the eaves and highest point of pitched roofs of hip roofs; or to a level two-thirds (?) of the distance from the level of the eaves to the highest point of gambrel roofs. For this purpose, the level of the eaves shall be taken to mean the highest level where the plane of the roof intersects the plane of the outside wall on a side containing the eaves. Where the height is designated in terms of stories, it shall mean the designated number of stories including the first story. 
    Building line: For the purpose of this chapter, the building line is the same as a front yard setback line. 
    Building official: The city official or employee responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable building codes and standards of the city. 
    Business: The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, the maintenance or operation of offices, or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit. 
    Camper: A mobile living unit designed to be mounted upon and conveyed by another vehicle. 
    Camper (fold down): A vehicle consisting of a portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewall which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the camp site to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
    Carport: A roofed structure permanently open on at least three (3) sides and attached to or made a part of the main building or free-standing, not closer than five (5) feet from a side or rear property line, or in a front yard only on a paved driveway, for the purpose of providing shelter for one (1) or more private, motor driven vehicles. A carport of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or more shall require a building permit with construction specifications indicating roof truss or rafter design of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot live load and an acceptable foundation and/or anchorage plan. A carport of combustible materials may not be located closer than ten (10) feet from the main structure or any other lawful accessory structure. 
    Car wash: The use of a site or building for washing and cleaning passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles or light duty vehicles or equipment, where the customer provides the labor and where no self-propelled wash racks are provided. 
    Car wash, industrial: Mechanical facilities for washing, waxing, cleaning of automobile, trucks, heavy trucks, buses and other equipment, with or without self-propelled wash racks. 
    Cattery: A place where four (4) or more adult cats are kept, by owners or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation, but not including small animal hospitals, clinics. An adult cat is one that has reached the age of six (6) months. A cattery is not permitted in a residential zone. 
    Cemetery: Land uses for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
    Certification of appropriateness: The certificate issued by the historic landmark commission indicating approval of appropriate plans as they pertain to the reconstruction, restoration, alteration, or creation of buildings or other structures within Courthouse Square. 
    Certificate of occupancy: A certificate signed by the zoning officer, building official, and fire chief stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or structure referred to therein complies with the provisions of this chapter and the state building and fire codes. 
    Child: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Child day care center/nursery school: A place or residence where child care is provided on a regular basis to the needs of thirteen (13) or more children for any number of hours a day in a place or residence other than the child's own home by persons other than their parents or guardians, custodians, or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption. This also includes nursery schools, but does not include the care of older children enrolled in school during school hours. (See definition of "nursery" and additional requirements in section 15-24(k).) 
    Child day care facility: A place or residence where child care is provided on a regular basis to the needs of seven (7) to twelve (12) children for any number of hours a day in a place or residence other than the child's own home by persons other than their parents or guardians, custodians, or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
    Child day care home: A place or residence where child care is provided on a regular basis to the needs of up to six (6) children for any number of hours a day in a place or residence other than the child's own home by persons other than their parents or guardians, custodians, or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
    Clinic or medical health center: An outpatient establishment where patients are admitted for special study and treatment by two (2) or more licensed physicians or dentists and their professional associates not lodged overnight. 
    Club, private, indoor: Buildings or facilities, owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons, for a social, educational or recreational purpose to which membership is required for participation, profit or non-profit includes lodge or fraternal organization; a non-profit association or persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, use of the premises restricted to members and their guests; a private, for profit restaurant, tavern or wine restaurant, licensed by and in compliance with rules and regulations of the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Control Administration, where alcoholic beverages are served for consumption, only on the premises. 
    Coffee shop: An informal restaurant primarily offering coffee, tea and other beverages, where light refreshments and limited meals may be sold; a retail food business in a freestanding building that sells coffee or other beverages and pre-made bakery goods from a walk up or drive through window to customers for consumption and provides no indoor or outdoor seating; kiosk; an informal restaurant in a hotel, motel, office or similar building where light refreshments and beverages are served. 
    Community or recreation center: A building used as a place of meeting, recreation or social activity; a meeting place, public or private, where people living in the same community carry on cultural, recreational or social activities and possessing outdoor recreational facilities such as a golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, polo grounds, basketball courts, baseball or softball fields or similar facilities; a convention or civic center. 
    Comprehensive development plan (also called comprehensive plan): A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted and amended from time to time by the planning commission of the City of Beckley, showing the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities including housing, industrial, and commercial uses, major thoroughfares, parks, schools, and other community facilities. This plan establishes the goals, objectives, and policies of the community. 
    Conditional use: A use or occupancy of a structure, or use of land, permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the limitations and conditions imposed to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone. 
    Coop: A cage, small fenced and/or screened enclosure or small building in which poultry is housed. 
    Corral: An enclosure or pen for confining livestock. 
    Court: An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building. 
    Curb grade: The established elevation of the curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb grade has been established, the city shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Data processing facilities: Facilities where electronic data is processed by employees, including, without limitation, data entry, storage, conversion or analysis, subscription and credit card transaction processing, telephone sales and order collection, mail order and catalog sales, and mailing list preparation. 
    District: One (1) or more sections of the incorporated area of the city for which the regulations and provisions governing the use of building and land are uniform for each class of use permitted therein. 
    Dormitory: A building intended or used primarily for sleeping accommodations related to an educational institution, public or private, or a public or nonprofit institution, which may contain one (1) or more common kitchen or bath facilities and some common gathering rooms for social or other purposes. 
    Driveway: A path for vehicles, from a street or right-of-way, onto private or public property, that may also be used for parking, subject to other provisions which may limit the size and/or type of vehicle, and the size and/or type of surface. 
    Dry cleaning facility: A building, portion of a building, or premises used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort per day for customers by immersion and agitation, or by immersions only, using volatile solvents including, but not by way of limitation, solvents of the petroleum distillate type, and/or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes incidental thereto. 
    Dwelling: Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence or sleeping place for more than six (6) consecutive months of the calendar year by one (1) or more persons or families and which includes permanently installed cooking and lawfully required sanitary facilities, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. A dwelling shall not include a tree house, tent, recreational vehicle, house trailer, mobile home, or a room in a hotel, motel, boarding or lodging house. A dwelling shall include any manufactured home constructed to the following specifications: 
(1)  The home is affixed to a permanent foundation and connected to appropriate utilities. 
(2)  The home, excluding any addition, has a width of at least twenty-two (22) feet at one (1) point and a length of at least twenty-two (22) feet at one (1) point. The total living area of the home, excluding garages, porches or attachments, must be at least nine hundred (900) square feet or equal to or greater than any minimum dwelling size applicable within an applicable zoning district. 
(3)  The home has a minimum 3:12 residential roof pitch, conventional residential siding, and a six-inch minimum eave overhang, including appropriate guttering. 
(4)  The home was manufactured after June 1, 1976. 
    Dwelling, duplex: Two (2) attached one-family dwellings. 
    Dwelling, elderly high-rise: A multiple-family high-rise dwelling planned and designed primarily for residential occupancy of families whose heads or their spouses or whose sole members have attained the age of sixty (60) years or older, or are handicapped or disabled, or as may be defined by state or federal regulations; with the sole exception of a single-dwelling unit in any one (1) elderly high-rise which may be occupied by a resident employee and the employee's family. 
    Dwelling, group residential facility: A facility which is owned or leased by a behavioral health service provider and which: 
(1)  Provides residential services and supervision for individuals who are developmentally disabled or behaviorally disabled; 
(2)  Is occupied as a residence by not more than eight (8) individuals who are developmentally disabled and not more than three (3) supervisors, or is occupied as a residence by not more than twelve (12) individuals who are behaviorally disabled and not more than three (3) supervisors; 
(3)  Is licensed by the department of health or the division of human services; and 
(4)  Complies with the state fire commission for residential facilities. 
    Dwelling, group residential home: A building owned or leased by developmentally disabled or behaviorally disabled persons for purposes of establishing a personal residence. 
    Dwelling, multiple: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families, living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, one-family: A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, row: A row of three (3) to six (6) attached one-family dwellings, not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories in height. 
    Dwelling, two family: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed primarily for occupancy by one (1) family for living or sleeping purposes. 
    Elderly day care center: A facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance for senior citizens for any part of but not a complete twenty-four-hour day and not for overnight stays. It shall be a permitted use in an R-5 or R-6 zoning district. It shall be a conditional use in any R-2, R-3, B-2 and B-3 zoning district, and in an R-1 or B-1 zoning district provided not more than six (6) adults are cared for, subject to the provisions of sections 15-5(d)(1) and(2) and any state or federal licensure requirements or regulations. 
    Elderly housing: A residential complex containing multifamily dwellings designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens. Such facilities may include a congregate meals program in a common dining area but excludes institutional care such as medical or nursing care. Elderly housing shall be a permitted use in R-3, R-5, B-2 and B-3 zoning districts. Elderly housing shall be a conditional use in a B-1 zoning district subject to the provisions of sections 15-5(d)(1) and (2), 15-23, 15-24(c)(1) and (2), and any state or federal licensure requirements or regulations. 
    Erected: Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the land required for the building, or to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix, or the painting of signs. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered part of the erection. 
    Escort: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one (1) of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground or overhead gas, electrical, telephone transmission, or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, towers, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including building, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, or for the public health or safety or general welfare. 
    Establishment: Any business regulated by this article. 
    Extended care facility: A hospital or unit thereof, which provides nursing and related services for long-term patients who require medical, nursing and other professional healthcare services. 
    Factory-built home: Includes mobile homes, house trailers, and manufactured homes. 
    Family: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage, or group of not more than five (5) persons (excluding servants) who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
    Foot candle: A unit of illumination equal to the amount of direct light thrown one (1) candle on one (1) square foot of surface one (1) foot away. 
    Frontage: All property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets or natural barriers. 
    Garage, private: An accessory building for the storage of motor-driven vehicles of which not more than one (1) shall be a commercial vehicle of not more than two-ton capacity. 
    Garage, public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage or automobile service station, designed or used for equipping, repairing, storing, or parking automobiles for remuneration, hire, or sale within the structure. 
    Grade: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five (5) feet distant from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and the property line if it is less than five (5) feet distant from said wall. In case walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a public sidewalk, alley or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or public way. 
    Greenbelt (buffer zone): Greenbelt or buffer zone shall be an area comprised of trees, shrubs or other plantings adjacent to the side or rear property line, where no structure, sign, tower or accessory building or parking of any vehicle, trailer or equipment is permitted. 
    Gross public floor area: The total area of the building accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled "public"), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
    Guesthouse: A structure for human habitation, containing one (1) or more rooms with bath and toilet facilities, but not including a kitchen or facilities which would provide a complete housekeeping unit. 
    Hard surfaced: Paved with asphalt, concrete, or similar material approved by the board of public works. 
    Historic landmark commission: The commission shall be comprised of five (5) members, nominated by the mayor and appointed by the common council, City of Beckley. They shall be: An architect or licensed professional engineer; demonstrate an interest in or expertise in historic preservation; demonstrate historic knowledge of the area; design professional; owner of significant or historical property within the corporate limits; member of the downtown Beckley business or professional community; or an owner or lessee of property constructed before 1930. The initial appointments shall be for terms of one (1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years, and five (5) years, and shall thereafter be for a term of five (5) years. 
    Home improvement center: A facility of more than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area, engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders' hardware, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery. 
    Home occupation: A small-scale occupation, profession, or hobby, conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or accessory unit that is typically associated with a residential use, provided that all the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The use is limited in extent and incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof; 
(2)  Only residents of the dwelling unit and members of their immediate family are employed in the occupation, profession or hobby use (no outside employees permitted); 
(3)  The occupation, profession or hobby product or service is wholly produced or provided within the dwelling; 
(4)  No customers visit the dwelling to transact business involved in the occupation, profession or hobby; 
(5)  No signage of any kind is permitted. 
A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include activities involving activities, meetings or transactions with customers, patients or clients at the premises or that provide significant adverse effect upon the surrounding neighborhood, including the following: professional offices; child day care facilities and centers; barbershops and beauty salons; physical fitness facilities; studios for musicians or artists where concerts, exhibitions or sales may take place; facilities for repair of heavy equipment, motor vehicles, lawn or garden or similar equipment; and, commercial breeding, raising or selling of animals. (See section 15-24(d).) 
    Hospital: Any institution, place, building or agency in which accommodation of five (5) or more beds is maintained, furnished or offered for the hospitalization or extended care of the sick or injured. 
    Hospital or sanitarium: An institution open to the public in which sick patients or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care of contagious diseases or incurable patients. 
    Hotel: Any building or part of a building two (2) or more stories in height in which six (6) or more rooms are designed or intended to be used, or are used, for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for hire for transient guests in contradistinction to a boarding or lodging house. 
    House trailer: All trailers designed and used for human occupancy on a continual nonrecreational basis, but may not include fold-down camping and travel trailers, mobile homes, or manufactured homes. 
    Improvement location permit: A permit signed by the zoning officer stating that a proposed improvement complies with the provisions of this chapter and such other ordinances as may be applicable. Such a permit may also be known as a building permit. 
    Incombustible material: Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred (1,200) degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
    Institution: A facility that provides a public service and is operated by a federal, state, or local government, public or private utility, public or private school or college, church, public agency, or tax-exempt organization (e.g., charitable organizations, hospitals, houses of worship, libraries, and nonprofit cultural centers). 
    Institution, eleemosynary: One (1) supported by charity or charitable contributions. 
    Junkyard: Any place at which personal property is or may be salvaged for reuse, resale, or reduction or similar disposition and is owned, possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted, including but not limited to used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, lumber, millwork, brick, and similar property except animal matter; and used motor vehicles, machinery, or equipment which is used, owned, or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom. 
    Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs over four (4) months of age are owned, kept, or harbored; or a business where two (2) or more dogs not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises are housed, boarded, groomed or otherwise provided care for any amount of remuneration or consideration. (See section 15-24(j).) 
    Laboratory: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing of product or products is not to be permitted within this definition. 
    Laundromat: An establishment or business that provides washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be operated by the customer on the premises. 
    Laundry: A building, portion of a building, or premises used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort per day for customers by immersion and agitation, or by immersions only, using water-based detergents. 
    Laundry, ironing, and/or dry cleaning pickup station: An establishment or business maintained for the pickup and delivery of laundry and/or ironing and/or dry cleaning without the maintenance or operation of any laundry, ironing, or dry-cleaning equipment or machinery on the premises. 
    Lingerie modeling studio: An establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie to individuals, couples, or small groups in a room smaller than six hundred (600) square feet. 
    Loading space: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access. (See section 15-23 (b).) 
    Lodging house: A building with not more than five (5) guest rooms where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not open to the public or transients. 
    Long-term care facility: Any nursing home, personal care home, or residential board and care home as defined in West Virginia Code, sections 16-5C-2(e), 16-5D-2(i), and 16-5H-2(j); nursing homes operated by the federal government or the state government; extended care facilities operated in connection with hospitals; and any similar institution, residence or place, or any part or unit thereof, however named, in this state which is advertised, offered, maintained or operated by the ownership or management for consideration, for the express and implied purpose of providing accommodations and care or personal assistance to one (1) or more persons who are ill or otherwise incapacitated or are dependent upon the services of others by reasons of physical or mental impairment and who are not related within the degree of consanguinity of second cousin to the owner or manager of the institution, residence or place. 
    Lot: A parcel of land occupied or suitable for occupancy by one (1) main building or use, with accessory buildings, including the open spaces required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or highway. 
    Lot, corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
    Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction on the side lot lines. 
    Lot frontage: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the side of a lot that abuts a public street. For corner lots, the frontage may be established by the orientation of the buildings, or of the location of the principal entrance if the building orientation does not clearly indicate lot frontage. Where no other method determines conclusively the front of a corner lot, the owner shall select the front of the lot. (It is recommended that the shortest side fronting upon a street be considered the front of the lot.) For interior lots which abut more than one (1) street, each street frontage shall be deemed a front lot line. 
    Lot, reversed frontage/reversed corner: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general pattern in the area. If the lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, it is also known as a reversed corner lot. 
    Lot interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Luminaire, cutoff type: A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts, with elements such as shield, reflectors or refractor angles that direct and cutoff the light at cutoff angles less than ninety (90) degrees. 
    Manufactured home: A building unit or assembly of closed construction fabricated in an off-site facility, that conforms with the federal construction and safety standards established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the "Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," and that has a label or tag permanently affixed to it certifying compliance with all applicable federal construction and safety standards. 
    Massage parlor: Any establishment where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of, or in connection with, specific sexual activities or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto exposes specific anatomical areas. 
    Mobile home: A transportable housing unit built prior to June 1, 1976, designed to be towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels), and designed to be connected to utilities for year-round occupancy and long-term residential use that was wholly, or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. The term includes: 
(1)  Units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed or telescoped when being towed and that may be expanded to provide additional cubic capacity, and 
(2)  Units composed of two (2) or more separately towable components designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of being separated again into the components for repeated towing. 
These units were built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq., effective on June 1, 1976), and were usually built to the voluntary industry standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) - A119.1 Standards for Mobile Homes. 
    Motel: A building or a detached building, usually not more than one (1) story in height, used as dwelling units containing bedroom, bathroom, and closet space with each unit having convenient access to a parking space for the use of the unit's occupants. The units, with the exception of the apartment of the manager or caretaker, are devoted to the use of automobile transients. 
    Motel, extended-stay: Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for guests primarily for periods of one (1) week or more and contain kitchen facilities for food preparation, including but not limited to such facilities as refrigerators, stoves, and ovens. 
    Motor home: Every vehicle, designed to provide temporary living quarters, built into an integral part of or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle, chassis or van including: 
(1)  Type A motor home built on an incomplete truck chassis with the truck cab constructed by the second stage manufacturer; 
(2)  Type B motor home consisting of a van-type vehicle which has been altered to provide temporary living quarters; and 
(3)  Type C motor home built on an incomplete van or truck chassis with a cab constructed by the chassis manufacturer. 
    Multiple-family high-rise: A multiple-family dwelling structure as permitted in the R-5, multiple-family high rise district, subject to the provisions of the state building and state fire codes. 
    Nude model studio: Any place where a person who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. A nude model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of West Virginia or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
(1)  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a model who displays specified anatomical areas is available for viewing; and 
(2)  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
(3)  Where no more than one (1) model displaying specified anatomical areas is on the premises at any one (1) time. 
    Nursery school: A school that is primarily educational in nature and meets the needs of a child of three (3) to five (5) years of age. (See definition of "child day care center" and additional requirements in section 15-24(k).) 
    Nursing home: Any institution, residence or place or any part or unit thereof, however named, in this state which is advertised, offered, maintained or operated by the ownership or management, whether for a consideration or not, for the express or implied purpose of providing accommodations and care for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours, for four (4) or more persons who are ill or otherwise incapacitated and in need of extensive, ongoing nursing care due to physical or mental impairment or which provides services for the rehabilitation of persons who are convalescing from illness or incapacitation. 
    Other advertising structure: See definition of "sign". 
    Parking areas, lots, and parking garages: An open area other than street, or a structure or portion thereof, designed for the temporary parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available for public use whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for employees, clients or customers. 
    Parking space: An area enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed and being not less than nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long exclusive of passageways, which has adequate access to a public street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile. 
    Pen: A small, fenced enclosure for small animals other than horses or cattle. 
    Permittee: A person receiving a building or other permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
    Person: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organizations of any kind. 
    Planning commission: The seven-member body appointed by the common council, in compliance with West Virginia law, charged with making recommendations to the common council for the development and amendment of the comprehensive plan, zoning maps and zoning ordinance. 
    Plat: A map or chart indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land, intended to be filed or recorded. 
    Porch: A roofed entrance to a building projecting out from the wall or walls of the main structure and commonly open to the weather in part. 
    Primary live entertainment: On-site entertainment by live entertainers that characterizes the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a pattern of advertising as well as actual performances. 
    Professional office: The office of a person offering professional services including physicians, dentists, osteopaths, architects, engineers, lawyers, and similar professions. 
    Public administration building: Any building held used or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of government, state, county or municipal, without reference to ownership of the building or of the realty on which it is situated. A building belonging to or used by the public for the transaction of public or quasi-public business, not including a garage, storage facility, amphitheater, convention or civic center, tower, transmitter or other non-office facility or site. 
    Public utility facility: A building or structure used or intended to be used by any public utility, including a filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station, and other similar facilities. 
    Recreational vehicle: A motorboat, motorboat trailer, all-terrain vehicle, travel trailer, fold-down camping trailer, motor home, or snowmobile. 
    Restaurant, entertainment: An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed within a structure that includes, as an integral component of the facility, electronic or mechanical games of skill, simulation, and virtual reality play areas, video arcades, or similar uses, billiards, and other forms of amusement. 
    Rooming house: A residential building with three (3) or more sleeping rooms for lodgers, and wherein no dining facilities are maintained for the lodger, as distinguished from a boarding house. 
    Sadomasochistic practices: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed or naked. 
    Secondhand merchandise, retail sales: Means retail sales of previously used merchandise, such as clothing, household furnishings or appliances, and sports/recreational equipment. This classification does not include secondhand motor vehicles, parts, or accessories. 
    Sexual encounter center: Any building or structure which contains, or is used for, commercial entertainment where the patron, directly or indirectly, is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with, or to allow personal contact by employees, devices or equipment, or by personnel provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron, to include, but not to be limited to, bath houses, massage parlors, and related or similar activities. 
    Sexual excitement: Means the condition of the human male or female genitals, when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Sexually-oriented business: An establishment which advertises or holds itself out in any forum as "XXX," "adult," "sex," or otherwise provides a service or product distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexually oriented material, specific sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas. Sexually oriented businesses include the following type of establishments: adult amusement or entertainment, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motel, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store, escort agency, lingerie modeling studio, massage parlor, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Sexually-oriented material: Any media or novelty that is distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Media includes any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, writing, poster, print, drawing, picture, undeveloped picture, pictorial representation, slide, transparency, motion picture film, video cassettes, videotape, videotape production, CD-ROM, DVD, laser disc, figure, image, description, phonograph recording, tape recording, magnetic media, sound recording, game, novelty, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. A sexually oriented novelty includes any instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs, including leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices. 
    Shopping center, outlet center: Usually located in rural or occasionally tourist locations, and outlet centers consisting mostly of manufacturers' outlet stores selling their own brands at a discount. These centers are typically not anchored. A strip configuration is most common, although some are enclosed malls, and others can be arranged in a "village cluster." 
    Sign: Any writing (including letter, word, or numeral), pictorial presentation (including illustration or decoration), emblem (including device, symbol, or trademark), flag (including banner or pennant), or any other figure of similar character, that: 
(1)  Is a structure or any part thereof, or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or other structure (such as a card, cloth, paper, metal, painted glass, wood, plaster, stone, billboard, marquee, canopy, awning, tree, wall, bush, post, fence, building, etc.); 
(2)  Is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; and 
(3)  Is visible from outside a building. 
A sign includes writing, representation, or other figures of similar character, within a building, only when illuminated and located in a window. (Refer to sign regulations in section 16-301 et seq.) 
    Sign, electrical: Any sign or other advertising structure that requires electricity for illumination, movement, or any other purpose. 
    Sign, facing: The surface of a sign or other advertising structure upon, against, or through which a message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. 
    Specified anatomical areas: Exhibition, display or depiction of: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely-covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Specific sexual activities: Activities which include: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including sexual excitement, penetration with a finger or male organ into any orifice in another person, oral copulation, masturbation, intercourse, sodomy, or bestiality; or 
(3)  Excretory functions, male ejaculation, or the aftermath of male ejaculation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) and (2) above. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street, private: Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Street, public: A thoroughfare (street, drive, avenue, boulevard) open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel that has been or is intended to be dedicated for public use and has been accepted or is acceptable into the city street network. A public street is usually not less than one-fourth (1/4) of a mile in length and has a minimum width between the boundary lines of fifty (50) feet. 
    Structural alterations: Any change which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
    Structural trim: Any molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing, and platforms which are attached to the structure. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected in compliance with the zoning ordinance and the state building code, which includes, but is not limited to, everything built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and attached or affixed to real property, or which adds utility to real property or any part thereof, or which adds utility to a particular parcel of property and is intended to remain there for an indefinite period of time. A structure shall include any dwelling, building or fixture permanently affixed to realty including basements, footings, foundations, sewage systems and underground pipes directly servicing the dwelling or building. A structure shall not include driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, land, trees, plants, crops or agricultural field drainage tile. 
    Terrace, open: A level and rather narrow plain, or platform, which, for purposes of this chapter, is located adjacent to one (1) or more faces of the main structure, and which is constructed not more than four (4) feet in height above the average level of the adjoining ground. 
    Tourist court: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit including auto courts, motels, or motor lodges. 
    Tourist home: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests. 
    Trailer, fold-down camping: Every vehicle consisting of a portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the camp site to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
    Trailer, travel: Every vehicle, mounted on wheels, designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use of such size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when towed by a motor vehicle and of gross trailer area less than four hundred (400) square feet. 
    University: A facility providing educational services for students by operation of an accredited institution of higher education providing course of instruction and awarding degrees at the university level, undergraduate and/or postgraduate and doctoral; an accredited institution of the highest level comprised of various accredited colleges, graduate and/or professional schools; including appropriate buildings, lands and related facilities that include but are not limited to: classrooms and non-traditional instruction, lecture hall; colleges; research and laboratory facilities; parking lots or structures; food service, cafeteria, catering, coffee shop, restaurant, snack bar, student union facilities; book store; offices; housing, student and faculty, dormitory, residence hall, apartment or other; athletic programs, stadiums, gymnasiums, fields, rinks, playgrounds, courts or other related structures or facilities; theatrical facility, movie theater and entertainment facility, meeting or convocation facility; religious worship structure or facility; medical, osteopathic or veterinary facility or clinic or related services for instruction, student, staff and faculty treatment or care, nursery; student, staff and faculty services including banking, barber and beauty facilities, fraternities and sororities; computer laboratories, structures, facilities and services; communications, broadcasting, telecasting, Internet or related services and facilities. 
    Use: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased. 
    Use, accessory: See definition of "accessory building or use." 
    Use, conditional: A use that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by the board of zoning appeals and granting of conditional use approval imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity. Conditional uses are issued for uses of land and are transferable to subsequent owners in accordance with all requirements and stipulations associated with the conditional use approval. 
    Use, nonconforming: Any building, structure, or land lawfully occupied by a use, or lawfully situated at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, which does not conform after the passage of such ordinance or amendments thereto with the regulations of this chapter. 
    Use, permitted: A use permitted in a district without the need for special administrative review and approval, upon satisfaction of the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
    Video rental store: Establishment primarily engaged in the retail rental or lease of video tapes, films, CD-ROMs, laser discs, electronic games, cassettes, or other electronic media. Sales of film, video tapes, laser discs, CD-ROMs, and electronic merchandise associated with VCRs, video cameras, and electronic games are permitted accessory uses. 
    Yard: An open space on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
YARD AND LOT LINES 
    Yard, front: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building. 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building. 
    Yard, side: That part of the yard lying between the main building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the required rear yard. 
    Zero lot line: A single family unit distinguished by the location of one exterior wall on a side property line. 
ZERO LOT LINES 
    Zoning officer: The agent or official designated by the council and charged by law with the administration and enforcement of the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. He serves as the secretary to the City of Beckley planning commission, board of zoning appeals and historic landmark commission and as such maintains all records, prepares recommendations, findings of facts and performs other duties to each as assigned or requested. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 8-12-03, § 2; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1) 
Sec. 15-4. - Use districts. 
(a)  The city is hereby divided into ten (10) use districts: 
(1)  R-1 one-family district 
(2)  R-2 general residential district 
(3)  R-3 multiple-family district 
(4)  R-5 multiple-family high rise 
(5)  R-6 elderly high rise 
(6)  O/R office/residential transitional district 
(7)  B-1 neighborhood business district 
(8)  B-2 general commercial-business district 
(9)  B-3 "Courthouse Square" central downtown multi-use district 
(10)  M manufacturing district 
(b)  The boundaries of designated districts are shown upon the map made a part of this chapter, which map is designated as the zone map of the city. The zone map made a part of this chapter and on file in the office of the city recorder-treasurer and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the zone map and all such notations, references, and other information shown thereon were fully set forth or described herein. 
(c)  Interpretation of district boundaries. The board of zoning appeals (BZA) has the authority to interpret the official zoning map and shall adhere to the following rules: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries appear to be approximately parallel to the center lines or street lines of streets, or of the center lines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such distance therefore as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map. 
(4)  Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said railroad line. 
(5)  Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake, or other body of water, said boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the City of Beckley, unless otherwise indicated. 
(6)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this zoning ordinance shall be determined by dimension notes on the map or by the use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(7)  When a street, alley, public way, or railroad right-of-way is vacated, the vacated area shall assume the zoning classification of the abutting zoning district. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-5. - Administration. 
(a)  The zoning officer. 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by an agent to be appointed by the council of the city, who shall be known as the zoning officer. 
(2)  An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the office of the zoning officer specified by provisions of this chapter and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times in accordance with Freedom of Information Act provisions. 
(3)  The zoning officer shall receive applications for and issue building permits and certificates of occupancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  The zoning officer shall make all the required inspections or such officer may, subject to the approval of council, engage such expert opinion as such officer may deem necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that may arise. 
(5)  At least annually, the zoning officer shall submit to the council a written statement reporting all permits and certificates of occupancy issued and notices and orders issued. 
(b)  The planning commission. 
(1)  The planning commission of the City of Beckley, under provisions of West Virginia Code, section 8-24-5, is comprised of seven (7) members, all of whom are freeholders and residents and qualified by knowledge and experience in matters pertaining to the development of the city, and include representatives of business, industry and labor. All are nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the common council. At least three-fifths (?), or four (4), have been residents for ten (10) years prior to their nomination and confirmation. One (1) member is also a member of the common council and one (1) member is a member of the city administration, both terms coextensive with their term of elected or appointed office. Members are appointed or reappointed for three-year terms. 
(2)  Under the provisions of West Virginia Code, Chapter 8, Art. 24, any petition or other action requiring a public hearing before the planning commission shall require a public notice in accordance with West Virginia Code, sections 59-3-2(b), as amended, and shall be by Class 1-0 legal advertisement, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date set by the commission for the public hearing. A special notice of such public hearing, not less than ten (10) days before the date set by the commission for the public hearing, shall also be provided. The special notice shall be by regular mail to all owners and/or residents within three hundred (300) feet of the property to be considered. All costs of the public and special notice shall be paid by the petitioner. At the hearing any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(c)  Permits. 
(1)  Any person who shall make application for a building permit shall, at the time of making such application, furnish a site plan or development plan of real estate upon which said application for a building permit is made. Said site plan shall be drawn to scale showing the following items: 
a.  Legal or site description of the real estate involved; 
b.  Location and size of all buildings and structures; 
c.  Width and length of all entrances and exits to and from said real estate; 
d.  All adjacent and adjoining roads or highways. 
(2)  Site plans so furnished shall be filed and shall become a permanent public record. 
(3)  No land shall be occupied or used and no building, including basements, hereafter erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or part, for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy has been issued stating that the building and use comply with all of the provisions of this chapter applicable to the building or premises or the use in the district in which it is to be located, and the applicable regulations of the state building and/or fire codes. 
(4)  No change shall be made in the use of land or in the use of any building or part thereof, now or hereafter erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, without a certificate of occupancy having been issued, and no such certificate shall be issued to make such change unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  General standards applicable to all conditional uses. 
a.  In addition to the specific requirements for conditionally permitted uses as specified in this chapter, the board of zoning appeals shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use is at the proper location in that it: 
1.  Is in fact, a conditional use established under the provision of this chapter. 
2.  Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives, or with any specific objective of the city's comprehensive plan and/or this chapter. 
3.  Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area. 
4.  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses. 
5.  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such services. 
6.  Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
7.  Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment, and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors. 
8.  Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be designed so as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares. 
9.  Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of major importance. 
(2)  Specific criteria for conditional uses. In granting any conditional use, the board of zoning appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter in addition to determination of positive findings of fact. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  Site plan review process. 
(1)  Site plan review shall be required in any district where the construction, alteration, or expansion of any principal/accessory structure, or the enlargement of a parking area by five (5) or more spaces in areas designated for multifamily, assembly, business or manufacturing use in R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6, B-1, B-2, B-3, and M zones, nor shall any premises be used for or have its use changed to any of the above or related uses unless final development plans for such building, structure, or premises have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to the erection, construction, alteration, or use of any one-family dwelling. 
a.  Procedures for site plan review. Formal submission and approval of a site plan is required before any building permit may be issued. Submission and approval of a site plan includes following the review procedures and submission requirements defined herein. 
b.  An applicant seeking site plan approval shall follow the site plan review process as defined in this chapter. For developments also requiring conditional use approval, the procedure established in section 15-5(c) shall be followed. If a variance is required, the applicant shall be required to seek a variance in accordance with section 15-6(g) before submitting plans for formal site plan approval in accordance with this chapter. 
c.  Optional informal concept review. At any time prior to the formal submission and review of a site plan, an applicant may engage the zoning officer in an optional concept review process. The purpose of this informal review is to provide the applicant with an opportunity to conceptually discuss a proposed development and to provide general guidance to assist in the preparation of a formal site plan. There are no applied standards to the site sketch plan, however, the applicant is encouraged to provide enough detail in order to be able to accurately represent the concept. All comments and suggestions shall be considered informal by the applicant and shall not be a binding agreement with the planning commission for approval. This concept review is a service provided to benefit the applicant, and formal site plan approval is dependent upon the outcome of the site plan review described herein. 
d.  Formal submission of site plan. All applicants are required to comply with site plan review procedures before receiving final approval of site plans and approval for a building permit. Applicants shall be required to submit a completed application and a final site plan (ten (10) sets) to the zoning officer at least fifteen (15) days before the next regularly scheduled meeting in order to be placed on the planning commission agenda for review. An additional fee may be required to defray the expenses associated with the city review of the plans, including the need to retain a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or other professional consultant to advise the city on any or all aspects of the site plan. The cost of required legal advertisement and postage for special notice letters shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
d.  Site plan content. A site plan shall include the following data, details, and supporting plans. The number of pages submitted will depend on the proposal's size and complexity. A site plan shall be prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet (developments more than five (5) acres may be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet) or as determined by the zoning officer, on standard twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets, with narrative on eight and one-half-inch by eleven-inch sheets as necessary. Items required for submission include: 
1.  Name of the project, boundaries, and location maps showing the site's location in the city, date, north arrow, and scale of the plan. Indicate the location of the proposed development in relation to existing community facilities, thoroughfares, and other transportation modes, shopping centers, manufacturing establishments, and residential development. 
2.  Name, address, telephone number, and fax number of the owner of record, developer, engineer, architect, landscape architect, and seal of the engineer, architect, or landscape architect who prepared the site plan, if applicable. 
3.  The legal description of the site that will be developed. 
4.  Existing or proposed deed restrictions or covenants associated with the development. 
5.  Names and addresses of all owners of record of abutting parcels and those within three hundred (300) feet of the property lines. 
6.  All existing lot lines, easements, and rights-of-way. Include area in acres or square feet. Indicate abutting land uses. Indicate the width and names of public rights-of-way that are adjacent to the site and/or will be used for access. Indicate applicable zoning district/proposed zoning district. 
7.  The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the development including building footprints, overhangs, site coverage, building-ground contact, and area. A brief description of the use of the site shall be included with an estimate of the number of employees. 
8.  All dimensions of height and floor area and showing all exterior entrances. 
9.  Illustrations of traffic movement, ingress and egress, and the location of all present and proposed public and private drives, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, ramps, curbs, fences, paths, landscaping, walls, and fences. 
10.  Illustrations of the proposed changes in any public right-of-way, and typical pavement sections and plans showing other improvements, including new streets and infrastructure to be constructed for the development which shall be dedicated to public use. 
11.  The location, height, intensity, lighting pattern, bulb type and values (foot-candles) (e.g., fluorescent, sodium, incandescent) of all external lighting fixtures. 
12.  The location, height, size, materials, and design of all proposed signage. 
13.  The location of all present and proposed utility systems including sewage system, water supply system, telephone, cable, electrical systems, and storm drainage system including existing and proposed drain lines, culverts, catch basins, headwalls, endwalls, hydrants, manholes, and drainage swales, detention areas, and storm system design calculations. 
14.  General soil conditions at the site and neighboring area. Plans to prevent the pollution of surface or groundwater, erosion of soil both during and after construction, excessive runoff, excessive raising or lowering of the water table, and flooding of other properties, as applicable. 
15.  Existing and proposed topography upon and within seventy-five (75) feet of the site at a one (1) foot contour interval. All elevations shall refer to the nearest United States Coastal and Geodetic Bench Mark. If any portion of the parcel is within the one hundred-year flood plain, the area will be shown, and base flood elevations given. If the area is not located within the one hundred-year flood plain, this fact shall be noted on the plan. 
16.  A landscape plan showing all existing natural land features, trees, forest cover, water resources, and all proposed changes to these features including size and type of plant material. Water resources will include ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, floodplains, and drainage retention areas. 
17.  For new construction or alterations to any existing building, a table containing the following information must be included: 
i.  Area of building to be used for a particular use such as retail operation, office, storage, etc. 
ii.  Maximum number of employees. 
iii.  Maximum seating capacity, where applicable. 
iv.  Number of parking spaces existing and required for the intended use. 
v.  A complete set of building drawings and plans as approved by the code enforcement department. 
(f)  Review by the zoning officer. The zoning officer shall review the application for compliance to all applicable sections of this chapter within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the application. Such review shall be based on the information provided by the applicant. If the zoning officer finds that the site plan will not comply with this chapter, the zoning officer shall notify the applicant of the discrepancies of the site plan. If the applicant disagrees with the zoning officer's decision or chooses to seek relief, the applicant may appeal to the board of zoning appeals for such relief, as described in section 15-6(h) as a separate process. Submission of the site plan to the planning commission for review shall not be permitted unless the zoning officer determines that the plans are in compliance with this chapter or an appeal has been granted from the board of zoning appeals. 
(1)  The zoning officer shall forward the application to the planning commission for review and discussion after determining that the application is complete and the applicant complies with this chapter. 
(2)  Notification of adjoining property owners. Upon determination that the application is complete, notices of the meeting to be held by the planning commission on the proposed development shall be sent, by first class mail not less than ten (10) days before that meeting, to all adjoining property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed development. Applicant is responsible for the cost of mailings. 
(g)  Review by planning commission. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of an accurate and complete application and plan from the zoning officer, the planning commission shall meet and shall consider the proposed site plan according to the following criteria: 
(1)  The adequacy of the information presented to determine the impacts of the proposed site. 
(2)  The impacts of the proposed development compared with the following standards: 
a.  Traffic: Convenience and safety of both vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in relationship to adjoining ways and properties. 
b.  Parking: Provisions for the off-street loading and unloading of vehicles incidental to the normal operation of the establishment, adequate parking, adequate lighting, and internal traffic control. 
c.  Services: Reasonable demands placed on city services and infrastructure. 
d.  Pollution control: Adequacy of methods for sewage and refuse disposal and the protection from pollution of both surface water and groundwater. This includes controlling soil erosion both during and after construction. 
e.  Nuisances: Protection of abutting properties from any undue disturbance caused by excessive or unreasonable noise, smoke, vapors, fumes, dust, odors, glare, storm water runoff, etc. 
f.  Existing vegetation: Minimizing the area over which existing vegetation is to be removed. Where tree removal is required, special attention shall be given to planting of replacement trees. 
g.  Amenities: The applicant's efforts to integrate the proposed development into the existing landscape through design features, such as vegetative buffers, roadside planting, and the retention of other green areas. 
h.  Community character: The building setbacks, area, and location of parking, architectural compatibility, signage, and landscaping of the development and how these features harmonize with the surrounding landscape. 
(3)  Access control requirements. The planning commission may, as part of the site plan review process, require that driveways be moved, combined, re-aligned, or eliminated to reduce the potential for accidents. Access shall be reviewed relative to the distance from other drive approaches and from roadway intersections. The preferred method of providing access to parcels is to minimize or eliminate driveways by using service roads, rear access roads, or shared driveways. General standards for parking areas, circulation, and access (found in section 15-23 of this chapter) shall be incorporated as part of the site plan. 
a.  Conditional approval of driveways. As part of the site plan review process, the planning commission may approve a site plan with a specific driveway location with the condition that an agreement be first entered into between the property owner and the City of Beckley requiring that if a service road is constructed in the future, or if the opportunity for a shared driveway should present itself with development of adjacent property, one (1) or more approved driveways shall be closed and measures taken to utilize such service road or shared drive. Approval of driveways may also include restrictions on turning movements, locations, or other requirements to ensure safe and efficient traffic movement. 
b.  Construction and use of service roads. When a service road is required, such improvement shall be constructed by the developer of the involved property before any zoning occupancy or zoning use permit is granted. When a service road is provided, all access to an adjacent property shall use that service road and no direct access to the main thoroughfare shall be provided. 
(4)  Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study may be required by the planning commission for site plan review if the expected trip generation of the proposed use exceeds one hundred (100) or more cars per hour as identified in the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) Manual. Site plans involving roadways falling within the jurisdiction of the West Virginia Department of Transportation must meet all the specific traffic study requirements of that department. A traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified professional engineer at the developer's expense. The traffic impact study shall investigate the feasibility and benefits of improvements such as signals, turn lanes, driveway movement limitations, and other relevant information to the site to protect the safety of the traveling public. The traffic impact study shall include the following elements: 
a.  A description of the site and study area. 
b.  Anticipated development of adjacent parcels. 
c.  Trip generation and distribution, including a description of all assumptions used to generate findings of trip distribution. 
d.  Modal split (if applicable). 
e.  Traffic assignment resulting from the development. 
f.  Projected future traffic volumes. 
g.  An assessment of the impact that would result from driveway alternatives. 
h.  Recommendations for site access and transportation improvements needed to maintain traffic flow within and past the site at an acceptable and safe level of service. 
i.  An evaluation of the effects the proposed development will have on the level of service and roadway capacity. 
(5)  Final action. The planning commission shall take a final action consisting of either: 
a.  Approval of the site plan based upon a determination that the proposed plan will constitute a suitable development and the plan meets all standards set forth in this zoning ordinance. 
b.  Approval of the site plan subject to any additional conditions, modifications, and restrictions as are required to ensure that the project meets the zoning requirements. 
1.  The site plan review should not result in a denial of the site plan, but should clearly list the necessary elements the applicant must provide, or the conditions, modifications, and restrictions required under the chapter. 
2.  If the site plan is approved subject to conditions, the zoning officer shall not issue a permit until the site plan has been redrawn and resubmitted and checked for compliance with the imposed conditions. 
(6)  Enforcement. The City of Beckley may require the posting of a bond or other similar performance guarantee to ensure compliance with the plan and stated conditions of approval. It may suspend any building permit when work is not performed as required. Site plan approval shall lapse within one (1) year if a substantial use thereof has not commenced, except for good cause. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-6. - Board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  A board of zoning appeals is hereby established with membership and appointment provided in accordance with the authority conferred by Article 24 of Chapter 8 of the Code of West Virginia, as amended. The members of the board of zoning appeals shall be individuals who are freeholders and residents of the City of Beckley, and at least three-fifths (?) of such members must have been residents of the City of Beckley for at least ten (10) years preceding the time of their appointment. No member of the board of zoning appeals shall be a member of the planning commission nor shall any member hold other elective or appointive office in the city government. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their official duties. (See West Virginia Code, section 8-24-51 for membership requirements.) 
(b)  At the first meeting of each year, the board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its members. The vice-chairman shall have authority to act as chairman during the absence or disability of the chairman. 
(c)  A majority of members of the board shall constitute a quorum. No action of the board is official, however, unless authorized by a majority of the board. 
(d)  The board may appoint and fix the compensation of a secretary and such employees as are necessary for the discharge of its duties all in conformity to and compliance with salaries and compensations therefor fixed by the common council. 
(e)  The board shall adopt such rules concerning the filing of appeals and applications for variances and conditional uses, giving of notice and conduct of hearings as shall be necessary to carry out their duties under the provisions of this chapter. The board of zoning appeals shall also impose requirements on specific conditions for conditional uses. 
(f)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep records of its examinations and other official actions, and shall record the vote on all actions taken. All minutes and records shall be filed in the office of the zoning officer and shall be a public record. 
(g)  The board shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty to: 
(1)  Hear and determine appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or board charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Hear and decide applications for conditional uses as defined and required in this chapter. 
(3)  Authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. Approval is contingent on findings of fact that there are: 
a.  Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property or intended use that do not generally apply to other property or class of use in the same neighborhood and area; 
b.  Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same neighborhood and area but denied to the property in question; 
c.  The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood and area; and 
d.  The granting of the variance will not alter land use characteristics of the neighborhood and area, diminish marketable values of adjacent land and improvements or increase congestion on public streets. 
(h)  The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to permit variations from the regulations as follows: 
(1)  Authorize a building permit in any residential, business or manufacturing district for a temporary building or use incidental to the residential or business development, such permit to be issued for a period of not more than two (2) years; 
(2)  Authorize a building permit in the manufacturing district for a building or use otherwise excluded from such district, provided such building or use is distinctly incidental and essential to a use of a building or plant with a series of buildings permitted in such district, subject to such conditions as will safeguard the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare; 
(3)  Apply the provisions of this section in such a way as to carry out the true intent and purpose where the street and alley layout on the ground differs from the layout shown on the zoning map; 
(4)  Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specified piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or conditions of such piece of property, the strict application of these regulations would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulty to or exceptional or undue hardship upon the owner of such property, the board of zoning appeals shall have the power in a specific case to vary from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance; 
(5)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the zoning officer or any other administrative official in carrying out the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter; 
(6)  To grant a conditional use permit for the erection of buildings and the use of buildings and lands within an appropriate residential district for clubs, lodges, social, and community center buildings, provided it is the finding of the board that such proposed use and/or buildings will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or materially increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the public danger of fire and safety or materially diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare of the community; and, provided further, that the site plans are first approved by the city planning commission taking into account the foregoing considerations and the adequacy and safety of ingress and egress to and from the site, the adequacy of off-street loading and unloading space to be provided, and the appropriate landscaped screening from adjacent properties in the side and rear yard areas; 
(7)  To grant a conditional use permit for the erection of buildings and the use of land within any district for private schools, elementary and high, including parochial schools, having a curriculum substantially similar to that ordinarily given in public elementary or public high schools, and hospitals and sanitariums, and not containing offices for doctors or other persons except those necessary to the operation of such hospital or sanitariums; provided it is the finding of the board that such proposed use and/or buildings will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or materially diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare of the community; and, provided further, that the site plans are first approved by the city planning commission taking into account the foregoing considerations and the adequacy and safety of ingress and egress to and from the site, the adequacy of off-street loading and unloading space to be provided, and the appropriate landscaped screening from adjacent properties in the side and rear yard areas. 
(8)  The board may impose reasonable conditions for landscaping and screening as necessary. 
(i)  In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from as in its opinion ought to be done on the premises, and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the administrative official or board from whom the appeal is taken. 
(j)  An appeal taken from the requirement, decision or the determination made by an administrative official or board charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall be filed with the board. The appeal shall specify the grounds thereof and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date the requirement, decision or determination was issued and in such form as may be prescribed by the board by general rule. The administrative official or board from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon request of the board, transmit to it all documents, plans, and papers constituting the record of the action from which an appeal was taken. 
(k)  The board shall fix a time for the hearing of an appeal. Public notice shall be given in accordance with Chapter 59, Article 3, Section 2(b) of the West Virginia Code, 1931, as amended, and such notice shall be a Class 1-0 legal advertisement. Additionally, notice shall specifically be given to all property owners and/or occupants residents within a three hundred-foot radius of the property to be considered at the hearing. The public notice, shall be given not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date set by the board for the public hearing. The special notice shall be by regular mail and shall be not less than ten (10) days from the date set by the board for the public hearing. The petitioner shall bear the cost of all public notice and special notice. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. 
(l)  When an appeal from the decision of any administrative official or board has been taken and filed, all proceedings and work on the premises concerning which the decision was made shall be stayed unless the administrative official or board from whom the appeal was taken shall certify to the board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings or work shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the circuit court of this county, an application, on notice to the administrative official or board from whom the appeal is taken, and the owner of the premises affected and on due cause shown. 
(m)  Every decision or order of the board of zoning appeals shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision or order of the board of zoning appeals may present to the county circuit court of Raleigh County a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision or order is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the alleged illegality. The petition must be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision or the order of the board of zoning appeals complained of. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-7. - General provisions. 
(a)  All streets, alleys, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, or railroad right-of-way. Where the center line of a street or alley served as a district boundary and zoning of such street or such street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. 
(b)  No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is located. 
(c)  No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which the building is located except that penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, or similar structures or towers, radio and television aerials or antennas, wireless masts or other wireless telecommunications towers and facilities, subject to the provisions of section 15-25 et seq. of this chapter may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed. No such structure may be erected to exceed by more than twenty-five (25) feet, the height limits of the district in which it is located, except that aerials or antennas designed to aid home television reception may be erected to a height not to exceed sixty (60) feet from the ground level, provided said aerial or antenna is attached to the building or erected in the rear yard area. 
(d)  No building or structure other than a building for conditional use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(e)  No space which for the purpose of a building or dwelling group has been counted or calculated as part of a side yard, rear yard, front yard, court, or other open space required by this chapter, may, by reason of change in ownership or otherwise, be counted or calculated to satisfy or comply with a yard, court, or other space requirement of, or for any other building: 
(1)  An open terrace, but not including a roofed-over porch or terrace, may occupy a front yard provided the unoccupied portion of the front yard has a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet. A one-story bay window may project into a front yard not more than three (3) feet. Overhanging eaves, including gutters, may project over the minimum required side yard not more than eighteen (18) inches. 
(2)  The minimum yards or other open spaces, including lot areas per family, required by this chapter for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building. 
(f)  Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling units shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one (1) such building on one (1) lot unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(g)  Any separate tract, the title of which was of record at the time of the adoption of this chapter, that does not meet the requirements of this chapter for yards, courts, or other area of open space may be utilized for single residence purpose provided the requirements for such yard or court (or lot) area, width, depth, or open space is within fifty (50) per cent of that required by the terms of this chapter. The purpose of this provision is to permit utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long as reasonable living standards can be provided. 
(h)  No building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot, or parcel of land, which does not abut upon a public street or permanent easement of access to a public street, which street or easement shall have a minimum width of forty (40) feet, unless such street or easement of lesser width was of record prior to the adoption of this chapter. Additionally, no public street or permanent easement of access to a public street shall be constructed with a cul-de-sac (a street closed at one (1) end in a circular manner), which cul-de-sac is less than eighty (80) feet in diameter. 
(i)  No wall, fence, or shrubbery shall be erected, maintained, or planted on any lot which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with traffic visibility on a curve or at any street intersection. 
(j)  A dwelling shall not be erected in the M manufacturing district; however, the sleeping quarters of a watchman or caretaker are permitted. 
(k)  No residential structure shall be erected upon the rear of a lot or upon a lot with another dwelling; except that in a two-story garage with living quarters upon the second floor; such quarters may be occupied by a servant (and the servant's family) of the family occupying the main structure. There may also be constructed a guest house (without kitchen) or rooms for guests within an accessory building, provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of guests of the occupants of the main structure and not for permanent occupancy by others as a housekeeping unit. 
(l)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building upon which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter and upon which building actual construction has been diligently carried on, and provided further, that such building shall be completed within two (2) years from the date of passage and publication of this chapter. 
(m)  An area indicated on the official zone map as a public park or recreation area, public utility area, cemetery, public school site, or semipublic open space, shall not be used for any other purpose, and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned R-1 one-family district, until otherwise zoned. 
(n)  Any area annexed to the city shall, upon such annexation, be automatically zoned R-1 one-family district, until otherwise zoned. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-8. - R-1 one-family district. 
    The following regulations shall apply: 
(a)  Use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Accessory buildings including a private garage, accessory living quarters, guesthouse, recreation room, green house, and bathhouse, provided they shall be located as required in section 15-24(a); 
(2)  Automobile parking space to be provided as required in section 15-23; 
(3)  Bomb shelters and/or fallout shelters; 
(4)  Group residential facility, or home not to be occupied by the behaviorally disabled or by more than six (6) developmentally disabled individuals; 
(5)  Sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building or premises on which the sign is located not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, except as otherwise provided in section 15-300; 
(6)  Single-family dwellings; 
(7)  Temporary buildings less than nine hundred (900) square feet and temporary uses incidental to construction, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, except that a six-month extension may be granted if construction is substantially underway; 
(8)  Vegetable gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved, and not operated for profit; 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with section 15-5(d). 
(1)  Bed and breakfast; 
(2)  Bicycle trails; 
(3)  Cemeteries, crematories, or mausoleums; 
(4)  Child day care center/nursery school, conducted entirely on church property, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(5)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(6)  Elderly day care center (six (6) or less); 
(7)  Community or recreational centers; 
(8)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(9)  Golf courses; 
(10)  Group residential facility or home, if to be occupied by the behaviorally disabled or by more than six (6) developmentally disabled individuals; 
(11)  Home occupations subject to the provisions of section 15-24(d); 
(12)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(13)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(14)  Public administration building or any other publicly-owned structure; 
(15)  Schools, public or private. 
(c)  Building height. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained or exceed three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(d)  Areas. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet or the established building line if less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Side yard. On the interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than ten (10) feet, and a combined total of side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Any lot platted prior to the enactment of this chapter which is less than seventy-five (75) feet wide may reduce the two (2) side yards by nine (9) inches for each foot of difference to a total width of not less than ten (10) feet. Under such circumstances, the width of the narrower of the two (2) side yards shall not be less than five (5) feet. 
a.  On corner lots, the side yard requirements shall be the same as for interior lots, except that there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the building or structure maintains frontage, and there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than fifty (50) per cent of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot, but such setback need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having an average depth of not less than forty (40) feet. 
(4)  Lot area. Every lot or other parcel of land shall have a minimum width at the front building line of seventy-five (75) feet, and a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet for all uses permitted in this section, except that the lot area for churches, public and private schools, or any permitted eleemosynary institution shall be not less than one (1) acre. 
(5)  Lot coverage. Not more than thirty-five (35) per cent of the area of a lot may be covered by main buildings, structures, or accessory buildings. 
(6)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the front yard. They may encroach upon the side yards provided no buildings are closer to the lot lines than five (5) feet. Provided further that on a corner lot, accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the front or side yards adjacent to the abutting streets. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1) 
Sec. 15-9. - R-2 general residential district. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Accessory buildings including a private garage, accessory living quarters, guesthouse, recreation room, green house, and bathhouse, provided they shall be located as required in section 15-24(a); 
(2)  Automobile parking space to be provided as required in section 15-23; 
(3)  Group residential facility or home; 
(4)  Temporary buildings less than nine hundred (900) square feet and temporary uses incidental to construction, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, except that a six-month extension may be granted if construction is substantially underway; 
(5)  Two- to four-family dwelling units; 
(6)  Vegetable gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved, and not operated for profit. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with sections 15-5(d). 
(1)  Auditoriums; 
(2)  Bed and breakfast; 
(3)  Bicycle trails; 
(4)  Cemeteries, crematories, or mausoleums; 
(5)  Child day care center/nursery school, facility or home, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(6)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(7)  Community or recreational centers; 
(8)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(9)  Golf and miniature golf courses; 
(10)  Gymnasiums; 
(11)  Home occupations; 
(12)  Hospitals or sanitariums, acute care, extended care or long-term care facilities, nursing homes; 
(13)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(14)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(15)  Public administration building or any other publicly-owned structure; 
(16)  Public utility facilities (i.e., filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station and other similar facilities); 
(17)  Schools, public or private; 
(18)  Single-family dwellings; 
(19)  Utility, broadcasting stations or towers subject to section 15-25. 
(c)  Height. No building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed a height of three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
(d)  Areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with such building structures or enlargement: 
(1)  Front yard. Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Where lots comprising forty (40) per cent or more of the frontage between two (2) intersecting streets are developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of not more than fifteen (15) feet in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than fifty (50) feet be required. 
(2)  Side yard. On the interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than eight (8) feet, and a combined total of side yards of not less than twenty (20) feet. Any lot platted prior to the enactment of this chapter which is less than sixty (60) feet wide may reduce the two (2) side yards by nine (9) inches for each foot of difference to a total width of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Under such circumstances the width of the narrower of the two (2) side yards shall not be less than six (6) feet. 
a.  On corner lots the side yard shall be the same as for interior lots, except that there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the building or structure maintains frontage, except in the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than fifty (50) per cent of the front yard required, but such setback need not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having an average depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet. 
(4)  Lot coverage. Not more than thirty-five (35) per cent of the area of a lot may be covered by main buildings, structures, or accessory buildings. 
(5)  Lot area. Every dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered to accommodate two- to four-family dwelling units shall be on a lot having a width at the established building line of not less than sixty (60) feet, and an area per dwelling unit of not less than three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet. 
(6)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the front yard. They may encroach upon the side yards provided no buildings are closer to the lot lines than five (5) feet. Provided further that on a corner lot, accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the front or side yards adjacent to the abutting streets. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-10. - R-3 multiple-family district. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Accessory buildings including a private garage, accessory living quarters, guesthouse, recreation room, green house, and bathhouse, provided they shall be located as required in section 15-24(a); 
(2)  Automobile parking space to be provided as required in section 15-23; 
(3)  Boarding or lodging houses; 
(4)  Elderly housing; 
(5)  Group residential facility or home; 
(6)  Long-term care facility; 
(7)  Multiple family dwellings and apartments of five (5) or more family units; 
(8)  Row dwellings containing five (5) or more family units; 
(9)  Temporary buildings less than nine hundred (900) square feet and temporary uses incidental to construction, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, except that a six-month extension may be granted if construction is substantially underway; 
(10)  Vegetable gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved, and not operated for profit; 
(11)  Zero lot line dwellings with one (1) or more zero lot line units, with six (6) units being the maximum number of units to be joined together. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use and require a conditional use permit in accordance with sections 15-5(c). 
(1)  Auditoriums; 
(2)  Bed and breakfast; 
(3)  Bicycle trails; 
(4)  Cemeteries, crematories, or mausoleums; 
(5)  Child day care center/nursery school, facility or home, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(6)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(7)  Clubs, lodges, or fraternal organizations, when not operated for profit; 
(8)  Community or recreational centers; 
(9)  Elderly day care center; 
(10)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(11)  Golf and miniature golf courses; 
(12)  Gymnasiums; 
(13)  Home occupations; 
(14)  Hospitals or sanitariums; 
(15)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(16)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(17)  Public administration building or any other publicly-owned structure; 
(18)  Public utility facilities (i.e., filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station and other similar facilities); 
(19)  Schools, public or private; 
(20)  Public utilities, broadcasting stations or towers subject to section 15-25. 
(c)  Height. No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered to exceed four (4) stories nor shall it exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(d)  Areas. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with such structure or enlargement: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Side yard. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five (5) feet, and a combined total of side yards of not less than fifteen (15) feet. On corner lots the side yard on the intersecting street side shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet for interior lots nor less than fifteen (15) feet for corner lots. 
(4)  Lot coverage. Not more than thirty-five (35) per cent of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures. 
(5)  Lot area. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple dwelling, apartment, or row dwelling of more than four (4) dwelling units shall provide a lot area per dwelling unit of not less than fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered in the R-3 multiple-family district shall have a total lot area of less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet, nor a lot width of less than eighty (80) feet. 
(6)  Courts. No inner court or courts completely surrounded on all sides by a building shall be permitted. Outer courts are permitted, provided the depth of the court is no greater than the width of the court. 
(7)  Accessory buildings. The same regulations shall apply as required in the R-2 one- to four-family district. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1) 
Sec. 15-11. - R-5 multiple-family high-rise. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Accessory buildings including a private garage, accessory living quarters, guesthouse, recreation room, green house, and bathhouse, provided they shall be located as required in section 15-24(a); 
(2)  Assisted living facility; 
(3)  Automobile parking space to be provided as required in section 15-23; 
(4)  Boarding or lodging houses; 
(5)  Elderly housing; 
(6)  Group residential facility or home; 
(7)  Long-term care facility; 
(8)  Multiple family dwellings and apartments of five (5) or more family units; 
(9)  Row dwellings containing five (5) or more family units; 
(10)  Sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building or premises on which the sign is located not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area, except as otherwise provided in section 15-300; 
(11)  Temporary buildings less than nine hundred (900) square feet and temporary uses incidental to construction, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, except that a six-month extension may be granted if construction is substantially underway; 
(12)  Vegetable gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved, and not operated for profit; 
(13)  Zero lot line dwellings with one (1) or more zero lot line units, with six (6) units being the maximum number of units to be joined together. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with sections 15-5(c). 
(1)  Auditoriums; 
(2)  Bed and breakfast; 
(3)  Bicycle trails; 
(4)  Cemeteries, crematories, or mausoleums; 
(5)  Child day care center/nursery school, facility or home, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(6)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(7)  Community or recreational centers; 
(8)  Elderly day care center; 
(9)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(10)  Gymnasiums; 
(11)  Home occupations; 
(12)  Hospitals or sanitariums; 
(13)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(14)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(15)  Public administration building or any other publicly-owned structure; 
(16)  Public utility facilities (i.e., filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station and other similar facilities); 
(17)  Schools, public or private; 
(18)  Telephone exchange; 
(19)  Public utilities, broadcasting stations or towers subject to section 15-25. 
(c)  Height. Height of all multiple-family high-rise dwellings shall be subject to approval by the city fire department, based on fire control considerations and potential hazards to life and property, but in no event shall height exceed ten (10) stories or one hundred twenty (120) feet, whichever is less. 
(d)  Area and yard requirements. No building or structure or the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with such structure or enlargement: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Such twenty-five-foot required yard shall be maintained in landscaping, aside from drive-ways and walkways, and shall not be used for off-street parking. 
(2)  Side yard. On interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than ten (10) feet, and a combined total of side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. On corner lots the side yard on the intersection street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Additional rear and side yard requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth above, the rear and side yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of building height above forty-five (45) feet. 
(5)  Lot coverage. Not more than forty (40) per cent of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures. 
(6)  Lot area. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple-family high-rise dwelling shall provide a lot area per dwelling unit of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered in the R-5 multiple-family high-rise district shall have a total lot area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, nor a lot width of less than one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(e)  Additional requirements: 
(1)  The zoning officer shall issue no building permit for the erection of any multiple-family high-rise apartment, or for any alteration of any multiple-family high-rise apartment which: 
a.  Increase its height, coverage of land, or number of units; 
b.  Changes the general nature or extent of its use; or 
c.  Alters parking requirements or reduces the number of off-street parking spaces available, 
(2)  Nor shall any certificate of occupancy be issued for such multiple-family high-rise dwelling, nor shall any other city agency, department, official, or representative take action in connection with the erection or use of any multiple-family high-rise dwelling unless and until the planning commission shall have reviewed the application and documents required to be submitted therewith and reported concerning conformity with provisions, intent and purposes of this chapter, or has failed to report as hereinafter provided. 
(3)  In connection with all applications for permits or certificates on multiple-family high-rise dwellings requiring planning commission action, the applicant shall submit architectural plans (including details as to use of areas within structures, number, location, and orientation of dwelling units, etc.); plot plans; landscaping plans; plans for off-street parking, service areas, and ingress and egress arrangements; plans for proposed signs; plans for lighting the premises outside buildings; elevations of all portions of proposed structures; topographic maps and photographs or perspective drawings showing the relationship between the proposed structures as it is to be located on the premises and all principal structures within five hundred (500) feet (or such other distance as the planning commission deems necessary in the particular case) of any portion exceeding fifty (50) feet in height of any building or buildings to be erected on the premises. 
(4)  Applicants shall also provide such maps, plans, drawings, or reports as are necessary to indicate: 
a.  That suitable major streets, fitting the probable patterns of origins and destinations of residents, are immediately available to the property or can be reached without creating concentrated traffic flow on minor streets through residential neighborhoods; 
b.  That the property, if developed as proposed, will not be subject to hazards such as objectionable smoke, noxious odors, unusual noise, possibility of subsidence or probability of flood or erosion, and that conditions of soil, ground water level, drainage, rock formations, and topography will not create hazards to the property or to the health and safety of the occupants; 
c.  That essential community services, such as employment centers, shopping centers, schools, if likely to be required, recreation areas, and police and fire protection will be readily accessible to the property in appropriate form and scale, or that provision will be made assuring these facilities; and 
d.  That appropriate water supply, sewerage, telephone, electrical, gas, and other utility installations exist or will be made available. The zoning officer may require posting of appropriate and sufficient bond to insure such installations or availability. 
(5)  In addition, the applicant shall supply such other plans, drawings, maps, or reports as the planning commission may require in the particular case to guide its findings as to matters on which it is generally or specifically required to make findings. 
(6)  After the applicant has submitted all required documents, the planning commission shall complete its report in a timely manner. 
(7)  All multiple-family high-rise existing and new, regardless of the type of construction, shall be provided with complete automatic sprinkler protection and complete electronic fire alarm systems incorporating such devices as smoke detectors and rate of rise censors, provided such equipment has been approved by the state fire and building code. All alarms shall be automatically transmitted by the fire alarm system to the emergency operations center. All multiple-family high-rise dwellings shall also fully comply with all other existing and applicable city code provisions. 
(8)  There shall be no loading in connection with normal operations on the street in front of the premises, or in any required front yard; where practicable, all loading shall be provided for at the rear of the building or structure. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1) 
Sec. 15-12. - R-6 elderly high-rise. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Accessory buildings including a private garage, accessory living quarters, guesthouse, recreation room, green house, and bathhouse, provided they shall be located as required in section 15-24(a); 
(2)  Assisted living facility; 
(3)  Automobile parking space to be provided as required in section 15-23; 
(4)  Bicycle trails; 
(5)  Boarding or lodging houses; 
(6)  Group residential facility or home; 
(7)  Long-term care facility; 
(8)  Multiple family dwellings and apartments containing five (5) or more units; 
(9)  Temporary buildings less than nine hundred (900) square feet and temporary uses incidental to construction, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, except that a six-month extension may be granted if construction is substantially underway; 
(10)  Vegetable gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved, and not operated for profit. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with sections 15-5(c). 
(1)  Auditoriums; 
(2)  Child day care center/nursery school or facility, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(3)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(4)  Community or recreational centers; 
(5)  Elderly day care center; 
(6)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(7)  Gymnasiums; 
(8)  Home occupations; 
(9)  Hospitals or sanitariums, nursing homes, acute care, extended care or long-term care facilities; 
(10)  Railroad right-of-way; 
(11)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(12)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(13)  Public administration building or any other publicly-owned structure; 
(14)  Public utility facilities (i.e., filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station and other similar facilities); 
(15)  Schools, public or private; 
(16)  Telephone exchange; 
(17)  Public utilities, broadcasting stations or towers. 
(c)  Height. Height of all elderly high-rise dwellings shall be subject to approval by the city code enforcement department and fire departments, based on fire control considerations and potential hazards to life and property, but in no event shall height exceed ten (10) stories or one hundred twenty (120) feet, whichever is less. 
(d)  Area and yard requirements. No building or structure or the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with such structure or enlargement: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Such twenty-five foot required yard shall be maintained in landscaping, aside from driveways and walkways, and shall not be used for off-street parking. 
(2)  Side yard. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than ten (10) feet. On corner lots the side yard on the intersection street side shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Additional rear and side yard requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth above, the rear and side yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of building height above forty-five (45) feet. 
(5)  Lot coverage. No more than forty-five (45) per cent of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures. 
(6)  Lot area. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as an elderly high-rise dwelling shall provide a lot area per dwelling unit of not less than six hundred (600) square feet. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered in the R-6 elderly high-rise district shall have a total lot area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, nor a lot width of less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(7)  Dwelling standards . All elderly high-rise dwelling units hereafter erected, converted or reconstructed shall contain the following square feet of usable square feet of floor area, exclusive of basements, cellars, unfinished attics, open porches, access hallways and garages: 
a.  One bedroom: Four hundred eighty (480) square feet; 
b.  Two (2) bedrooms: Six hundred thirty (630) square feet; 
c.  Three (3) bedrooms: Seven hundred eighty (780) square feet; 
d.  Four (4) bedrooms or larger: Nine hundred thirty (930) square feet. 
e.  All elderly high-rise dwellings existing and new, regardless of the type of construction, shall be provided with complete automatic sprinkler protection and complete electronic fire alarm systems incorporating such devices as smoke detectors and rate of rise censors provided such equipment has been approved by the state fire and building code. All alarms shall be automatically transmitted by the fire alarm system to the emergency operations center. All elderly high-rise dwellings shall also fully comply with all other existing and applicable city code provisions. 
f.  There shall be no loading in connection with normal operations on the street in front of the premises, or in any required front yard; where practicable, all loading shall be provided for at the rear of the building or structure. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1) 
Sec. 15-13. - O/R office/residential transitional district. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Accessory buildings including a private garage, accessory living quarters, guesthouse, recreation room, green house, and bathhouse, provided they shall be located as required in section 15-24(a); 
(2)  Single-family dwellings; 
(3)  Offices for service, financial, or professional businesses, barber shops, beauty and hair salons; 
(4)  Bed and breakfast inns not to exceed ten (10) units; 
(5)  Group residential facility or home not to be occupied by more than six (6) developmentally disabled individuals or the behaviorally disabled. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with section 15-5(d). 
(1)  Child day care center/nursery school, facility or home, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(2)  Adult day care center; 
(3)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(4)  Home occupations subject to the provisions of section 15-24(d). 
(c)  Building height. No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected or maintained or exceed three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(d)  Areas. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be side yards totaling not less than twenty-five (25) feet with the short side not less than ten (10) feet except on a corner lot the side yard abutting the street shall have a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet and a green belt or buffer zone not less than fifteen (15) feet abutting the rear property line, with a privacy fence or screen planting separating O/R from any residential zone of not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(4)  Lot area. Every lot or other parcel of land shall have a minimum width at the front building line of seventy-five (75) feet, and a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet for all uses permitted in this section, except that the lot area for churches, public and private schools, or any permitted eleemosynary institution shall be not less than one (1) acre. 
(5)  Lot coverage. Not more than fifty (50) per cent of the area of a lot may be covered by main buildings, structures, or accessory buildings. 
(6)  Parking. No vehicle, including trailers, may be parked in a front yard except on a paved driveway. The parking of oversize vehicles shall also be subject to the restrictions of section 14-823. 
(7)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the front yard. They may encroach upon the side yards provided no buildings are closer to the lot lines than five (5) feet or no closer than five (5) feet to the greenbelt or buffer zone, if applicable. Provided further that on a corner lot, accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the front or side yards adjacent to the abutting streets. 
(8)  Frontage. Any new lots platted in any O/R Zoning District may not exceed 200 feet in frontage. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 8-12-03, § 2; Ord. of 5-26-15) 
Sec. 15-14. - B-1 neighborhood-highway business district. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted uses; 
(2)  Antique shops; 
(3)  Auto convenience mart; 
(4)  Automobile sales for both new and used vehicles and service shops, where all service operations are conducted wholly within an enclosed building as one (1) integrated business operation; 
(5)  Automobile service stations; 
(6)  Bakeries, retail; 
(7)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(8)  Barber shops and beauty parlors; 
(9)  Bed and breakfast; 
(10)  Bicycle trails; 
(11)  Blueprint and photostat stores; 
(12)  Book or stationery stores; 
(13)  Brew pub; 
(14)  Car wash; 
(15)  Clubs, private indoor; 
(16)  Coffee shops; 
(17)  Drugstores; 
(18)  Electrical appliance shops and repair; 
(19)  Florist shops, for retail trade only; 
(20)  Frozen food lockers; 
(21)  Grocery, fruit, or vegetable stores; 
(22)  Group residential facility or home; 
(23)  Hardware stores; 
(24)  Hotels and motels; 
(25)  Laundromat; 
(26)  Laundry and/or ironing and/or dry cleaning pickup station; 
(27)  Markets; 
(28)  Meat market or poultry stores, if no slaughter or stripping is involved; 
(29)  Offices for service or professional businesses; 
(30)  Pet shops or animal hospitals when conducted wholly within the enclosed building; 
(31)  Photographers' or artists' studios; 
(32)  Restaurant, standard or sit-down; 
(33)  Restaurant, entertainment; 
(34)  Retail stores; 
(35)  Row dwellings and multiple dwellings containing five (5) or more units, subject to the height and yard requirements of section 15-10(c) and (d); 
(36)  Schools/studios, commercial or trade (e.g., business, dance, music, martial arts); 
(37)  Secondhand merchandise, retail sales; 
(38)  Shoe repair shops; 
(39)  Tailor and dressmaking shops; 
(40)  Temporary buildings less than nine hundred (900) square feet and temporary uses incidental to construction, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, except that a six-month extension maybe granted if construction is substantially underway; 
(41)  Temporary retail sales outlets conditioned upon the issuance of a permit by the recorder-treasurer; 
(42)  Tourist homes; 
(43)  Travel agency; 
(44)  Undertaking establishments. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with sections 15-5(d). 
(1)  Auction rooms; 
(2)  Auditoriums; 
(3)  Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums; 
(4)  Child day care center/nursery school, facility or home, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(5)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(6)  Community or recreational centers; 
(7)  Elderly day care center; 
(8)  Elderly housing; 
(9)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(10)  Golf and miniature golf courses; 
(11)  Gymnasiums; 
(12)  Hospitals or sanitariums; 
(13)  Kennels, subject to section 15-24(j); 
(14)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(15)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(16)  Public utility facilities (i.e., filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station and other similar facilities); 
(17)  Railroad right-of-way; 
(18)  Schools, public or private; 
(19)  Telephone exchange; 
(20)  Public utilities, broadcasting stations or towers, telecommunication towers subject to section 15-25. 
(c)  Height. No building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed a height of three (3) stories nor shall it exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(d)  Areas. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement: 
(1)  Front setback. All new structures permitted in this district shall be set back from the front street line a distance of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Side yard. The required side yard is ten (10) feet. Where a lot adjoins a residential district the side yard setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet when abutting upon a public alley and not less than twenty (20) feet when no dedicated alley or public way exists at the rear of the lot, except that a rear yard adjoining a residential district shall have a depth of not less than forty (40) feet. 
(4)  Lot area. The same regulations as apply in the R-3 multiple-family district shall apply to dwelling units erected or structurally altered in this district, a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per dwelling, not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet total. 
(5)  Maximum building size. Buildings in the B-1 Neighborhood-Highway Business District shall be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square foot structures in order to bring about more appropriate development by encouraging smaller scale buildings within established neighborhood business areas. Proposed buildings in the B-1 district over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet will require conditional use approval if located adjacent to highways and major thoroughfares. 
(e)  Prohibitions. The following permitted uses may not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any "R", residential district or "O/R", office/residential transitional district: Automobile service station; brew pub; carwash; club, private indoor; restaurant, entertainment; restaurant, with drive-thru service; retail or convenience store selling alcohol or beer in sealed containers; retail or convenience store operating after 9:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. The three hundred (300) foot separation distance shall exclude the width of any abutting public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1; Ord. of 4-24-07) 
Sec. 15-15. - B-2 general business district. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Agricultural implement sales and service conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building; 
(2)  Air conditioning and heating sales and service; 
(3)  Antique shop; 
(4)  Auction rooms; 
(5)  Auditoriums; 
(6)  Auditoriums, indoor; 
(7)  Auto convenience mart; 
(8)  Automobile or trailer sales (new or used), where the front portion of the lot is occupied by a structure containing automobile or trailer show rooms and the rear portion of the lot has open storage or where part of the open storage area is within fifty (50) feet of any street right-of-way; 
(9)  Automobile sales for both new and used vehicles and service shops, where all service operations are conducted wholly within an enclosed building as one (1) integrated business operation; 
(10)  Automobile service stations; 
(11)  Bakeries, retail; 
(12)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(13)  Battery and tire service stations; 
(14)  Bed and breakfast; 
(15)  Beverage distributors, but not including bottling plants; 
(16)  Bicycle trails; 
(17)  Billiard and pool rooms; 
(18)  Blueprint and photostat stores; 
(19)  Book binding; 
(20)  Bowling alleys; 
(21)  Brew pub; 
(22)  Car wash; 
(23)  Catering establishments; 
(24)  Clubs, private indoor; 
(25)  Coffee shops; 
(26)  Dance halls; 
(27)  Data processing facilities; 
(28)  Department, furniture, and home appliance stores; 
(29)  Elderly housing; 
(30)  Electrical appliance shops and repair; 
(31)  Employment agencies; 
(32)  Expressing, baggage, and transfer delivery services; 
(33)  Florist shops, for retail trade only; 
(34)  Frozen food lockers; 
(35)  Garages, public, for storage of private passenger automobiles, but not including repair service; 
(36)  Garden supply, nursery, and/or greenhouses (provided all sales on premises are retail); 
(37)  Grocery stores and supermarkets; 
(38)  Grocery, fruit or vegetable stores; 
(39)  Group residential facility or home; 
(40)  Hardware stores; 
(41)  Home improvement center; 
(42)  Hotels and motels; 
(43)  Laboratories; 
(44)  Laundromat; 
(45)  Laundry, receiving less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds of dry goods per day; 
(46)  Laundry and/or ironing and/or dry cleaning pickup station; 
(47)  Manufacturing or processing which is clearly incidental to retail use employing not more than ten (10) persons in actual manufacturing or processing; 
(48)  Markets; 
(49)  Meat market or poultry stores, if no slaughter or stripping is involved; 
(50)  Medical offices, outpatient and surgical hospitals, medical centers, or clinics; 
(51)  Micro brewery; 
(52)  Multiple family dwellings and apartments, five (5) units or more; 
(53)  Offices for service or professional businesses; 
(54)  Outlet shopping center; 
(55)  Painting and decorating shops; 
(56)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(57)  Pet shops or animal hospitals when conducted wholly within the enclosed building; 
(58)  Photographers' or artists' studios; 
(59)  Plumbing, heating, and roofing supply and workshops; 
(60)  Printing, publishing, and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, and other reading matter; 
(61)  Printing shops; 
(62)  Radio - television broadcasting places; 
(63)  Radio and television sales and service; 
(64)  Restaurant, standard or sit-down; 
(65)  Restaurant, entertainment; 
(66)  Retail stores; 
(67)  Row dwellings, apartments or condominiums containing five (5) or more family units subject to section 15-10(c), (d); 
(68)  Schools/studios, commercial or trade (e.g., business, dance, music, martial arts); 
(69)  Secondhand merchandise, retail sales; 
(70)  Shoe repair shops; 
(71)  Tailor and dressmaking shops; 
(72)  Taverns, subject to the regulations of the state and other adopted ordinances of the city; 
(73)  Taxi service stations; 
(74)  Telegraph service stations; 
(75)  Temporary buildings less than nine hundred (900) square feet and temporary uses incidental to construction, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, except that a six-month extension maybe granted if construction is substantially underway; 
(76)  Temporary retail sales outlets conditioned upon the issuance of a permit by the recorder-treasurer; 
(77)  Theaters; 
(78)  Tourist homes; 
(79)  Trailer sales, when conducted within a building; 
(80)  Travel agency; 
(81)  Undertaking establishments; 
(82)  Upholstery stores; 
(83)  Video rental store; 
(84)  Wholesale establishments, excluding a building the principal use of which is for a storage warehouse. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use and require a conditional use permit in accordance with section 15-5(d). 
(1)  Cemeteries, crematories, or mausoleums; 
(2)  Child day care center/nursery school or facility, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(3)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(4)  Community or recreational centers; 
(5)  Dry cleaning plant or facility; 
(6)  Elderly day care; 
(7)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(8)  Golf and miniature golf courses; 
(9)  Gymnasiums; 
(10)  Hospitals or sanitariums; 
(11)  Kennels, subject to section 15-24(j); 
(12)  Park/playgrounds (public or private); 
(13)  Public administration building or any other publicly-owned structure; 
(14)  Public utility facilities (i.e., filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station and other similar facilities); 
(15)  Railroad right-of-way; 
(16)  Schools, public or private; 
(17)  Sexually-oriented businesses subject to section 15-24(b); 
(18)  Telephone exchange; 
(19)  Utility or broadcasting stations or towers; 
(20)  Wireless telecommunication facilities subject to section 15-25. 
(21)  Limited video lottery establishments, subject to section 15-24(n). 
(c)  Height. No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of four (4) stories nor shall it exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height. 
(d)  Areas . 
(1)  Front yard. A front yard shall be required at the discretion of the zoning officer for emergency vehicle needs. 
(2)  Side yard . A side yard shall be provided on the side of a lot which abuts a residential district, such yard having a width of not less than ten (10) feet, or at the discretion of the zoning officer a width of sufficient distance to provide for emergency vehicle access. 
(3)  Rear yard . There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet when abutting upon a publicly dedicated alley or public way which exists at the rear of the lot. The rear yard may be used for off-street parking and loading as provided by section 15-23. 
(4)  Parking and vehicle access shall be so arranged that there will be no need for motorists to back over sidewalks or into streets. 
(e)  Prohibitions. The following permitted uses may not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any "R", residential district or "O/R", office/residential transitional district: Automobile service station; brew pub; carwash; club, private indoor; restaurant, entertainment; restaurant, with drive-thru service; retail or convenience store selling alcohol or beer in sealed containers; retail or convenience store operating after 9:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. The three hundred (300) foot separation distance shall exclude the width of any abutting public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1; Ord. of 11-9-04; Ord. of 4-24-07) 
Sec. 15-16. - B-3 Courthouse Square. 
(a)  Area of application. 
(1)  The B-3 government/service/retail-cultural/entertainment-university zoning district shall encompass a portion of the existing central business district and includes the downtown Beckley historic district, of one hundred thirty-four (134) parcels which are subject to more stringent regulations administered by the City of Beckley historic landmark commission and its architectural review program and summary of design standards guidelines, adopted by ordinance October 25, 1994, as well as state and federal regulations enforced by the West Virginia state historic preservation office. The B-3 district is comprised of the downtown historic district and adjacent areas as referenced on the City of Beckley zoning maps. 
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the southern right-of-way line South Kanawha Street and the western right-of-way line of Beaver Avenue; 
thence leaving said southern right-of-way line of South Kanawha Street and with said western right-of-way line of Beaver Avenue and the eastern boundary line of Parcel 28, Tax Map 36, District 1 to a point, said point being the common corner of Parcels 28 and 29 of Tax Map 36, District 1; 
thence leaving said eastern right-of-way line of Beaver Avenue and with the southern boundary lines of Parcels 28, 27, 25, 24, 23, 22, 21, 18, 17, 14, 13, 12, 11, 19, and 17 to a point, said point being the southwest corner of Parcel 7, and a point in the eastern boundary line of Parcel 6, Tax Map 36, District 1; 
thence with the western boundary line of Parcels 6, 7, 6.1, 8.1, 5, and 8 Tax Map 36, District 1, to a point, said point being the common corner to Parcels 5 and 8 and a point in the northern right-of-way line of Minnesota Avenue; 
thence crossing said Minnesota Avenue to a point at the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of said Minnesota Avenue and the western right-of-way line of Riley Street, said point being the northeast corner of Parcel 115, Tax Map 36, District 1; 
thence with said western right-of-way line of Riley Street and the eastern boundary lines of Parcels 115, 119, 120, and 114 to a point, said point being the common corner to Parcels 114 and 113, Tax Map 36, District 1; 
thence leaving said western right-of-way line of Riley Street and with the common boundary line of 114, 113, 121, and 122 to a point, said point being the common corner of Parcels 121 and 122 and point in the eastern right-of-way line of Church Street; 
thence crossing said Church Street to a point, said point being a point on the western right-of-way line of Church Street and the common corner of Parcels 78 and 80 of Tax Map 20, District 1; 
thence with said right-of-way of Church Street, the eastern boundary lines of Parcels 80, 78, and 79 of Tax Map 20, District 1, in a northerly direction to a point, said point being at the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of Willow Lane and the western right-of-way line of said Church Street and also the northeast corner of Parcel 78, Tax Map 20, District 1; 
thence leaving said Church Street and with said southern right-of-way line of Willow Lane and the northern boundary lines of Parcels 78, crossing South Fayette Street, 77, 76 crossing at the intersection of Rawlings Street, 67, 66, 65, 64, 37, 38 and 36 to a point, said point being the northwest corner of Parcel 36, District 1 and the intersection of said southern right-of-way line of Willow Lane and the eastern right-of-way line of South Heber Street; 
thence crossing said Heber Street to a point, said point being in the western right-of-way lines of said Heber Street and the northeast corner of Parcel 1, Tax Map 20, District 1; 
thence with the northern boundary line of said Parcel 1, Tax Map 20, District 1 to a point, said point being the northwest corner of Parcel 1, Tax Map 20, District 1 and a point in the eastern right-of-way line of Woodlawn Avenue; 
thence crossing said Woodlawn Avenue to a point, said point being the northeast corner of Parcel 22, Tax Map 20, District 1 and the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of Bellevue Lane and the western right-of-way line of said Woodlawn Avenue; 
thence leaving said Woodlawn Avenue and with said southern right-of-way line of Bellevue Lane and the northern boundary lines of Parcels 22, 21, 20, Tax Map 20, District 1, crossing the intersection with Freeman Street, continuing with the northern boundary lines of Parcels 9, 8, 7, 6, 1, and 3 to a point, said point being the northwest corner of Parcel 3, Tax Map 20, District 1 and the intersection of said southern right-of-way line of Bellevue Lane and the eastern right-of-way line of Second Street; 
thence crossing said Second Street with the southern right-of-way line of said Second Street and the northern boundary lines of Parcels 27, through the intersection of First Avenue, 26, 22, 21, 20, 14, through the intersection of Second Avenue, continuing with the northern boundary lines of 13, 12, and 1, Tax Map 22, District 1, to a point, said point being a northeast corner of Parcel 1 and the intersection of said southern right-of- way line of Second Street and the centerline of Third Avenue; 
thence with said centerline of Third Avenue in a southern direction parallel with the western boundary lines of Parcels 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 through the intersection with Park Avenue to a point in the centerline of Third Avenue at its intersection with the extension of the southern right-of-way line of Park Avenue; 
thence leaving said centerline of Third Avenue and with the common line of Parcels 11 and 13, Tax Map 29, District 1 to a point, said point being a common corner to said Parcels 11 and 13 and a point in the eastern right-of-way line of Robert C. Byrd Drive; 
thence crossing Robert C. Byrd Drive to a point, said point being at the intersection of the western right-of-way lines of Robert C. Byrd Drive and the northern right-of-way line of Beckley Avenue and also the southeast corner of Parcel 7, Tax Map 29, District 1; 
thence in a northern direction with said western right-of-way lines of Parcels 7, 52.1, 51, 50, crossing at the intersection of Ellison Avenue, continuing with Robert C. Byrd Drive's western right-of-way line, the eastern boundary lines of Parcels 28, 27.1, 26, 25, 24, crossing the intersection of Orchard Court, continuing with said western right-of-way line of Robert C. Byrd Drive and the western boundary of Parcel 19, crossing Neville Street to a point, said point being at the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of Prince Street and the western right-of-way line of said Robert C. Byrd Drive; 
thence north crossing said Prince Street and with said western right-of-way line of Robert C. Byrd Drive, the eastern boundary lines of Parcels 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, Tax Map 10, District 1 to a point, said point being the common corner to Parcels 226 and 227, Tax Map 10, District 1; 
thence east crossing Robert C. Byrd Drive to a point, said point being at the intersection of the eastern right-of-way line of said Robert C. Byrd Drive and the northern right-of-way line of Sisson Street and the southeast corner of Parcel 15, Tax Map 26, District 1; 
thence leaving Robert C. Byrd Drive and with said northern right-of-way line of Sisson Street and the southern boundary lines of Parcels 15 and 16, Tax Map 26, District 1 to a point, said point being a corner to Parcel 16 and a point at the intersection of said northern right-of-way line of Sisson Street and the western right-of-way line of Hemlock Street; 
thence leaving said northern right-of-way line of Sisson Street and crossing said Sisson Street to a point, said point being a point in the southern right-of-way line of Sisson Street and a common corner to Parcels 50 and 49, Tax Map 26, District 1; 
thence with said southern right-of-way line of Sisson Street and the northern boundary lines of Parcels 49, 46, 45, 44, 43, 42, 41, and 39, Tax Map 26, District 1, to a point, said point being a common corner to Parcels 39, 38, Tax Map 26, District 1; 
thence with the common line of said Parcels 39 and 38, Tax Map 26, District 1, to a point, said point being a common corner to said Parcels 39 and 38 and point in the northern right-of-way line of the C & O Railway Railroad (now owned by the City of Beckley); 
thence in a northeast direction with said northern railroad right-of-way line and the eastern boundary line of Parcels 38, 37, 36, 35 and 34, Tax Map 26, District 1, to a point, said point being the northeast corner of said Parcel 34 and the western right-of-way line of Piney Avenue; 
thence crossing said Piney Avenue and with said right-of-way line of said railroad to a point, said point being the common corner of Parcels 182 and 183, Tax Map 11, District 1; 
thence leaving and crossing said railroad right-of-way to a point, said point being at the intersection of the eastern right-of-way line of North Fayette Street and the southern right-of-way line of a 15 foot alley and a corner to Parcel 33, Tax Map 25, District 1; 
thence with said southern right-of-way line of the 15 foot alley in a easterly direction, crossing part of said alley to the southeast corner of Parcel 46, Tax Map 25, District 1; 
thence with the eastern right-of-way line of said 15 foot alley and the western boundary line of said Parcel 46, Tax Map 25, District 1, to a point, said point being the northwest corner of said Parcel 46 and the intersection of said 15 foot alley's western right-of-way line and the southern right-of-way line of Croft Street; 
thence east a diagonal line crossing Croft Street to the south east corner of Parcel 24, Tax Map 12, District 1, and a point in the northern right-of-way line of said Croft Street; 
thence east with said northern of said Croft Street to a point, said point being the southwest corner of Parcel 53, Tax Map 12, District 1, and the intersection of said northern right-of-way line of Croft Street and the eastern right-of-way line of a 12 foot alley; 
thence leaving Croft Street and with said 12 foot alley in a northerly direction and with the western boundary line of Parcels 53, 52, 51, and 50 to a point, said point being the common corner to Parcels 49 and 50, Tax Map 12, District 1; 
thence leaving said 12 foot alley and with the common line of said Parcels 49 and 50 to a point, said point also being a common corner to said Parcels 49 and 50 and a point in the western right-of-way line of North Kanawha Street; 
thence crossing North Kanawha Street to a point, said point being the common corner to Parcels 74 and 75, Tax Map 12, District 1, and a point in the eastern right-of-way line of said North Kanawha Street; 
thence with said eastern right-of-way line of North Kanawha Street and the western boundary lines of Parcels 74 and 73 to a point, said point being at the intersection of said eastern right-of-way line of North Kanawha Street and the northern boundary line of Wilson Street; 
thence with said northern right-of-way line of Wilson Street and the southern boundary line of Parcels 73, 75, 117, 117.1, 119, 120, 121 and crossing Hull Street to a point in the eastern right-of-way line of Hull Street, said point also being the common corner to Parcel 152 and 154, Tax Map 12, District 1; 
thence leaving said Hull Street and with the common line of said Parcels 152 and 154 to a point, said point being a common corner to Parcels 154 and 153, Tax Map 12, District 1 and a point in the western right-of-way line of Nebraska Avenue; 
thence with said western right-of-way line of said Nebraska Avenue and the eastern boundary lines of Parcels 153, 150, 149, and 148 to a point, said point being the southeast corner of said Parcel 148, Tax Map 12, District 1; 
thence crossing said Nebraska Avenue and East Prince Street to a point, said point being the corner to Parcel 1.1, Tax Map 17, District 1 and also the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of East Prince Street and the eastern right-of-way line of Williams Street; 
thence leaving said East Prince Street and with said eastern right-of-way line of Williams Street and the western boundary line of Parcels 1.1, 76, 75, 74 crossing the intersection of Clyde Street, 77 and 78, Tax Map 17, District 1 to a point, said point being a corner to Parcel 78 and the intersection of the northern right-of-way line of Williams Street, the northern right-of-way line of a 12 foot alley and the northern right-of-way line of Hargrove Street; 
thence leaving said corner of said Parcel 78 and crossing Williams Street to a point, said point being at the beginning of the northern right-of-way line of Garden Terrace and the western most corner of Parcel 165, Tax Map 17, District 1; 
thence with said northern right-of-way line of Garden Terrace and the southern boundary lines of Parcels 165, 166, 167, and 258, Tax Map 17, District 1 to a point, said point being the southern most common corner of Parcels 268 and 267, Tax Map 17, District 1 and at the intersection of the northern right-of-way line of said Garden Terrace and the western right-of-way line of Bratton Street; 
thence crossing said Bratton Street to a point, said point being a point in the northern right-of-way line of Crawford Street and the southwestern corner of Parcel 266, Tax Map 17, District 1; 
thence with said northern right-of-way line of Crawford Street and the southern boundary lines of Parcels 266 through 248 inclusive to a point, said point being the southeast corner of Parcel 248 and a point at the intersection of said western right-of-way line of Johnstown Road; 
thence leaving said Crawford Street and Parcel 248 and with said western right-of-way line of Johnstown Road and the eastern boundary line of Parcels 302, 302.1, and 303 to a point at the intersection of said western right-of-way line of Johnstown Road and the northern right-of-way line of South Kanawha Street; 
thence crossing South Kanawha Street to the point and place of beginning. 
(2)  Additionally, this section shall apply to all properties which front on any of the aforementioned streets, referenced on the zoning maps, but which are not within the generally described boundaries. 
(b)  Permitted use regulations. Except as otherwise provided by law or in this section, no buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied in the B-3 zone except for the following purposes: 
(1)  Antique shops; 
(2)  Aquariums; 
(3)  Apartment units or other residential units; 
(4)  Auditoriums (indoor); 
(5)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(6)  Barber shops and beauty parlors; 
(7)  Bicycle trails; 
(8)  Blueprint and photostat shops; 
(9)  Bowling alleys; 
(10)  Brew pub; 
(11)  Catering establishments; 
(12)  Clubs, private indoor; 
(13)  Coffee shop; 
(14)  Community or recreation centers; 
(15)  Convents or monasteries; 
(16)  Data processing facilities; 
(17)  Day or youth camps; 
(18)  Duplicating, photography; 
(19)  Elderly housing; 
(20)  Funeral homes, mortuaries; 
(21)  Garden supply, nursery, and/or greenhouses (provided all sales on the premises are retail); 
(22)  Governmental offices, public administration buildings, publicly owned structures; 
(23)  Grocery stores and supermarkets; 
(24)  Group residential facility, home; 
(25)  Gymnasiums; 
(26)  Hospitals or sanitariums; 
(27)  Hotels and motels, including extended stay; 
(28)  Ice cream stores or stands; 
(29)  Libraries or museums; 
(30)  Laundry and/or ironing and/or dry cleaning pick up station or facility; 
(31)  Lodges or fraternal orders or organizations; 
(32)  Long-term care facility; 
(33)  Markets; 
(34)  Mechanical repair (watch, camera, bicycle, TV); 
(35)  Medical offices; outpatient and surgical hospitals, medical centers or clinics; 
(36)  Micro brewery; 
(37)  Multiple family dwellings and apartments, condominiums or other residential units; 
(38)  Offices for service or professional businesses; 
(39)  Parking areas, lots, parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(40)  Recreational centers, indoor; 
(41)  Restaurant, entertainment, with or without private club, private wine restaurant or tavern license; 
(42)  Restaurants, standards or sit-down, with or without private club, private wine restaurant or tavern license; 
(43)  Retail stores; 
(44)  Retail stores selling liquor, beer soft drinks (in sealed containers not for consumption on premises); 
(45)  Rooming houses; 
(46)  Schools/studios, commercial or trade (e.g., business, dance, music, martial arts); 
(47)  Secondhand merchandise, retail sales; 
(48)  Shoe repair shops; 
(49)  Shopping centers, malls; 
(50)  Skating rinks (ice or roller), indoor or outdoor; 
(51)  Swimming pools, indoor or outdoor; 
(52)  Tailor and dressmaking shops; 
(53)  Temporary retail sales outlets, subject to license and/or permit requirements; 
(54)  Temporary street fairs; 
(55)  Tennis, racquetball or handball courts; 
(56)  Theaters, indoor or outdoor; 
(57)  Travel agency; 
(58)  University, college or other post-secondary education institutions; 
(59)  Upholstery shops. 
(c)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with section 15-5(d): 
(1)  Auction rooms; 
(2)  Auditoriums; 
(3)  Child care center, nursery school, day care center, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(4)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching (subject to RLUIPA); 
(5)  Elderly day care center; 
(6)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(7)  Schools, public or private, or for the physically or mentally handicapped; 
(8)  Telephone exchange; 
(9)  Utility, public; service yards or garages; broadcasting stations or towers; 
(10)  Wireless telecommunications facilities, co-location only, subject to section 15-25. 
(11)  Limited video lottery establishments, subject to section 15-24(n). 
(d)  Height. No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed four (4) stories nor shall it exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height. 
(e)  Area. 
(1)  Front yard. No front yard shall be required. 
(2)  Side yard. No side yard shall be required except that when a building or group of buildings abuts upon a residential zone, a yard shall be provided on the side of the lot abutting the residential district, such side yard having a width of not less than ten (10) feet. In such circumstances where the delivery of emergency services could be jeopardized, the zoning officer may require a side yard not to exceed twelve (12) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet when abutting upon a publicly dedicated alley or when a public way exists at the rear of a lot, or when abutting upon a residential zone. 
(f)  Parking and vehicle access. 
(1)  A rear or side yard may be used for off-street parking and loading, subject to section 15-23. 
(2)  Parking and vehicle access shall be so arranged that there will be no need for motorists to back over sidewalks or into streets. 
(3)  Specific regulations for the B-3 Zone are found in section 15-23(m)(1)m. 
(g)  Design standards. No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered in any manner not in accordance with the architectural review program and design standard guidelines developed for the Downtown Beckley Historic District, by the City of Beckley Historic Landmark Commission. 
(1)  Procedure for historic landmark commission review. 
a.  Any person, firm or corporation, or other business entity desiring to alter the exterior of any existing structure within the B-3, Downtown Beckley Historic District, or to construct a new structure shall first contact the zoning officer to apply for the necessary permits, obtain the design standard guidelines of the historic landmark commission and apply for a certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  After filing the application with the zoning officer, the zoning officer will contact the historic landmark commission to arrange for review of plans, compatibility, funding and other matters to be considered by the commission, to obtain a certificate of appropriateness. The applicant shall be notified as to the time, date and place when the commission will meet to review the application. 
c.  Upon any determination by the historic landmark commission, if the applicant wishes to appeal the decision, such appeal shall be made to the City of Beckley board of zoning appeals in writing ten (10) working days following receipt by the applicant of the determination by the historic landmark commission. Upon notification of such appeal, the board of zoning appeals shall set a time and date for a hearing and the applicant, his agent or counsel shall present the appeal to the board at the designated time. 
d.  If the applicant is displeased by the decision of the board of zoning appeals, the applicant must present an appeal to the circuit court of Raleigh County within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision by the board of zoning appeals. 
e.  Upon receipt by an applicant of a certificate of appropriateness, the applicant must apply to the code enforcement department for a building permit prior to commencing any alteration or construction. No building permit shall be issued by the city until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. 
(2)  Noncompliant signs in B-3 District. In addition to the nonconforming uses specified in provisions of section 15-26 of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall apply. Any use of signs or awnings, building signs, logos or business names, pendant signs, window signs or any other type advertisement not in compliance and accepted by the historic landmark commission or the design standard guidelines issued by that commission after January 1, 1988 shall be deemed in noncompliance with this section and the property occupant shall be deemed in violation of the Beckley City Code and shall be subject to the provisions specified in section 15-30. 
(3)  Exclusions. For any business or property owner who has any type of building, structure, or otherwise on property that is deemed as nonconforming under section 15-26 of this chapter at the time of passage of this chapter, and which building, structure or otherwise is a vital, integral part of an ongoing business enterprise and is necessary to maintain the business, such building, structure of otherwise is hereby excluded from the operations of this article until such time as the business or property owner disposes of or transfers the property; or the business is damaged beyond repair in excess of fifty (50) per cent of its assessed value as determined by the assessor of Raleigh County; or the property is abandoned or the business discontinued for a period of one (1) year, whichever event first occurs. Thereafter, the property owner shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and the zoning ordinance of the City of Beckley. 
(h)  Prohibitions. The following permitted uses may not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any "R", residential district or "O/R", office/residential transitional district: Automobile service station; brew pub; carwash; club, private indoor; restaurant, entertainment; restaurant, with drive-thru service; retail or convenience store selling alcohol or beer in sealed containers; retail or convenience store operating after 9:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. The three hundred (300) foot separation distance shall exclude the width of any abutting public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 12-9-03, § 1; Ord. of 11-9-04; Ord. of 4-24-07) 
Secs. 15-17-15-21. - Reserved. 
Sec. 15-22. - M manufacturing district. 
(a)  Permitted use regulations. Permitted uses are: 
(1)  Artificial limb manufacture; 
(2)  Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning, and body and fender work when done within the confines of a structure; 
(3)  Automobile sales for both new and used vehicles and service shops, where all service operations are conducted wholly within an enclosed building as one (1) integrated business operation; 
(4)  Bakeries, wholesale; 
(5)  Beverage bottling and distributing stations; 
(6)  Bicycle trails; 
(7)  Blacksmith shops; 
(8)  Box manufacture; 
(9)  Broom manufacture; 
(10)  Building equipment, building materials, lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards, and yards for contracting equipment, maintenance, or operating equipment of public agencies, or public utilities, or materials or equipment of similar nature; 
(11)  Busline shops and garages; 
(12)  Canvas goods and fabrication; 
(13)  Carpet and rug cleaners; 
(14)  Carting, express hauling, or storage yards; 
(15)  Cement block manufacture, when done wholly within a building; 
(16)  Chick hatcheries; 
(17)  Cleaning and dyeing establishments; 
(18)  Clothing and dress manufacture; 
(19)  Cosmetics and pharmaceuticals manufacture; 
(20)  Creameries; 
(21)  Data processing facilities; 
(22)  Drapery and bedding manufacture; 
(23)  Dry cleaning plant or facility; 
(24)  Electrical appliance and electronic instrument assembly; 
(25)  Food processing and dehydrating for human consumption; 
(26)  Furniture manufacture and upholstering; 
(27)  Grain elevators; 
(28)  Greenhouses, wholesale growers; 
(29)  Heating and sheet metal fabrications; 
(30)  Home improvement center; 
(31)  Hotels and motels - extended stay; 
(32)  Ice cream and ice manufacture; 
(33)  Kennel; 
(34)  Laundry, receiving less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds of dry goods per day; 
(35)  Laundry, receiving one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds or more of dry goods per day; 
(36)  Manufacture of pottery and figurines or any other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas; 
(37)  Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials; bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, furs, glass, hair, horn, tanned leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, shell, textiles, wood and yarns; 
(38)  Manufacturing establishments that can be operated without creating objectionable noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, or vapor, and that is a use compatible with the use and occupancy of adjoining properties; 
(39)  Recycling center; 
(40)  Stone, marble, and granite grinding and cutting; 
(41)  Telephone exchange; 
(42)  Tool and die shops; 
(43)  Truck or bus storage yard, truck terminals; 
(44)  Upholstering; 
(45)  Window shade manufacture; 
(46)  Wholesale establishments, excluding buildings where the principal use is a storage warehouse; 
(47)  Wireless telecommunication facilities, subject to section 15-25; 
(48)  Offices; 
(49)  Business incubators; 
(50)  Research and development facilities. 
(51)  Firearms sales and service. 
(b)  Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, and require a conditional use permit in accordance with sections 15-5(c). 
(1)  Auditoriums; 
(2)  Child day care center/nursery school or facility, subject to section 15-24(k); 
(3)  Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teaching, subject to RLUIPA; 
(4)  Community or recreational centers; 
(5)  Emergency services and service buildings/garages (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue); 
(6)  Hospitals or sanitariums; 
(7)  Kennels, subject to section 15-24(j); 
(8)  Mineral or gravel extraction; 
(9)  Parking areas, lots, and parking garages, subject to section 15-23; 
(10)  Park/playground (public or private); 
(11)  Public administration building or any other publicly-owned structure; 
(12)  Public utility facilities, i.e., filtration plant or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station, and other similar facilities; 
(13)  Railroad right-of-way; 
(14)  Schools, public or private; 
(15)  Stables, corrals, pens, coops, or kennels (structures); 
(16)  Salvage yards, subject to section 15-24(l); 
(17)  Public utilities or broadcasting stations or towers. 
(c)  Height. No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of four (4) stories nor shall it exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height except as provided in section 15-5(e). 
(d)  Areas. The maximum ground area occupied by all buildings shall be not more than sixty (60) per cent of the area of the lot or tract on which a building permit has been issued: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet wherein there shall be no structure of any kind, open storage of materials or equipment, or the parking of vehicles. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet on both sides of the building or buildings, but where the property is adjacent to an R district, there shall be a side yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet on the side nearest to the residential lots. The parking of private automobiles may be permitted within the side yard areas, but not closer than five (5) feet to any lot zoned for residential use. 
(3)  Rear yard. A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts upon an R district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet, and no storage of materials or equipment, or the parking of automobiles shall take place within the ten (10) feet of any residential lot or lots. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 4-24-07; Ord. of 1-10-17) 
Sec. 15-23. - Off-street parking and loading. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to ensure that safe and convenient parking areas are provided to serve the requirements of all land uses in the City of Beckley, to avoid traffic congestion, to avoid or minimize the adverse visual impact of large concentrations of exposed parking, to provide necessary access for service and emergency vehicles, and to provide for safe and convenient interaction between vehicles and pedestrians. 
a.  For the purpose of this section, one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet (9' × 18') of lot or floor area, which have a means of ingress or egress from an alley or street, shall be deemed parking space for one (1) vehicle. Such space shall not occupy any part of any required front yard, except a driveway, but where open may be included as part of a required open space for side or rear yard. On corner or through lots, parking space may not be included as part of the required yards lying adjacent to either street. Such parking spaces and access driveways required in residential districts, when used in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be paved or otherwise surfaced with an all-weather, dustproof material. That part of the driveway connecting from the curb line to the property line shall be paved with concrete or asphaltic materials. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter, except where there is a change of use, or front yard parking is approved, shall not apply to any existing building or structure. Where the new use involves no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many of such spaces as may be required by this chapter. 
c.  Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date of this zoning ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise to create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces, additional parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. 
d.  Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this zoning ordinance is enlarged to the extent of fifty (50) per cent or more in floor area or in the area used, number of employees, number of housing units, seating capacity, or otherwise, said building or structure shall then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein. 
(b)  Off-street loading space requirements and dimensions. 
(1)  On the same lot with every building or part thereof, erected hereafter to be used for other than exclusive dwelling purposes, or as an accessory use for dwelling purposes, there shall be provided on the lot, adequate space for motor vehicles in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets or alleys. Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include a ten-foot by forty-foot loading space, with fifteen (15) feet height clearance, and one (1) such space shall be provided for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet or fraction thereof of floor or lot area used for other than residence purposes. 
(2)  Such loading space shall not be located in the required front yard of the lot on which it is located. However, the loading space shall have unrestricted ingress and egress to a public right-of-way. 
(3)  No such space shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any other lot located in any R District, unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless enclosed on all sides by a wall or uniformly painted solid board fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(4)  The surface of the loading space and its access drive shall be maintained in a dust free condition at all times. 
(c)  Dimensions. 
(1)  Parking spaces shall have minimum rectangular dimensions and driveway aisles shall have a minimum width of not less than the following: 
Parking Space Width Length Width of Driveway Aisle 90° parking 9 feet 18 feet 25 feet 60° parking 9 feet 18 feet 171/2 feet 45° parking 12 feet 19 feet 13 feet Parallel parking 9 feet 20 feet 12 feet  
All dimensions for parking spaces shall be exclusive of driveways, aisles, and other circulation areas. 
(d)  Access. 
(1)  There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress. Any parking area shall be designed in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or into a public or private street shall be traveling in a forward motion. 
(2)  Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be clearly visible for a reasonable distance to any pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or private street. 
(3)  Where a lot does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive leading to the parking or storage areas or loading or unloading spaces required hereunder, in such a manner as to secure the most appropriate development of the property in question. Such access drive shall be not less than eight (8) feet in width in the case of a dwelling, and not less than eighteen (18) feet in width in all other cases; provided, however, that one-way aisles for either ingress or egress for uses other than dwellings may be reduced to not less than ten (10) feet in width. Such access drive or easement shall not be located in any R district except where provided in connection with a use permitted in an R district. 
(e)  Width of access driveway. 
(1)  The entrances and exits of the parking area shall be clearly marked. Interior vehicular circulation by way of access roads shall maintain the following minimum standards: 
a.  For one-way traffic, the minimum width of fourteen (14) feet except for forty-five (45) degree parking, in which case the minimum width of the access road shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
b.  Access roads for two-way traffic shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet. 
c.  Parking areas having more than one (1) aisle or driveway shall have directional signs or markings in each aisle or driveway. 
(f)  Location of parking spaces. 
(1)  The following regulations shall govern the location of off-street parking spaces and areas: 
a.  Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve. Parking on nonpaved surfaces, on sidewalks or in the front yard shall be prohibited. 
b.  Parking spaces for commercial, industrial, or institutional uses shall be located not more than seven hundred (700) feet from the principal use except as provided for in section 15-16. 
c.  Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories, or similar residential uses shall be located not more than three hundred (300) feet from the principal use. 
(g)  Mixed occupancies and uses not specified. 
(1)  In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. In case a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities for a similar use shall apply. 
(2)  Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as specified for joint use in section 15-23(h). 
(h)  Joint use. 
(1)  Two (2) or more non-residential uses may jointly provide and use parking spaces when their hours of operation do not normally overlap, provided that a written agreement approved by the zoning officer or planning commission is filed with the application for a building permit. Permission for such joint use of parking spaces may be granted subject to such conditions as the zoning officer or planning commission finds necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this section. 
(2)  Common parking areas may be provided in areas designated to serve jointly two (2) or more buildings or uses provided that the total number of off-street parking spaces shall not be less than that required by this section for each use. 
(i)  Handicapped parking. (It is the intent of this section to comply with all ADA, state and federal handicapped accessibility requirements.) All parking areas shall have provisions for the physically handicapped. 
(1)  Handicap spaces shall be located as close as possible to a major entrance or a building or use. 
(2)  A minimum of one (1) parking space for the handicapped shall be provided for each nonresidential use which requires a minimum of fifteen (15) parking spaces. 
(3)  For such uses requiring more than fifteen (15) spaces, one (1) designated for the handicapped shall be provided for each additional twenty-five (25) spaces. 
(4)  Handicap spaces shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width unless located parallel to a sidewalk on the driver's side of the vehicle in which case they shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width. Parallel handicap spaces shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in length. 
(5)  All handicap spaces shall be designated by means of a permanent, raised identification sign. 
(j)  Grade of parking use areas. 
(1)  Outdoor parking areas shall not exceed eight (8) per cent of grade and shall be not less than one (1) per cent of grade. 
(2)  The cross slope of any parking or loading space shall not exceed five (5) per cent of grade. 
(3)  The grade of access ways shall not exceed four (4) per cent within one hundred (100) feet of the intersection with a public right-of-way, or where topographic conditions preclude maintaining four (4) per cent or less, the grade of the access way shall not exceed one (1) per cent within twenty-five (25) feet of the public right-of-way. 
(k)  Stacking spaces. For any drive-in or drive-through retail or service use, there shall be provided stacking space for vehicles waiting for service which space is sufficient to prevent any such vehicles from extending onto the public right-of-way at any time. 
(1)  In no case shall fewer than four (4) such stacking spaces be provided for each such service bay, window, or counter on the entrance side, and one (1) such space on the exit side where an exit is provided. 
(2)  Parking spaces required for such service bay uses may be counted among the required stacking spaces. 
(3)  No bays designed to be entered from more than one (1) direction shall be permitted. 
(l)  Striping. All parking areas with a capacity over twelve (12) vehicles shall be striped. 
(m)  Parking space requirements. 
(1)  In any district, except as noted below, every building built or structurally altered, enlarged or increased in capacity, and every land use initiated subsequent to the adoption of this section shall be provided with minimum off-street parking facilities as follows: 
a.  One- and two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings and multiple-family high-rise: Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
b.  Elderly high-rise: One (1) parking space for each two (2) dwelling units, also two hundred (200) square feet for each three (3) dwelling units shall be added to the open area requirement, this area to revert to improved parking area before discontinuance of use as elderly high rise. Any elderly high-rise converted to multiple-family high-rise must have two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as provided by the codes of the city. 
c.  Hotels, motels, rooming houses, lodging houses: One (1) parking space for each guest sleeping room and one (1) parking space for each three (3) employees. If a restaurant or meeting facility is included, the requirements for such facilities shall be in addition to these requirements. 
d.  Hospitals: One (1) parking space for each three (3) hospital beds; one (1) per doctor; one (1) for each two (2) employees. 
e.  Tourist homes: One (1) parking space for each transient sleeping room offered for tourist accommodation in addition to parking spaces required for permanent residents of the building. 
f.  Tourist courts and motels: One (1) parking space for each lodging unit. 
g.  Churches, auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadiums, theaters, and other places of public or private assembly with fixed seats: One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats or bench seating spaces, based upon maximum seating capacity. 
1.  For the purpose of this type of use, parking spaces already provided to meet off-street parking requirements for stores, office buildings and industrial establishments, or off-street parking facilities provided by the municipality, lying within three hundred (300) feet of the place of public assembly as measured along the lines of public access, and that are not normally in use between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and midnight, and are made available for other parking, may be used to meet up to seventy-five (75) per cent of the total requirements of parking space for places of public assembly. 
h.  Dance halls, bowling alleys, and private clubs: One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, to be provided on the premises or within three hundred (300) feet of the entrance; 
i.  Funeral homes: Fifteen (15) parking spaces on the premises, plus one (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area which can be used as a parlor; 
j.  Stores and other retail establishments and offices where such uses are permitted: One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of store space, to be provided on the premises or within two hundred (200) feet of the entrance off of the street, except that restaurants or establishments whose primary use is to serve meals and refreshments to patrons shall provide one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor space in the building; 
k.  Wholesale and distributing establishments including telephone exchanges: One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees; 
l.  Manufacturing establishments: One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees, based on the greatest number of employees at work at one time on the maximum working shift, to be provided on the premises or at other off-street locations within one thousand (1,000) feet of the main entrance. 
m.  B-3 government/service/retail district, university district, cultural entertainment district: on site or by agreement (including municipal or private rental spaces), within one thousand (1,000) feet; retail/office/service: one (1) space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor space; cultural/entertainment: one (1) space for every three (3) seats; restaurants: one (1) space for every one hundred (100) square feet of floor space; residential: one (1) space for each residential unit, on site or by agreement or contract within the B-3 zoning district. 
(2)  Parking space required under this section may be reduced at a time when the capacity or use of a building is changed in such a manner that a new use or capacity would require less space than before the change. Such reduction may not be below the standards set forth in the section. 
(3)  Loading and unloading areas shall not be considered as parking areas. 
(4)  The joint use of parking facilities may be permitted in cases where major parking demands occur on different days of the week or during different hours, provided: 
a.  That parking spaces will be available for each use in accordance with the above standards, and 
b.  That the owners agree in writing that any subsequent sale or division of the property or change in use thereof will not interfere with the joint use of the parking facilities. 
(5)  A plan of parking facilities shall accompany each application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy. The completion of the improvements for parking according to such plan shall be a requisite for the validity of the permit or certificate. 
(6)  The common council may authorize a special permit to allow a parking lot in a residence zone for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Public notice and special notice must be given and a public hearing held by the planning commission on the request for a special permit in the same manner in which said notice is given and such hearing is held on a request for an amendment to this chapter or a site plan review. 
b.  Special notice must be given by regular mail not less than ten (10) days before a hearing to all owners of property or residents lying within three hundred (300) feet of the land for which the special permit is sought. 
c.  A special permit shall not be granted unless the application shows and warrants that in the proposed development of the parking area, front and side yards will be met and maintained. 
(n)  Drainage. All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent properties or walkways. These areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. These areas shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles. 
(o)  Lighting. Any parking area which is intended for use during non-daylight hours shall be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Ground mounted lighting shall be permitted. 
(1)  Lighting originating on a site shall not be permitted beyond the site to exceed the following values when measured at grade ten (10) feet beyond the property for the following adjacent properties: 
a.  Residential-Three-tenths (0.3) foot-candle. 
b.  Multi-family-Five-tenths (0.5) foot-candle. 
c.  Office-commercial-assembly-One (1.0) foot-candle. 
d.  Outdoor sports facilities-Lighting shall be reviewed for compliance with regard to the intent to minimize the impact of light trespass and glare on all surrounding properties and public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A cutoff type luminaire shall be used to illuminate a parking lot and shall be so arranged as to reflect the light way from the adjoining property. When located adjacent to business uses, the light source shall not be visible at a height greater than five (5) feet above ground level. When located adjacent to residential uses, the light source shall not be visible at ground level or above. 
(p)  Screening and landscape design standards. 
(1)  Whenever a parking area is located in or adjacent to a residential district, it shall be effectively screened on all sides which adjoin or face any property used for residential purposes. A physical barrier created by earth berms, planter boxes, fences, walls or hedges not less than three and one-half (31/2) feet nor more than (8) feet in height. The earth berms, planter boxes, and hedges shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, and shall be provided within the property boundaries. Tree species shall be selected that, at full maturity, will create a dense, visually obstructing buffer planting strip. 
(2)  The space between such fence, wall, or planting screen and the lot line of the adjoining premises in any residential district shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition. 
(3)  In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that the erection of such fence, wall, or planting screen will not serve the intended purpose, then no such fence, wall, or planting screen and landscaping shall be required. 
(4)  The following sections include specifications for plant materials. Alternatives to these materials that can be shown to meet both the intent and requirements of this chapter may be approved as part of a site plan: 
a.  Shrubs: Shrubs shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches average height and spread at the time of planting, and, where required for screening, shall form a continuous, year-round, solid visual screen within five (5) years after planting. 
b.  Ground cover and grass: Ground cover shall be planted a minimum of eight (8) inches on center and shall be planted in such a manner to present a finished appearance and seventy-five (75) per cent coverage after one (1) complete growing season. If approved as part of a site plan, ground cover may also consist of rocks, pebbles, wood chips, and other material. Grass shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns. 
c.  Prohibited tree species: Within any required landscaping, the following tree species may not be used: 
1.  Box Elder 
2.  Tree of Heaven 
3.  Catalpa 
4.  Black Walnut 
5.  Poplar 
6.  Willow 
7.  Mountain Ash 
8.  Siberian Elm 
9.  Black Locust 
10.  Hickory 
11.  Mulberry 
12.  Silver Maple 
d.  In addition to the species listed above, trees which produce nuts, seeds, or fruit that can create a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles, shall not be planted in such a manner that the natural dripline of an average adult tree of the species planted will be any closer than three (3) feet of a pedestrian walkway or parking lot. 
(5)  Walkways shall have a minimum effective (exclusive of vehicle overhang) width of four (4) feet. 
(q)  Interior parking area landscaping. Landscaping within parking areas, whether ground cover or upright plant material, is necessary not only to reduce the generation of heat and water runoff, but to break up, visually, the expanse of paved areas. The use of parking islands or peninsulas strategically placed throughout the parking lot is required to landscape parking lot interiors. The use of shade trees in these landscape areas is encouraged. Any open parking area containing more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of area or fifteen (15) or more parking spaces shall provide the following interior landscaping in addition to the required perimeter screening: 
(1)  An area equal to five (5) per cent of the total area devoted to parking space and parking lanes shall be landscaped and permeable. 
(2)  Whenever possible, large parking areas of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or larger shall be designed so as to break up their visual expanse and create the appearance of smaller parking lots. This distinction or separation can be achieved by interspersing yard space and buildings in strategic areas and by taking advantage of natural features such as slope, existing woodland or vegetation, drainage courses, and retention/detention areas that contain water throughout the year. 
(3)  Landscaping in parking areas shall be dispersed throughout in peninsulas or islands. The minimum island or peninsula size shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet with a two-foot minimum distance between all trees or shrubs and the edge of pavement where vehicles overhang and should have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. Islands shall typically be located every ten (10) to twelve (12) parking spaces and may be curbed. 
(4)  The required plant materials for the interior of parking areas shall be one (1) deciduous tree for every three thousand (3,000) square feet. Where site distance or maneuvering conflicts exist, trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five (5) feet above the ground, and the remaining required landscape areas shall be planted with shrubs or ground cover not to exceed two (2) feet in height. 
(5)  Areas located between any parking area and public right-of-way shall be landscaped with a minimum three-foot wide buffer strip including elements such as mounding, trees, ground cover, and shrubs. 
(r)  Maintenance and replacement requirements. The owner shall be responsible for maintaining all landscaping in good condition to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. This should be accomplished by the following standards: 
(1)  All plant growth in landscaped areas shall be controlled by pruning, trimming, or other suitable methods so that plant materials do not interfere with public utilities, restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, or otherwise constitute a hazard. 
(2)  All planted areas shall be maintained in a weed-free condition, clear of undesirable undergrowth; and free from refuse and debris. 
(3)  Replacement plants shall conform to the standards that govern original installation. Dead or unhealthy plants shall be replaced within the next planting season. 
(4)  Representatives of the City of Beckley shall have the authority to inspect landscaping and check it against the approved plan on file. 
(s)  Parking in residential districts. 
(1)  Within any residential district no person shall be permitted to park or store any vehicle in the front yard of any lot in a residential zone, or the side yard facing a street on a corner lot in a residential district, any airplane, boat, motor home, mobile home, trailer, bus, tractor recreational vehicles, or any other motor vehicle except as provided in subsections (2) and (3). (See also section 14-823, restricting parking of oversize vehicles on residential streets). 
(2)  A person shall be permitted to park or store a passenger vehicle, pick-up truck, or sport utility vehicle in any front yard of any lot in a residential zone, or the side yard facing a street on a corner lot in a residential district provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Said vehicles shall be parked only on permanently constructed parking spaces which shall include driveways and parking pads. 
b.  No parking space shall encroach upon the sidewalk or entrance walk to the dwelling nor be within five (5) feet of the side lot line. If there is no sidewalk, the parking space shall not encroach upon the street right-of-way. If the right-of-way line is within two (2) feet of the curb, an additional front line setback of two (2) feet of the curb, an additional front line setback of two (2) feet shall be required. 
c.  A parking space and approach shall be properly drained, have an adequate subbase, be surfaced with a surface in compliance with the building code and meeting the approval of the city, and shall be maintained by the property owner. 
d.  The approach to the parking space shall be by drop curb and heavy-duty concrete sidewalk as specified by the board of public works, and the applicable building code and zoning ordinance provisions. 
e.  All curb cuts and sidewalk replacements shall require a permit and prior approval of the board of public works and shall be in compliance with the applicable building code and zoning ordinance provisions. All curb cuts and sidewalk replacements on state rights of way shall be governed by rules and regulations promulgated by the State of West Virginia. 
f.  A building permit is required before construction of any parking space, parking pad, driveway or other parking areas. 
(3)  Any temporarily disabled vehicle may be parked on the front yard of any lot in a residential zone, or the side yard facing a street on a corner lot in a residential district for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours while so disabled. 
(t)  Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
(1)  The parking of commercial vehicles upon any lot, land, street, right-of-way, or shoulder thereof, for a period of time exceeding one (1) hour, except in emergency situations or for such length of time as may be necessary for the pick up, loading, unloading, or delivery of materials and/or passengers in a residential zoned area: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5 and R-6 is prohibited. This prohibition shall be enforced by complaint of the zoning officer or his designated representative, by complaint from a civic or homeowners' association representing a subdivision in which such violation is alleged to have occurred, or by complaint by at least three (3) residents living within one thousand (1,000) feet of the alleged prohibited conduct. It is further provided that his prohibition shall not apply to lots larger than two (2) acres provided adequate screening of such alleged prohibited conduct is undertaken. 
(2)  For the purposes of this chapter, commercial vehicle is defined as a vehicle whose Tara weight exceeds five (5) tons (ten thousand (10,000) pounds), or a vehicle having more than two (2) axles, or a vehicle greater than eight (8) feet in height. Construction equipment and farming equipment of any type are included in this definition. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-24. - Supplemental regulations. 
(a)  Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this chapter applicable to the main building. 
(2)  An accessory building may not be located in a front yard or nearer than five (5) feet to any side line and not nearer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line. 
(3)  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet of any main building. A carport open on not less than three (3) sides may be closer than ten (10) feet, provided no construction materials are combustible. 
(4)  An accessory building shall not be erected prior to the establishment or construction of the principal use of the building. 
(b)  Sexually-oriented businesses. 
(1)  Sexually-oriented businesses are allowed in a B-2 zoning district by conditional use permit from the board of zoning appeals and that sexually-oriented businesses should not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential zone, church, school, park or other sexually-oriented business. 
(2)  Prohibition. 
a.  No person shall exercise supervisory control, manager, operate, cause the establishment, or permit the establishment of any of the sexually-oriented businesses as defined in section 15-3. In addition, no personal shall exercise supervisory control, manage, operate, cause the establishment, or permit the establishment of any of the sexually-oriented businesses, as defined in section 15-24(b) within: 
1.  One thousand (1,000) feet from any other sexually-oriented business. The one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which a sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which another sexually-oriented business is conducted; 
2.  One thousand (1,000) [feet] from a church. Church as used herein shall mean all contiguous property owned or leased by a church upon which is located the principal church building or structure, irrespective of any interior lot lines; the one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which a sexually-oriented business is conducted to the nearest point of the church; provided, however, for a church use located in a building principally used for commercial office purposes (as in a shopping center), the one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured to the nearest building wall of the portion of the building used for church purposes; 
3.  One thousand (1,000) feet from a school of the type which offers a compulsory education curriculum; school as used herein shall mean all contiguous property owned or leased by a school upon which is located the principal school building(s) irrespective of any interior lot lines; the one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which a sexually-oriented business is conducted to the nearest point of the school; 
4.  One thousand (1,000) feet from a public park or private park. The one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which a sexually-oriented business is conducted to the nearest point on the property of the park; and 
5.  One thousand (1,000) feet from areas zoned residential. The one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which a sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest point on a residential zoning district boundary line (not including residentially zoned expressway right-of-way). 
b.  Provided further that the board of zoning appeals may permit, by conditional use permit, sexually-oriented businesses, as defined in section 15-3 in a B-1 area, subject to the distance limitations set forth under section 15-24(b)(1)a. 1., 2., 3., 4., and 5. 
c.  The establishment of a sexually-oriented business shall include the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, the enlargement of such business in greater scope or area, or the conversion of an existing business location to any of the uses described in section 15-24(b). 
(3)  Nonconforming sexually-oriented business uses. 
a.  Any business lawfully existing as of the effective date of this chapter that is in violation hereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such a nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two (2) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason whatsoever or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. In the event that two (2) or more sexually-oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible zone, the first such sexually-oriented business licensed and continually operating at a particular location shall be the conforming use and the later established business(es) shall be nonconforming. 
b.  Any sexually-oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location of a church, school, park, or residential district within one thousand (1,000) feet of a sexually-oriented business. 
(c)  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Consistent with the objectives established in this section, landscaping shall be provided according to the following standards: 
a.  Screening of service courts, storage areas, and loading docks. For all uses that include areas used for service, loading, and unloading activities, such areas shall be screened along the entire rear lot line and side lot lines from the rear lot line to the rear building line to the following minimum standards: 
1.  The width of the screening area shall be a minimum of five (5) feet. Screening shall consist of walls, hedges, fences, vegetation, or an acceptable combination of these elements, provided that screening must be at least seven (7) feet in height. 
2.  Vegetation used for screening shall have a minimum opaqueness of seventy-five (75) per cent at all times within two (2) years of planting. 
b.  Screening of trash container receptacles. Trash containers shall be screened according to the following minimum standards: 
1.  Trash containers designed to service more than one (1) residential unit or to service a nonresidential structure shall be screened on three (3) sides by walls, fences, natural vegetation, or an acceptable combination of these elements. 
2.  The height of such screening shall be at least six (6) feet. The maximum height of walls and fences shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Vegetation shall have a minimum opaqueness of seventy-five (75) per cent at all times within two (2) years of planting. The use of evergreen vegetation is encouraged. Vegetation shall be a variety and size that will attain six (6) feet in height within two (2) years of planting. 
c.  Screening of exterior mechanical equipment. Exterior components of plumbing, processing, heating, cooling, and ventilating systems (including, but not limited to piping, tanks, stacks, collectors, heating, cooling, and ventilating-equipment fans, blowers, ductwork, vents, louvers, meters, compressors, motors, incinerators, ovens, etc.,) shall not be directly visible at ground level. Any landscaping or structural means employed to screen exterior components of plumbing, processing, heating, cooling, and ventilating systems from direct view shall appear as integrated parts of the building; shall be constructed of complementary and durable materials; and finished in a texture and color scheme complementary to the overall architectural design. Any exterior components of plumbing, processing, heating, cooling, and ventilating systems, and their screening devices which will be visible from upper floors of adjacent building shall be kept to a visible minimum; shall be installed in a neat and compact fashion; and shall be painted such a color as to allow their blending with their visual backgrounds. 
d.  Buffer strip required. 
1.  In all side and rear yards in the B-1, B-2, B-3, M, O/R districts that adjoin a residential district, there shall be a buffer strip, that is not less than ten (10) feet in width and running the length of the side and/or rear yards adjacent to the residential district. 
2.  Standards for buffer strips. The landscaping materials used in a buffer strip shall be a combination of shrubs, trees, grass and/or other ground cover. The primary landscaping materials used shall be of shrubbery and hedges. Shrubbery and hedges shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height and spaced to prevent vehicle lights originating in parking areas from shining onto adjacent property. Trees and other planting materials shall be used to compliment the shrubbery and hedges. The maximum spacing between trees shall be forty (40) feet and shall be eight (8) to ten (10) feet in minimum overall height upon planting and which provided shade or are capable of providing shade at maturity. Other materials, earthen berms, topography, or fencing may be considered or required on the merits of the particular project. The minimum width required for such buffer strips shall be ten (10) feet except in the M district, where the minimum width shall be twenty-five (25) feet, and the O/R District where the minimum width shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(d)  Home occupations. 
(1)  An accessory office, commercial, or manufacturing use conducted for financial gain or support entirely within a dwelling or an accessory building, which meets all of the following criteria: 
a.  The use is conducted exclusively by residents or inhabitants on the subject property; and 
b.  The use is clearly incidental to and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes, does not change the residential character thereof, and does not create the appearance or impact of commercial activity to the surrounding neighborhood and no signage indicating the presence of a home occupation of any kind is permitted. No business is transacted requiring a customer to visit the residence; and 
c.  The use does not involve exterior storage on the premises of material or equipment used as a part of the home occupation; and 
d.  No equipment, process, materials, or chemicals shall be used which create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, x-rays, radiation, or electrical disturbances; and 
e.  The use does not adversely affect traffic flow and parking in the neighborhood, does not create the need for additional parking spaces either on or off-site, and does not involve the parking of commercial vehicles on or about the property; and 
f.  The use does not allow any article to be sold or offered for sale except such as is produced on the premises, only by members of the immediate family residing therein; and 
g.  The use does not allow any employees, except members of the immediate family. 
(e)  General yard requirements. 
(1)  In addition to all yard requirements specified in other sections of this chapter, the provisions of this section, shall be used for interpretation and clarification. Except as herein provided, every required yard shall be required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from three (3) feet above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, provided accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and requirements limited obstruction of visibility. 
a.  Yard requirements for single buildings. No required yard or other open space around a building shall be considered as a yard to open space for any other building. No required yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot shall be considered as providing the yard or open space on the lot whereon a building is to be erected or established. 
b.  Yard requirements for multiple-family dwellings. Multiple-family dwellings shall be considered as one (1) building for the purpose of determining front, side, and rear yard requirements. The entire group, as a unit, shall require one (1) front, one (1) rear, and two (2) side yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate district, except when the dwelling unit is located on a corner lot. Each individual building shall meet all yard requirements for the appropriate district as though it were on an individual lot. 
c.  Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot at the intersection of two (2) (existing or proposed) streets or at the intersection of an alley and a street within any district, nothing shall be installed, erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such manner as to impede vision materially between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets or of the intersecting alley and street in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines, or alley and street lines sixty (60) feet from the point of intersection. 

VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS 
(f)  Swimming pool requirements. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "swimming pool" and "pool" shall include the following defined classes unless specifically exempted in a particular section hereunder: 
(1)  Recessed outdoor swimming pool. "Recessed outdoor swimming pool" means any artificial water pool, permanent in nature, of steel, masonry, concrete, aluminum, or plastic construction, located out of doors, which has a water surface area of three hundred (300) square feet or more, a depth at any point of more than two (2) feet, or both. 
(2)  Above ground semipermanent outdoor swimming pool. "Above ground semipermanent outdoor swimming pool" means any artificial water pool, semipermanent in nature, of redwood or other wood, metal, or plastic construction, which has a water surface of three hundred (300) square feet or more, a depth at any point of more than one and one-half (11/2) feet, or both. 
(3)  Portable plastic or vinyl outdoor swimming pool. "Portable plastic or vinyl outdoor swimming pool" means any artificial water pool, portable in nature, of plastic or vinyl construction, located out of doors, which has a water surface area of three hundred (300) square feet or less and a depth at any point of one and one-half (11/2) feet or less. 
(4)  Permit required; fee. No person shall construct or maintain an outdoor swimming pool without first making application to the zoning officer and obtaining a permit. 
(5)  Plot plan. There shall be filed with the zoning officer a plot plan of the property showing the location of the swimming pool thereon and a detailed plan and specification for such swimming pool which contains full information as to the type, height, and location of the fence surrounding such swimming pool and the number of gates therein. Before any permit is issued, such plans and specifications shall be approved by the zoning officer. 
(6)  Location. Outdoor swimming pools may be erected on a side or rear yard. Every pool hereafter built shall be located upon the lot or parcel to allow a safe distance between the pool and the property lines so that any person or persons may be readily observed when approaching or in the vicinity of the pool. The swimming pool, its walks, decks, or paved areas, or any accessory structure adjacent thereto, whichever is closer, shall be situated ten (10) or more feet from any property line. 
(7)  Fencing. Every pool hereafter constructed, with the exception of semipermanent above-ground pools which have a built-in fence that is acceptable to the zoning officer, shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet but not more than six (6) feet in height. A fence which encloses the yard may be considered as complying with these requirements. Fence gates shall be of the self-closing, self-latching type with the latch on the inside of the gate, not readily available for children to open. All gates must be locked when the residents are away from the house or when the pool is not in use. 
(8)  Construction requirements. The following regulations shall apply to the construction of swimming pools: 
a.  Swimming pool construction shall conform to the state building code and the state fire code. 
b.  Nonportable fiberglass and plastic pools may be permitted, provided that they meet accepted safety and construction standards. 
c.  Any accessory building which houses pumping and filtering equipment shall conform to the provisions of the zoning code and the building code. 
d.  Illuminating lights may be erected with an intensity of no more than two (2) foot-candles, installed and shielded so as to eliminate direct rays and minimize reflected rays upon adjoining premises. 
e.  All electrical wiring shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical Code. Installation shall be underground wiring in an approved conduit. 
f.  All plumbing necessary for the connection of the intake or the outlet of a swimming pool to the city water system or sewer system shall conform to the requirements of the state building code. 
g.  There shall be no direct cross-connection with the municipal or home water supply and the water supply for the pool. 
h.  The construction of the pool shall be made in such a manner that all scum, splash, and deck water shall not return to the pool except through the filter system. 
i.  The pool shall be kept free at all times of floating material, sediment, and debris, either by an automatic surface skimmer, a scum gutter, or some other means approved by the zoning inspector. 
j.  Every private swimming pool shall be equipped with an approved filtration system. 
k.  A provision shall be made for positive germicidal or bacterial control by the use of chlorine, bromine, or other such disinfecting agents. 
l.  All swimming pool installations must be completed and filled with water, and the filter system must be in operation, before final inspection. 
m.  The pool sides and bottom shall be constructed of smooth, nonabsorbent materials, free from cracks, and be so constructed as to be properly drained through one (1) or more metal grate openings. 
(9)  Operation. The following regulations shall apply to the operation of swimming pools: 
a.  No person shall maintain a swimming pool on his or her premises without providing adequate supervision at all times when the pool is in use. 
b.  No swimming pool shall be drained during periods of excessive rainfall so as to overload the city sewer system. 
(10)  Inspection. The zoning officer shall have the right, at any reasonable hour, to inspect any swimming pool for the purpose of determining that all provisions of this chapter are fulfilled and complied with. 
(11)  Violations as nuisances; abatement. Any outdoor swimming pool installed, operated, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance, and the city may, in addition to the penalty provided in section 15-31, maintain any proper action for the abatement of such nuisance. 
(g)  Pond requirements. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "pond" shall include the following defined classes unless specifically exempted in a particular section hereunder: 
(1)  Landscape or decorative pond. A pond which is primarily decorative, which has a water surface area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less and a depth at any point of one and one-half (11/2) feet or less. 
(2)  Pond. Ponds may be located on a parcel of at least one (1) acre. All excavated material must be removed unless used for landscaping within sixty (60) days of the initial excavation and all excavation shall be carried out in conformance with West Virginia Department of Natural Resources regulations. All ponds shall conform with applicable U.S. Soil Conservation Service specifications. 
(3)  Permit required; fee. No person shall construct or maintain a pond without first making application to the zoning officer and obtaining a permit. Landscape or decorative ponds do not require a permit. 
(4)  Plot plan. There shall be filed with the zoning officer a plot plan of the property showing the location of the pond thereon and a detailed plan and specification for such pond which contains full information as to the type, height, and location of the fence surrounding such pond the number of gates therein. Before any permit is issued, such plans and specifications shall be approved by the zoning officer. All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by the proper fee. 
(5)  Location. Ponds may not be located within any required front yard or twenty (20) feet from any lot line. The twenty-foot setback is measured from the high water mark of the pond. If there are landscape mounds in excess of four (4) feet in height, the toe of the slope must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line. 
(h)  Vacant lots. The owner(s) of lots which are vacant as a result of building demolition shall plant grass seed and grade the surface to prevent soil erosion and standing water. The owner(s) shall comply with these requirements within thirty (30) days after building demolition has been completed. The zoning officer may grant an extension if inclement weather prohibits seeding and grading. 
(i)  Distance between buildings on the same lot. No principal building shall be closer to any other principal building than the average of the heights of such buildings. 
(j)  Kennels. Kennels, catteries or structures and enclosures of a similar nature used for domestic pets shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Four (4) or more pet dogs or a kennel, four (4) or more pet cats or a cattery, are prohibited from the exterior yard areas or accessory buildings in any residential district, or O-R office-residential transitional district, but subject to the provisions of this section may qualify as a conditional use in a B-1, B-2, B-3 or M zoning district. 
(2)  Kennels, catteries or structures and enclosures of a similar nature used for domestic pets which are fenced and screened, enclosed or soundproof may not be located within fifty (50) feet of a residential district, O-R office-residential zoning district, or overlay district. 
(3)  Kennels, catteries or structures and enclosures of a similar nature used for domestic pets which are fenced and screened, enclosed or soundproof may not be located in the required front yard, side or rear yard as specified in the zoning district of use. 
(4)  Every owner or operator of a kennel or cattery subject to W. Va. Code, §§ 19-20-3 and 19-20-9 shall display an unexpired and valid certificate of registration of such kennel or cattery. The owner of a kennel or cattery shall abide by the provisions of the City of Beckley Code regarding licensing, barking dogs, crying cats, cleanliness, sanitation, maintenance of the property and enclosure free of offal odor. Upon conviction of such violation, the conditional use permit shall be rescinded. 
(5)  All kennels, catteries and structures and enclosures of a similar nature used for domestic pets shall be fenced and screened. Such fence shall be a solid fence of at least six (6) feet in height, maintained in sound condition, painted or otherwise protected from decay or signs of wear and presenting a neat and inconspicuous appearance. In addition, the use of tree and shrub or other screening shall be required to enhance the outward appearance outside of the enclosed area. 
(6)  Domestic pets shall not include farm animals such as, but not limited to, horses, mules, cattle, swine, sheep, goats; fowl, such as, but not limited to, chickens, roosters, ducks, geese, turkeys, swans; reptiles or exotic animals. Farm animals, fowl, reptiles and exotic animals are prohibited in the exterior yard areas or accessory buildings in a residential zone and O-R office-residential transitional zone. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to own, possess or keep any cat or dog in the corporate limits that has not been spayed or neutered, except: 
a.  The dog or cat is less than six (6) months old; or 
b.  The owner has obtained an unaltered animal permit at a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the life of each animal; or 
c.  A West Virginia licensed veterinarian states in writing the dog or cat is medically unable to undergo the spay or neuter procedure; or 
d.  The dog or cat is kept in the corporate limits fewer than thirty (30) days in any one (1) year; or 
e.  The dog or cat otherwise qualifies for an unaltered animal permit or a breeding permit or obtains a breeding permit. 
(8)  To qualify for an unaltered animal permit or breeding permit, the owner must: 
a.  Have the dog or cat examined not less than annually by a West Virginia licensed veterinarian; 
b.  Have the dog or cat vaccinated in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 19-20A-2; 
c.  Have the dog or cat licensed annually in accordance with City of Beckley Code, Chapter 3, section 3-200; 
d.  Keep the dog or cat properly housed, fed and maintained. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to cause or allow any dog or cat owned or harbored in the city to breed without first obtaining a breeding permit, written authorization issued by the city, giving its lawful owner permission to breed the dog or cat. 
a.  Each breeding permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year and may be renewed prior to its expiration date of June 30th at an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per dog and/or cat. 
b.  No female dog or cat shall be permitted the breeding of more than one (1) litter in any one (1) permit year, except if that litter must be euthanized for medical reasons, in that event one (1) additional litter shall be authorized in that permit year. 
(10)  Conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this City of Beckley Code section shall be grounds to confiscate the animal, rescind all licenses and permits, and impound and/or dispose of the animals, as provided for in Chapter 3, Article IV, City of Beckley Code. 
(11)  Every dog and cat, six (6) months or older, shall possess a valid City of Beckley license as provided for in the City of Beckley Code, Chapter 3, Article II. 
(k)  Child care and nursery school land uses. 
(1)  Child day care centers and facilities and nursery schools must have a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area for each child to be cared for. 
(2)  Child day care centers and facilities and nursery schools must have the play area fenced and screened from all adjoining lots in any R district as a noise buffer and to enhance the outward appearance of the enclosed area. Such fence shall be a solid fence at least six (6) feet in height, maintained in sound condition, painted and presenting a neat and inconspicuous appearance. The screening shall consist of walls, fences, natural vegetation, or an acceptable combination of these elements. Vegetation shall have a minimum opaqueness of seventy-five (75) per cent at all times within two (2) years of planting. The use of evergreen vegetation is encouraged. Vegetation shall be a variety and size that will attain six (6) feet in height within two (2) years of planting. 
(l)  Salvage yard uses. 
(1)  All outdoor storage areas in a salvage yard land use shall be screened or fenced with a solid fence at least eight (8) feet in height. Such fence shall be maintained in sound condition, painted and presenting a neat and inconspicuous appearance. In addition, the use of trees and shrubs shall be encouraged to enhance the outward appearance of the enclosed area. Storage between the street and such fence is strictly prohibited. 
(2)  All outside salvage or stored material shall be located no closer than seventy-five (75) feet to the side and rear property lines when located adjacent to a nonresidential district and a two hundred-foot transition area measured from the fence to any residential district boundary shall be maintained. Such strip shall be planted with trees, grass, and shrubs. 
(3)  Salvage yards shall be established and maintained according to all applicable state statutes. The stricter regulations, either state or local, shall prevail. 
(4)  A minimum of two (2) acres shall be provided. 
(5)  A front yard one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way line shall be maintained. Such front yard shall be planted with trees, grass, and shrubs. 
(6)  No material shall be stocked above the fence height, except the movable equipment used in the operation. 
(7)  No open burning shall be permitted and all industrial processes involving the use of equipment for cutting, compressing or packing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(8)  A development plan shall be submitted at the time of application showing building location, accessory building(s), or structure(s) locations, fence location, fence type and specifications, planting plan, parking area, street access point or points, and drawn to scale. 
(9)  A salvage yard operation shall be permitted to operate in an approved location provided that the operation of such use does not adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(10)  A salvage yard shall be a conditional use in a M-Manufacturing Zone, provided it is located no closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any residential B-1, B-2, or B-3 zoning district. 
(m)  Lighting requirements. 
(1)  All exterior light used to light vehicular use areas, pedestrian pathways or provide building security shall be by cutoff-type luminaires, and shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises or streets. 
(2)  All other exterior lighting, including but not limited to doorways, architectural, accent, landscape, signage, decorative, security, floodlighting or area lighting shall be cutoff-type luminaires, where no portion of the lamp, reflector, lens or refracting system may extend beyond the housing or shield so as to create or allow glare to be visible from offsite. 
(3)  No open lights, twenty-five (25) watts or more, such as strings of light bulbs shall be permitted. This shall not apply to temporary, seasonal, holiday lighting, not more than sixty (60) days prior or ten (10) days after a holiday. 
(n)  Limited video lottery establishments. Limited video lottery establishments (LVL) are any establishments within the City of Beckley in which limited video lottery machines are operated. 
(1)  Prior to limited video lottery machines being operated in an establishment within the City of Beckley, an application shall be filed with the City of Beckley Tax and License Department and the applicant shall apply for and receive a conditional use permit from the City of Beckley Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(2)  Limited video lottery establishments shall be permitted in City of Beckley B-2 and B-3 zoning districts by a conditional use permit approved by the City of Beckley Board of Zoning Appeals, which permit shall be approved subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The limited video lottery establishment shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential zone, church or place of worship, school, park, community or recreation center or within one thousand (1,000) feet of another limited video lottery establishment. 
b.  The three hundred (300) feet from a school, park, community or recreational facility or residential zone shall be measured entrance to entrance from the video lottery establishment to the entrance of a school, park, community or recreational facility or property line of a residential zone. 
c.  The three hundred (300) feet from a church or place of worship shall be measured entrance to entrance from the video lottery establishment to the church or place of worship or related activities. 
d.  The one thousand (1,000) feet from another video lottery establishment shall be measured entrance to entrance from a video lottery establishment to another video lottery establishment. 
    The provisions hereof shall not be deemed applicable to any limited video lottery establishment that was in operation as of August 18, 2004. 
(o)  Private clubs, private wine restaurants, or taverns. 
(1)  Prior to private clubs, private wine restaurants, or taverns (establishments) being operated within the City of Beckley, an application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the City of Beckley Code Enforcement Office. 
(2)  Prior to such establishments being permitted to operate in the City of Beckley, a public hearing and approval of the conditional use by the City of Beckley Board of Zoning Appeals is required. 
(3)  Such establishment shall be located only in B-l, B-2, or B-3 zones. 
(4)  Such establishments shall be located not less than three hundred (300) feet from a church or place of worship, school, park, community or recreation facility, or a residential zone. 
(5)  The three hundred (300) feet shall be measured from the nearest point of a wall of the proposed establishment to the nearest property line of any church or place of worship, school, park, community or recreation facility, or a residential zone. 
(6)  The provisions of this subsection (o) shall not be deemed applicable to any establishment that was licensed by the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Control Administration and in operation as of October 11, 2005. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 8-12-03, § 2; Ord. of 9-28-04; Ord. of 11-9-04; Ord. of 10-11-05; Ord. of 8-8-17) 
Sec. 15-25. - Telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Findings. The Communications Act of 1954, as amended, by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (The "Act") grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over: 
(1)  The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emission from telecommunications facilities; and 
(2)  The regulation of radio signal interference among user of the RF spectrum. 
The city's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities of the city will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the Act. 
(b)  Purposes. The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city. 
Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city; 
(2)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of towers and telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  To minimize adverse visual impact of towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(5)  To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new tower structures to support antennas and telecommunications facilities; 
(6)  To avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; and 
(7)  To ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna support structure: Any building or structure other than a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities. 
    Applicant: Any person that applies for a tower development permit. 
    Application: The process by which a person or owner submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower or telecommunications facility upon a parcel of land within the city. Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations in whatever form or forum made by an applicant to the city concerning such a request. 
    Engineer: Any professional engineer licensed by the State of West Virginia, and/or any broadcast/telecast, RF, or electronics engineer duly qualified or certified, but not registered by the State of West Virginia. 
    Monopole: Any tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guyed wires and anchors. 
    Owner: Any person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding ten (10) years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the city who desires to develop or construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. 
    Person: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit. 
    Stealth: Any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened, roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower such as light poles, power poles, and trees. The term "stealth" does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole tower designs. 
    Telecommunication facility: Any system or facility including cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to located or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. This shall include, but not be limited to, any device, system or facility that transmits and/or received electromagnetic signals for the purpose of transmitting analog or digital voice or data communications, microwave dishes, direction antennas such as panels, omni-directional antennas such as whip antennas, horns, and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, equipment buildings, shelters, or cabinets, or other accessory development associated with the transmission or reception of communications. This shall also include any device intended for receiving or transmitting television, radio, digital, microwave, cellular, personal communication service (PCS), paging, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, or similar forms of wireless electronic communication. However, telecommunications facilities shall not include: 
(1)  Any satellite earth station antenna two (2) meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or 
(2)  Any satellite earth station antenna one (1) meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category. 
    Tower: Any pole, spire, structure, self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade, including lines, cables, wires, braces, and mast, which supports telecommunications facilities. A tower may include, but not be limited to, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and personal communication service (PCS) towers. The term "tower", as applied in this section, shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment as licensed by the FCC. 
(d)  Development of towers; permitted uses, restrictions, and application requirements for towers and telecommunications facilities. 
(1)  A tower shall be a permitted use of land in zoning district M manufacturing. No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land within a zoning district designated M manufacturing unless a permit shall have been issued by the city. Applications shall be made to the code enforcement officer in the manner provided in this chapter. 
a.  Towers in the M manufacturing district are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of that district. Towers shall be permitted to a height of one hundred (100) feet. Towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet are classified as a conditional use and must be approved by the board of zoning appeals as a conditional use in accordance with section 15-25(r), criteria for conditional use approval. 
b.  Towers are not a permitted use in any other zoning district within the city. 
(2)  A tower may be a conditional use of land in the zoning district b-2 mall-general commercial business district if approved by common council as a conditional use in accordance with section 15-25(r), criteria for conditional use approval. No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land within a B-2 mall-general commercial business district unless a permit shall have been issued by the city. Applications shall be made to the code enforcement officer in the manner provided in this chapter. 
a.  Towers classified as a conditional use or requiring approval as conditional use may not exceed a maximum height of two hundred seventy five (275) feet in a B-2 mall-general commercial business district. 
(3)  No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the city unless the tower is capable of supporting another person's operation telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the telecommunications facilities installed by the applicant on the tower within six (6) months of the completion of the tower construction. 
(4)  An application to develop a tower or telecommunication facility shall include: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated, the written consent of the owner shall be evidenced in the application. 
b.  The legal description, map/parcel number, and address of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. 
c.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of either towers or usable antenna support structures within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including city-owned property. 
d.  A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in the city. Applicant must identify its utilization of the most recent technological design including microcell design as part of the design plan. The applicant must demonstrate the need for towers and why design alternatives, such as the use of microcell design, cannot be utilized to accomplish the provision of the applicant's telecommunications services. 
e.  An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or co-locate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on city-owned towers or usable antenna support structures located within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
f.  An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or co-locate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
g.  Written technical evidence from a duly qualified broadcast/telecast, RF, or electronics engineer that the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or co-located on another person's tower or usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
h.  A written statement from a duly qualified broadcast/telecast, RF, or electronics engineer that the construction and placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. 
i.  Written, technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth in section 15-25(f), structural requirements of this chapter. 
j.  Written, technical evidence from a West Virginia registered professional engineer certifying compliance with the state fire code and building code of the City of Beckley that the proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other dangers to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals. 
k.  In order to assist city staff in evaluating visual impact, the applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. 
l.  Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and any other proposed structures, showing height above ground level. A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of the facility on the site; location of existing structures, trees, and other significant site features; the type and location of plants proposed to screen the facility; the method of fencing, the color of the structure, and the proposed lighting method. 
m.  A narrative discussing the extent to which the proposed telecommunication facility and tower would be visible from, or within, a designated scenic resource; the tree line elevation of vegetation within one hundred (100) feet of the facility; and the distance to the proposed facility from the designated scenic resources noted viewpoints. A written description of how the proposed facility fits into the applicant's telecommunications network. This submission requirement does not require disclosure of confidential business information. 
n.  Identification of districts, sites, building, structures, or objects, significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture that are listed, or eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C. 470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and 800). 
o.  A signed statement stating that the owner of the wireless telecommunications tower and his or her successors and assigns agree to: 
1.  Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential co-location applicant, in exchange for a reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of preparing a response; 
2.  Negotiate, in good faith, for shared use of the wireless telecommunications tower by third parties; 
3.  Allowed shared use of the wireless telecommunications tower if an applicant agrees, in writing, to pay reasonable charges for co-location; and 
4.  Require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on community rates and generally accepted accounting principles. This charge may include, but is not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning project administration, land costs, site design, construction, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate over the useful life span of the tower. 
p.  A form or surety approved by the city to pay for the costs of removing the tower if it is abandoned in accordance with section 15-25(s). 
q.  The Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of RF emissions and does not allow the city to condition or deny on the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications facilities (whether mounted on towers or antenna support structures) which meet FCC standards. In order to provide information to its citizens, the city shall make available, upon request, copies of ongoing FCC information and RF emission standards for telecommunications facilities transmitting from towers or antenna support structures. Applicants shall be required to submit information on the proposed power density of the proposed telecommunications facilities and demonstrate how this meets FCC standards. 
r.  A copy of the applicant's FCC license, or, if the applicant is not an FCC license holder, a copy of at least one (1) letter of commitment from an FCC license holder to locate at least one (1) telecommunication facility on the applicant's tower. 
s.  A letter from the owner of the property attesting that the property used as a telecommunication facility will be maintained, and the site and structures will be in good condition and free from trash, outdoor storage, weds, and other debris. 
t.  Payment of an application fee, non-refundable, in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) payable to the City of Beckley. 
u.  Payment of eight thousand five hundred dollars ($8,500.00) to the City of Beckley to be deposited in an escrow account by the recorder-treasurer for consulting costs in evaluating the application. Such consultants as the city may contract with, or employ, to evaluate an application will submit itemized invoices for specified services rendered and time spent, which will be paid from the escrow amount upon approval of the chief, code enforcement department, and the recorder-treasurer. Upon issuance of a permit, all monies remaining in the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant. In the event approved costs leave the escrow account with a balance of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less, the applicant shall be so notified and required to remit to that escrow account, upon written request of the recorder-treasurer within seven (7) days, not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) or more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) to complete the review process. 
(5)  Upon receipt of an application, the code enforcement department shall provide the applicant with a dated receipt. Within ninety (90) working days of the receipt, the code enforcement department shall review the application and determine if the application meets the submission requirements. If complete, the department will notify the applicant. The department may deny an application on the basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required in this subsection. Complete applications shall be reviewed by the city in a prompt manner and all decisions shall be supported, in writing, setting forth the reasons for approval or denial. 
(e)  Setbacks. 
(1)  The setback requirements of the applicable zoning districts shall not apply to towers or telecommunications facilities. Instead, all self-supporting towers and telecommunications facilities shall be set back from all lot lines a distance equal to fifty (50) per cent of the height of the towers and telecommunications facilities. All guyed towers and telecommunications facilities shall be set back from all lot lines a distance equal to eighty (80) per cent of the height of the tower and telecommunications facilities. 
(2)  Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the towers to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
(3)  Setback requirements may be modified as provided in section 15-25(r), criteria for conditional use approval, when placement of a tower in a location which will reduce the visual impact can be accomplished and will be classified as a conditional use. For example, adjacent to trees may visually hide the tower. 
(4)  No wires, cables, braces, or any part of any tower or telecommunications facility may, in anyway, interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or be placed on or be located above any public right-of-way. 
(f)  Structural requirements. All towers must be designed and certified by a West Virginia registered professional engineer to be structurally sound and, at minimum, in conformance with the building code and any other standards outlined in this chapter. All towers in operation shall be fixed to land. 
(g)  Separation requirements. For the purpose of this section, the separation distances between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. The minimum tower separation distances from other towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city jurisdictional boundaries. 
(1)  Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing towers or towers which have a permit but are not yet constructed at the time a permit is granted pursuant to this Code: 
a.  Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet; 
b.  Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) feet; 
c.  Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all monopole towers by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet. 
(h)  Method of determining tower height. Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this section shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad, and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto which extend more than twenty (20) feet over the top of the tower structure itself. Tower height shall be measured from grade. 
(i)  Illumination. Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Upon commencement of construction of a tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance which is three hundred (300) per cent of the height of the tower from the tower and where required by federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. 
(j)  Exterior finish. Towers and/or telecommunications facilities allowed as a conditional use shall have an exterior finished which is of natural or subdued color to maximize compatibility with adjacent land uses as approved by common council, subject however to required FAA paintings or markings. 
(k)  Landscaping, screening, fencing, and buffer requirements. 
(1)  All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the tower, antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. 
(2)  All telecommunications facilities, towers, and antenna support structures shall be screened and landscaped. Such screening and landscaping shall include one row of evergreen shrubs or trees capable of forming a continuous hedge of at least six (6) feet in height within two (2) years of planting. A maintenance plan for the landscape materials shall also be submitted at the time of the application. Screening and landscaping requirements may be modified as provided in section 15-25(r), criteria for conditional use approval, when the substitution of other architectural screening plans such as a decorative fence or masonry wall in lieu of planted materials would reduce visual impact and will be classified as a conditional use. 
(3)  All sites shall be reasonable protected against unauthorized climbing. The bottom of the tower, measured from ground level to twelve (12) feet above ground level, shall be designed in a manner to discourage unauthorized climbing. Sites shall have at least an eight-foot fence topped by a one-foot high, three-strand, barbed wire projection angled out surrounding the tower and telecommunications facilities. Landscaping must be installed on the outside of any fencing. 
(4)  Advertising or identification of any kind on towers, antenna support structures, and telecommunications facilities shall be prohibited, except for applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal, state, or local regulations. 
(5)  There shall be a buffer between towers and all residentially-zoned lands. Towers shall be separated from all residentially-zoned lands by a minimum of two hundred (200) feet or two hundred (200) per cent of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater. Tower separation distances from residentially-zoned lands shall be measured from the base of a tower to the closest point of residentially-zoned property. The minimum tower separation distances from residentially-zoned land and from other towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city jurisdictional boundaries. 
(l)  Access. A parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at least one (1) paved vehicular parking space on site. 
(m)  Stealth design. All towers which must be approved as a conditional use shall be of stealth design. 
(n)  Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures. Any telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be approved as a permitted use, by administrative review of the code enforcement department, provided the application is in accordance with the provisions stated in section 15-25(1)b.1., 2., 3., and 4., criteria for conditional use approval, and the telecommunications facilities will be located on any antenna support structure that does not increase the height or base of the antenna support structure and any additional external equipment must be completely screened from view and shall be permitted in any zoning district. Any other telecommunications facilities not attached to a tower shall require the owner of such structure, or the applicant, in addition to documenting compliance with requirements of section 15-25(r), criteria for conditional use approval, to establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a permit: 
(1)  That the height from grade of the telecommunications facilities shall not exceed the height from grade of the antenna support structure by more than twenty (20) feet, and shall not be permitted in any residential zone. 
(2)  That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, shall not be permitted in any residential zone and shall be set back one (1) foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one (1) foot in height above the primary roof of the telecommunications facilities. This setback shall not apply to telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved as provided in section 15-25(r)(1)b, criteria for conditional use approval, and will be classified as a conditional use. Setback requirements shall not apply to stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures below the primary roof, but which do not protrude more than eighteen (18) inches from the side of such an antenna support structure. 
(o)  Modification of towers. 
(1)  A tower existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, which was in compliance with the city's zoning regulations immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter, may continue in existence as a nonconforming structure. Such nonconforming structures may be modified or demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the additional requirements of this section, except for sections 15-25(g), separation requirements, 15-25(k), landscaping, screening, fencing, and buffer requirements, 15-25(p), certification and inspections, and 15-25(q), maintenance, provided: 
a.  The tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole purpose of accommodating, within six (6) months of the completion of the modification or rebuild, additional telecommunications facilities equal in weight, size, and surface area to the discrete operating telecommunications facilities of any person currently installed on the tower; and, 
b.  An application for a permit is made to the code enforcement department which shall have the authority to issue a permit without further approval. The grant of a permit pursuant to this section allowing the modification or demolition and rebuild of an existing nonconforming tower shall not be considered a determination that the modified or demolished and rebuilt tower is conforming; and, 
c.  The height of the modified or rebuilt tower and telecommunications facilities attached thereto do not exceed the maximum height allowed under the city zoning regulations or the height of the nonconforming structure, tower, or telecommunications facilities before the modification or rebuild, which is greater. 
(2)  Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming structure or use may not be enlarged, increased in size, or discontinued in use for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days. This chapter shall not be interpreted to legalize any structure or use existing at the time this chapter is adopted which structure or use is in violation of the Code prior to enactment of this chapter. 
(p)  Certifications and inspections. 
(1)  All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the building code and all other construction standards set forth by the city's code and federal and state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 15-25(d) of this chapter and every five (5) years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter and then every five (5) years thereafter. For new lattice of guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 15-25(d) of this chapter and every two (2) years thereafter. For existing lattice or guyed towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter and then every two (2) years thereafter. The tower owner may be required by the city to submit more frequent certification should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized. 
(2)  The city or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is located, between the inspection and certifications required above, to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the building code and all other construction standards provided by the city code and federal and state law. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to conduct such inspection at any time upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. All expenses related to such inspections by the city shall be borne by the tower owner. 
(q)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Tower owners shall, at all times, employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
(2)  Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the city/state building code and all FCC, state, and local regulations and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. 
(3)  All towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support structures shall, at all times, be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. 
(4)  All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications facilities, or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel. 
(5)  All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC. 
(6)  In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. 
(r)  Criteria for conditional use approval. 
(1)  Towers or telecommunications facilities classified as a conditional use or requiring approval as a conditional use according to this chapter must be approved as a conditional use in accordance with the following: 
a.  In addition to the requirements for a tower application, the application shall include the following: 
1.  A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that might occur. 
2.  A description of offsite or onsite factors which mitigate any adverse impact which might occur. 
3.  A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the applicant upon which the request for conditional use is based. The technical study shall be certified by an engineer and shall document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and properties. 
4.  For a modification of the setback requirement, the application shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed tower could be located, attempts by the applicant for co-location, and the result of such attempts. 
5.  The applicant seeking a conditional use permit shall pay the cost of review by the city's engineer or engineer under contract to the city to determine whether the application and technical studies support the basis for the conditional use requested. 
b.  The proposed conditional uses will be reviewed based on the following criteria: 
1.  That the tower of telecommunications facility, as proposed, will be compatible with, and not adversely impact, the character and integrity of surrounding properties. 
2.  Offsite or onsite conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impact, if any, created by the conditional use proposal. 
3.  That proposed towers, antenna support structures, and telecommunications facilities utilize building materials, colors, and textures that effectively blend the tower facilities into the surrounding setting and environment to the greatest extent possible. Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant materials. Outside of the manufacturing districts, unpainted, galvanized metal, or similar towers shall be prohibited, unless a self-weathering tower is determined to be more compatible with the surrounding area. 
4.  In addition, conditions may be imposed on the site where the tower or telecommunications facility is to be located if such conditions are reasonably necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower and mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of the conditional use. 
(2)  In addition to the requirements of this section, in the following cases, the applicant must be demonstrate, with written evidence, the following: 
a.  In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirements of section 15-25(e), that the setback requirements cannot be met on the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be located and the alternative for the person is to located the tower at another site which is closer in proximity of a residentially-zoned land. 
b.  In the case of a request for modification to the separation requirements from other towers of section 15-25(g), separation requirements, that the proposed site is zoned manufacturing and the proposed site is at least double the minimum standard for separation from residentially-zoned lands as provided for in section 15-25(g). 
c.  In the case of a request for modification of the buffer requirements from residentially-zoned land of section 15-25(k), that the person provides written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower and telecommunications facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system, and that the person is willing to create approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the tower from being visible to residentially-zoned property. 
d.  In the case of a request for modification of the height limits for towers and telecommunications facilities, the modification is necessary to: 
1.  Facilitate co-location of telecommunications facilities in order to avoid construction of a new tower, or 
2.  To meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system, which requirements must be documented with written, technical evidence from an engineer that demonstrates that the height of the proposed tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and no tower that is taller than such maintained height shall be approved. There must be evidence sufficient to support findings that the additional height is needed or that the surrounding topography, structures, or other facts make the height limitation impractical in order to justify a conditional use for the modification of the height limits for towers and telecommunications facilities. Further, there must be evidence sufficient to support findings that the increase in the height limitation does not adversely impact surrounding uses. An applicant or owner may not request a conditional use to modify the height limits for towers or telecommunications facilities located in an B-2 mall-general commercial business district if the proposed tower or telecommunications facility would exceed a maximum height of two hundred seventy five (275) feet. 
(3)  Towers shall be of a monopole design. The substitution of alternative tower types in cases where structural, radio frequency, and design considerations, locations, or the number of co-locators suggests a tower other than a monopole may be considered. 
(4)  In prominent locations, highly visible from adjacent residential areas or public spaces, and as a condition of approval, antenna support structures may be required to be located underground. 
(5)  The board of zoning appeals shall make findings and recommendations addressing the criteria set forth in this section and approve, disapprove or amend the application. Its decision may be appealed to Raleigh County circuit court within thirty (30) days. 
(s)  Abandonment. 
(1)  If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days, the city shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant, that the site will be subject to a determination by the city that such site has been abandoned. The owner shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period. If the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the city shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment, the owner shall, within seventy-five (75) days, dismantle and remove the tower. 
(2)  To secure the obligation set forth in this section, the applicant (and/or owner) shall post a bond or other instrument in an amount equal to the anticipated cost of removal of the tower at the time an application is made. The anticipated cost of removal shall be based upon a certification from a professional engineer. The bond shall be in such form as to be acceptable to the recorder-treasurer. 
(t)  Severability. That if any clause, section, or other part of this section shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby but shall remain in full force and effect. 
(u)  Towers of private reception of TV and radio signals; emergency telecommunications facilities. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, towers and antennas designed for private reception of television and radio signals, used for amateur or non-commercial purposes, shall be permitted in all district, provided such freestanding antennas and towers do not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Rooftop mounted antennas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. This includes, but is not limited to, amateur (ham) radio stations licensed by the FCC, and parabolic antennas less than seven (7) feet in diameter that are an accessory use of the property for private or recreational reception of television or radio signals. Only one (1) freestanding tower or antenna shall be allowed per residential lot. No more than one (1) roof-mounted antenna or satellite receiver or dish will be allowed per residential lot. 
(2)  Emergency telecommunications facilities and temporary wireless communication facilities for emergency communications by public officials are exempt from the provision of this chapter. 
(v)  Appeal From code enforcement department decision. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the code enforcement department may appeal the decision to the board of zoning appeals, as provided by West Virginia Code, section 8-24-56. Written notice of an appeal must be filed with the board of zoning appeals within thirty (30) days of the decision. The notice of appeal shall clearly state the reasons for the appeal. 
(w)  Administration. If the code enforcement department finds that any provision of this chapter has been violated, the code enforcement department shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The code enforcement department shall order correction of the violation and may take any other legal action to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(x)  Conflicts (repeal of ordinances). That all ordinances, or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-26. - Nonconforming uses. 
    The lawful use of land or buildings existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter may continue, although such use does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land or building is located, subject to the following conditions and specifications: 
(1)  Any nonconforming use of land or building which has ceased by discontinuance or abandonment for a period of six (6) months shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Any conforming building which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or by a public enemy to the extent of sixty (60) per cent or more of its assessed valuation, shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this chapter. Where more than forty (40) per cent of the assessed value of the building remains after such damage, such structure may be restored to the same nonconforming use as existed before such damage. 
(3)  No nonconforming use of a building may be moved to any part or parcel of land upon which same was conducted at the time of the adoption of such ordinance. 
(4)  No nonconforming building shall be enlarged or structurally altered except to make it a conforming building. A nonconforming use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of such ordinance may be extended throughout the building provided no structural alterations, except those required by ordinance or law are made therein, and provided approval is granted by the council. 
(5)  The use of a nonconforming building may be changed only to a use of like or similar character, or to a use conforming to the district in which the property is located. 
(6)  The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts hereafter changed by amendment to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-27. - Interpretation. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or repeal any ordinance, rules, regulations previously adopted, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter which shall be adopted pursuant to law relating to the use of building or premises, nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by such other ordinances or such easements, covenants, or other agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-28. - Validity. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be illegal, unconstitutional, or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portion of this chapter. The council of the city hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section and subsection thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases, may be declared illegal, unconstitutional, or invalid. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-29. - Amendments. 
    Amendments, supplements, or changes of the regulations of this chapter shall be considered as amendments to the comprehensive plan. Any proposed ordinance for the amendment, supplement, change, or repeal of this chapter not originating from petition of the planning commission shall be referred to the planning commission for consideration and report before any final action is taken by the council. Prior to the submission to the council of a commission petition or a report on a proposed ordinance referred to it for an amendment supplement, change, or repeal of this chapter, the commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing in the manner prescribed for adoption of a comprehensive plan in section 8-5-18 of the Code of West Virginia, as amended. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-30. - Penalties, remedies, and violations. 
(a)  Violation and penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall excavate for, erect, construct, enlarge, reconstruct, add to, alter, repair, move, maintain, use, and/or occupy any building, other structure, and/or land in violation of an approved plan or directive of the zoning officer, planning commission, board of zoning appeals or common council, or of a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall for each violation on conviction thereof, pay a fine or penalty of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each and every day that such violation continues may constitute a separate offense. (Refer to City of Beckley Code Chapter 2, Part 2, section 1-8) 
(b)  Violation as nuisance. Any building or structure erected, raised, or converted on land or premises used in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any regulations in this chapter or of any regulations made under authority conferred hereby, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance, and the owner of the building, structure, land or premises shall be liable for maintaining a common nuisance. 
(c)  The planning commission of the city, the board of zoning appeals, common council, or the zoning officer may institute a suit for injunction in the circuit court of this county, to restrain any person, firm, or corporation, or a governmental unit from violating the provisions of this chapter, or of any regulation in this chapter, or any regulation made under authority hereby conferred. The planning commission of the city, the board of zoning appeals, common council, or the zoning officer may institute a suit for a mandatory injunction directing a person, firm or corporation, or a governmental unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or of any regulation in this chapter or in violation of any regulation made under authority conferred hereby. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-31. - Effective date. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter is derived took effect after its passage and approval by the council of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Secs. 15-32-15-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings; construction and related activities, § 4-1 et seq.; garage sale signs, § 13-904 et seq.; signs resembling traffic control devices prohibited, § 14-406 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-301. - Short title. 
    This article shall hereafter be known and cited as the "sign regulations." 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-302. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable regulations for the design, construction, installation, and maintenance of all exterior signs in the City of Beckley in order to: 
(a)  Balance the right of individuals to identify their businesses and convey their messages and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs. 
(b)  Further objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(d)  Reduce traffic hazards. 
(e)  Facilitate the creation of an attractive and harmonious community. 
(f)  Protect property values. 
(g)  Promote economic development. 
(h)  Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs containing noncommercial messages. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 15-303. - Permit required. 
    Except as provided in section 15-315, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, relocate, or structurally alter, within the City of Beckley, any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this article, without first obtaining a building permit and making payment of the fee required by section 15-308. All electrical signs shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the National Electrical Code and its requisite permit fees. No permit is required for change of copy or message. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-304. - Application for building permit. 
    Application for a building permit shall be made upon a form provided by the zoning officer and shall contain and have attached the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(b)  Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected. 
(c)  Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures. 
(d)  A blueprint or ink drawing to approximate scale of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the buildings or in the ground. 
(e)  Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed to meet the wind pressure and dead load requirements of this and all other laws and ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, the state building code. 
(f)  Name of the person erecting this structure. 
(g)  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which, or on which, the structure is to be erected. 
(h)  Any required electrical permit. 
(i)  Insurance policy or bond as required by section 15-310. 
(j)  Such other information as the zoning officer shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-305. - Electrical signs; approved by plans examiner. 
    The application for a permit fee for erection of a sign or other advertising structure in which electrical wiring and connectors are to be used shall be submitted to the city plans examiner prior to submission to the zoning officer. The city plans examiner shall examine the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connectors to determine if they comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code and shall approved the application for further consideration by the code enforcement department and the issuance of a building permit pursuant to section 4-200 et seq. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-306. - Permit issuance. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a building permit, the zoning officer or his designee shall: 
(a)  Examine the plans and specifications and the premises upon which the proposed structure shall be erected. 
(b)  Issue a permit if the proposed structure complies with the requirements of this article and all other laws and ordinances of the City of Beckley. If the work authorized under a building permit is not completed within six (6) months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-307. - Annual permit fee. 
    For every permit issued pursuant to section 15-306, the permittee shall pay to the recorder-treasurer an annual permit fee of one dollar ($1.00) per sign face for each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-308. - Variances. 
    Within thirty (30) days after denial of a sign permit by the zoning officer, a request for variance may be filed with the board of zoning appeals. The board of zoning appeals may grant a variance if it finds that the unusual shape of topography of the property or other unique or extraordinary circumstance of the property in question prevents signage allowable under the provisions of this article from adequately identifying the business or activity located on such property. The board of zoning appeals may only grant a variance to: 
(a)  Allow a setback less than required by this article; or 
(b)  Allow the area or height of a sign to be increased by up to twenty-five (25) per cent of the maximum allowable height or area; or 
(c)  Increase the height of ground signs within six hundred sixty (660) feet of an interstate highway interchange by more than twenty-five (25) per cent. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing before determining if the variance should be granted. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-309. - Bond requirements. 
    Every applicant for a sign permit shall, before the permit is granted, file with the zoning officer a continuing bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by the applicant and a surety company to be approved by the city attorney and conditioned for the faithful observance of all laws and ordinances relating to signs and other advertising structures, and which shall indemnify and save harmless the City of Beckley from any and all damages, judgments, costs, or expenses which the city may incur or suffer by reason of the granting of the permit. Any person lawfully maintaining a sign or other advertising structure regulated by this article at the time of the enactment of this article shall within thirty (30) days after enactment, comply with all the provisions set forth in this section. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of West Virginia which conforms to the provisions of this section may be permitted in lieu of a bond. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-310. - Revocation of permit. 
    The zoning officer may revoke any permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of this article or a material misrepresentation of fact on the permit application. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-311. - Exemptions. 
    The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this article: 
(a)  Temporary real estate signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located. Such signs shall be removed no later than seven (7) days following sale or rental of the subject property. 
(b)  Temporary political signs concerning candidates for public office and ballot issues and not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area. Such signs shall be erected no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to an election or referendum and removed no later than seven (7) days after the election or referendum. 
(c)  Temporary signs advertising the date, time, and location of a garage or yard sale and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area. Such signs shall be posted no more than three (3) days prior to and removed one (1) day after the sale. 
(d)  Signs reviewed and approved under the Historic Landmark Commission Summary of Guidelines by the City of Beckley Historic Landmark Commission. 
(e)  Public signs regulating vehicular or pedestrian traffic or designating or giving direction to streets, schools, hospitals, historical sites, or public facilities. 
(f)  Flags of any government or governmental agency or any patriotic, religious, charitable, civic, educational, or fraternal organization. 
(g)  Temporary signs in conjunction with special events such as a philanthropic campaign or church, circus, carnival, or other community activity. Such signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area, shall not be erected more than fourteen (14) days in advance of the event and shall be removed within three (3) days after the termination of the event and shall be removed within three (3) days after the termination of the event. 
(h)  Temporary displays or decorations customarily associated with any national, state, local, or religious holiday or celebration. Such signs shall be erected no more than sixty (60) days before and removed no later than fourteen (14) days after the celebration. 
(i)  Handheld signs of a noncommercial nature not set on or affixed to the ground and not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area. 
(j)  Temporary signs identifying the architect, engineer, developer, or contractor when placed upon construction sites, and not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to approval of a site plan and shall be removed no later than seven (7) days after completion of the project. 
(k)  Commercial building occupational signs identifying the name and profession of the occupant(s) and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(l)  Memorial or commemorative plaques or tablets denoting a building name and/or date of erection or a location of historic significance and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area. 
(m)  Property identification signs indicating address and/or name and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area for residential land uses or five (5) square feet in area for nonresidential land uses. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 15-312. - Permitted signs. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in violation of the permit requirements of section 15-304. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-313. - Maintenance. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall be inadequately maintained so as to show evidence of deterioration including peeling, rust, dirt, facing, discoloration, or holes. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-314. - Outdated signs. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall advertise a business or product which is no longer in existence. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-315. - Obstructions to doors, windows, or fire escapes. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a stand pipe or fire escape. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-316. - Traffic hazards. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall: 
(a)  Obstruct free and clear vision at any street intersection. 
(b)  Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device because of its position, shape, or color. 
(c)  Make use of the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DANGER", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that interferes with, misleads, or confuses traffic. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-317. - Unsafe signs. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate design, construction, repair, or maintenance. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-318. - Electrical signs. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall be illuminated with lights which glare into or upon the surrounding area or any residential premises or distract operators of vehicles or pedestrians in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-319. - Vehicular signs. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall be painted on or attached to a motor vehicle used primarily for the display of such sign. This section shall not prohibit the identification of a business or its products or services on its vehicle(s) operated and parked in a manner appropriate to the normal course of business. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-320. - Moving signs. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall have visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, except for the movable hands on street clocks, or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronics, or mechanical means, except for time-temperature-date signs. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-321. - Flashing signs. 
    No sign or other advertising structure shall have lights or illumination that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity or color, or use intermittent electrical pulsations except for signs that present public service messages, time, date, and temperature information, or advertising by use of words on a permanent message board. Message boards or LED (light emitting diode) signs that present public service messages, time, date, and temperature, and advertising shall be permitted only in B-1, B-2, B-3, and M Zoning Districts. The message boards shall not exceed the width of the building or eight (8) feet in height. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 7-27-04) 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITTED SIGNS 

Sec. 15-322. - Ground signs. 
(a)  Definition. Ground sign as regulated by this article shall mean any sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the ground and not attached to any building. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  Material required. Ground signs shall have a surface or facing of incombustible material. 
(2)  Letters, etc., to be secured. All letters, figures, characters, or representations in cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  Height and area limitations. Ground signs shall not exceed a height greater than thirty-five (35) feet above the level of the street upon which the sign faces, or above the adjoining ground level, if such ground level is above the street level. Ground signs shall not exceed in area, twenty-five (25) per cent of the frontage area of the building it services, or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever shall be smaller. A billboard sign may not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area or twenty-five (25) per cent of the area of the building it is attached to whichever shall be smaller. 
(2)  Space between sign and ground and other signs and structures. Ground signs shall have an open space not less than two (2) feet between the baseline of said sign and the ground level. This open space may be filled in with a platform or decorative lattice work which does not close off more than one-half (1/2) of any square foot of such open space. This open space shall be not be required for monument signs. No ground sign shall be nearer than two (2) feet to any other sign, building, or structure except for directory or signs approved by the zoning officer for grade placement. 
(3)  Setback line. Ground signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the property line of the property on which the sign is erected. 
(d)  Erection. 
(1)  Braces, anchorages, and supports. Ground signs shall be securely built, constructed, and erected upon posts and standards sunk at least three (3) feet below the natural surface of the ground, and shall be supported and braced by timbers, or metal rods in the rear, extending from the top to a point in the ground at least a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the height of such sign, measured along the ground, from the posts or standards upon which the sign is erected, or shall be braced and anchored in a comparable manner, designed by a registered design professional, in compliance with the state building code. 
(2)  Wood preservative. All wooden posts, anchors, and braces which rest upon or enter into the ground shall be treated with copper chromated arsencial (CCA) or another commercially available wood preservative. 
(3)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements. Ground signs shall conform to the requirements of the state building code. 
(e)  Maintenance. Ground signs and their surrounding premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, and weeds. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-323. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Definition. Wall sign, as regulated by this article, shall mean all flat signs of solid face construction which are placed against building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear, or side wall of any building or other structure. 
(b)  Construction materials required. Wall signs shall have a surface or facing of incombustible materials. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  Limitation of placement and area. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. No wall sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area. 
(2)  Projection above sidewalk and setback line. No wall sign shall be permitted to extend more than six (6) inches beyond the building line, and shall not be attached to a wall at a height of less than ten (10) feet above the sidewalk or ground. 
(d)  Erection. 
(1)  Supports and attachments. Wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall by means of metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws of not less than three-eighths (?) inch diameter embedded into the wall at least five (5) inches. However, such signs may rest in or be bolted to strong, heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six (6) feet apart, each of which shall be securely fixed to the wall as provided above. In no case shall any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails. 
(2)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All wall signs shall conform to the requirements of the state building code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-324. - Roof signs. 
(a)  Definition. Roof sign, as regulated by this article, shall mean any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly upon or above the roof of any building with the principle support attached to the roof structure. 
(b)  Construction materials required. Roof signs, including upright supports and braces, shall be constructed entirely of incombustible materials. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  Height and area limitations. No roof sign shall have a surface or facing exceeding three hundred (300) square feet, nor have its highest point extended more than twenty (20) feet above the roof level. 
(2)  Setback from roof edge. No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the face nearer than five (5) feet to the outside wall toward the sign faces. 
(3)  Space between roof and sign. The space between a roof and sign shall be based on structural and wind load considerations, in compliance with the state building code, as determined by the plans examiner during the plan review process. 
(4)  Prohibited obstructions. No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure in such manner as to prevent free passage along the roof or interfere with openings in the roof. 
(d)  Erection. 
(1)  Bracing, anchorage, and supports. Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured to the buildings by iron or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods, or braces. When erected upon buildings which are not constructed entirely of fireproof material, the bearing plates of said sign shall bear directly upon masonry walls and intermediate steel columns in the building. No sign shall be supported or anchored to the wooden framework of a building. 
(2)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All roof signs shall conform to the requirements of the state building code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-325. - Projecting signs. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Projecting sign, as regulated by this article, shall mean any sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of the building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached. All projecting signs shall be electrical signs as defined in section 15-305. 
(2)  Horizontal projecting signs shall mean any sign which is greater in width than in height. 
(3)  Vertical projecting sign shall mean any sign which is greater in height than in width. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  [Design.] Projecting signs, including frames, braces, and supports shall be designed by a registered design professional or manufacturer, constructed of incombustible materials, and two-faced. 
(2)  Illumination. Reflectors shall be provided with the proper glass lenses concentrating that illumination upon the area of the sign and preventing glare upon the street or adjacent property. No floodlight or spotlight nor reflectors of the goose neck type shall be permitted on projecting signs. 
(3)  Glass requirements. The letter or advertising designs to be illuminated may be composed of glass or other transparent or semi-transparent incombustible material. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate glass at least one-quarter (1/4) inch thick; and in case any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three (3) square feet, it shall be wired glass. One section, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, constructed of wire glass or safety glass shall be permitted on each side of a sign. 
(4)  Moveable parts to be secured. Any movable part of a projecting sign such as the cover of a service opening shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges. 
(5)  Area limitations. Projecting signs shall be limited in area as follows: 
a.  Horizontal projecting signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet on each side. 
b.  Vertical projecting signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet on each side. 
(6)  Thickness limitation. The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
(c)  Location; projection over public property. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least ten (10) feet above the public sidewalk over which it is erected, no more than two (2) feet from the point of the sign nearest the wall, and at least one (1) foot from the curb line. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet above the public driveway, alley, or thoroughfare over which it is erected. 
(d)  Erection. 
(1)  Bracing, anchorage, and supports. Projecting signs exceeding ten (10) square feet in area or fifty (50) pounds in weight shall not be attached to, nor supported by frame buildings nor the wooden framework of a building. Such signs shall be attached to masonry walls with galvanized expansion bolts at least three-eighths (?) inch in diameter, shall be fixed in the wall by means of bolts extending through the wall, shall contain proper size metal washers or plate on the inside of the wall, and shall comply with the wind pressure and dead load requirements of the state building code. 
(2)  Prohibited anchorage. No projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails, nor shall any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign. 
(e)  V-shaped signs prohibited. V-shaped signs consisting of two-faced signs erected without a roof or ceiling shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-326. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Definition. Temporary sign, as regulated by this article, shall mean any sign, banner, pennant, or other advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board, or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  Materials and area limitations. No temporary sign of combustible material shall exceed four (4) feet in one of its dimensions or one hundred (100) square feet in area. Such signs in excess of sixty (60) square feet shall be made of rigid materials such as wall board or other light materials with frames. 
(2)  Weight limitations. Temporary signs weighing in excess of fifty (50) pounds must be approved by the chief of code enforcement as conforming to the safety requirements of the state building code. 
(c)  Location; projection over public property. No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare more than four (4) inches from the wall upon which it is erected and shall not be placed or project over any wall opening. This shall not apply to banner signs attached to utility poles, extended across a street, approved by the board of public works. 
(d)  Erection, anchorage, and support. Every temporary sign shall be attached with wire or steel cable. No strings, ropes, or wood slats for anchorage or support purposes shall be permitted. 
(e)  Duration of permits. Permits for temporary signs shall authorize their erection and maintenance for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
(f)  Advertising permitted. The advertisement contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only to the business, industry, or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. This provisions shall not apply to signs of a civic, political, or religious nature. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-327. - Marquees. 
(a)  Definition. Marquee, as regulated by this article, shall mean any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a thoroughfare. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  Marquees, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods, and braces shall be constructed of incombustible materials, designed by a registered design professional, and illuminated. 
(2)  Marquee roofs shall be property guttered and connected by downspouts to a storm sewer so that rainwater will not drip or flow onto public property. 
(3)  Marquee roofs shall be used for no other purpose than to form and constitute a roof, and at least twenty-five (25) per cent of the roof of every marquee shall be of glass or other incombustible transparent substance. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  No portion of a marquee shall be less than ten (10) feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public thoroughfare over which it is erected. 
(2)  No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond a point one (1) foot inside the curbline. 
(3)  Width. No marquee shall be wider than the entrance or entrances of the building, plus five (5) feet on each side. However, where the entrances to a building are not more than twenty (20) feet apart, a marquee may be made a continuous single structure between the entrances. 
(d)  Erection. 
(1)  Marquees shall be supported solely by the building to which they are attached, and no columns or posts shall be used as supports. 
(2)  Marquee roofs, except the glass area required, shall be designed and constructed to support a live load not less than one hundred (100) pounds per square foot. Marquees shall be designed to meet the wind pressure requirements provided in section 15-322. 
(3)  No marquee shall be erected on any building of wood-frame construction unless attached to the masonry, concrete, or steel supports of the building. 
(e)  Signs attached to marquee. Signs attached to or hung from a marquee shall be completely within the borderline of the marquee outer edge and shall, in no instance, be lower than ten (10) feet above the sidewalk or public thoroughfare. No sign or advertising material shall exceed five (5) feet in height exclusive of the name of the establishment exhibiting such marquee. No advertising material shall be placed upon the roof of any marquee. 
(f)  Illumination required. Marquees projecting over public property shall be illuminated by at least sixteen (16) candle power of illumination for each fifty (50) square feet or fraction thereof of area from sunset to 11:00 p.m. every Monday through Saturday night of each week. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-328. - Billboards. 
(a)  Definition. Billboard sign, as regulated by this article, shall mean any sign which is not located on the premises that it advertises or identifies. 
(b)  Size. All billboards must comply with section 15-322, section 15-323, section 15-324, or section 15-325, whichever is applicable for the maximum allowable size of the sign. No displays may be placed in a side-by-side nature, or stacked on top of each other, but there shall be allowed displays to be placed back-to-back in a parallel manner. V-type construction shall be permitted provided the widest portion of the "V" shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width. 
(c)  Height. All billboards must comply with section 15-322, section 15-323, section 15-324, or section 15-325, whichever is applicable for the maximum allowable height of the sign. 
(d)  Spacing. No billboard structure shall be erected closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any other such billboard. Provided, there shall be no billboard erected in any area not zoned manufacturing or business and located adjacent to a roadway designated federal-aid highway or interstate highway. 
(e)  Setback. All billboards must comply with section 15-322, section 15-323, section 15-324, or section 15-325, whichever is applicable for the allowable setback. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02; Ord. of 5-28-13) 
Sec. 15-329. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Any sign or other advertising structure legally in existence on the date of the adoption of this chapter may continue in its current nonconforming use, but shall not be enlarged or expanded although its current such use does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter, as long as the nonconforming use has not been abandoned for more than thirty (30) days. An unlawful sign, for purposes of this section, is not a nonconforming sign. No nonconforming sign is required to be removed solely by the passage of time if to so require is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-330. - Unlawful signs. 
    If the zoning officer finds that any sign or other advertising structure is prohibited by the provisions of this article, the zoning officer shall give written notice to the permittee or the owner of the property upon which the structure is located. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards set forth in this article within ten (10) days after such notice, the zoning officer may undertake such removal or alteration as is necessary to bring the structure into compliance and assess the costs to the permittee and/or owner. The zoning officer may cause any sign or other advertising structure which presents an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed or altered immediately and without notice. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-331. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-332. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article, or the application thereof to only person or circumstances, shall be held invalidity by any court of competent jurisdiction. Such invalidity shall not affect the other provision, or application thereof, of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-333. - Protection of First Amendment rights. 
    Any sign allowed under this article may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit or to a commodity or service for sale and that complies with all other requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
Sec. 15-334. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect upon passage [August 13, 2002]. 
(Ord. of 8-13-02) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1971 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1971 Code, as supplemented through April 26, 1983 which are included herein. Sections of the 1971 Code as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code App. A, § 1-7 15-1-15-7 App. A, §§ 9.1-9.111 15-9-15-11 App. A, §§ 10-23 15-12-15-25 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-2 2-3(a) 2-200 2-3(b) 2-201 2-4-2-6 2-202-2-204 2-7 2-210 2-8 2-212 2-9 2-208 2-10 2-205 2-11 2-209 2-12 2-211 2-13 2-206 2-14 2-207 2-15 8-1 2-16 8-2 2-17 2-3 2-18 2-4 2-26-2-31 2-8-2-13 2.5-1 2-300 2.5-2-2.5-10 2-302-2-310 3-1 3-1 3-2 3-10 3-3 3-8 3-5 3-5 3-6 3-6 3-7 3-11 3-8 3-9 3-15-3-21 3-305-3-311 3-23-3-25 3-200-3-202 3-26 3-202 3-27, 3-28 3-203 3-29-3-31 3-204-3-206 3-32 3-208 3-33 3-207 3-34 3-209 3-35 3-210, 7-206 3-37 3-400 3-38 3-401 3-40 3-402 3-42 3-403 3-43 3-404 3-44-3-46 3-2-3-4 4-1 10-37 4-2 10-38 4-4-4-7 14-904-14-907 4-8 14-902 4-9 4-204, 14-900 4-10 14-903 4-11-4-4-16 14-908-14-913 4-17 14-901 5-1 4-5 5-2-5-5 4-1-4-4 5-7 4-200 5-8 4-201 5-10 4-202 5-11 4-203 5-12-5-16 4-205-4-209 5-17 4-9 5-18 4-10 5-19 4-9 5-20 4-11 5-21 4-12 5-27-5-29 4-6-4-8 5-30 4-701 5-32 4-702 5-33 4-700 5-35-5-38 4-707-4-710 5-39 4-737 5-40-5-42 4-739-4-741 5-43 4-711 5-44 4-736 5-45 4-744 5-46 4-742 5-47 4-743 5-48 4-745 5-49 4-712 5-50 4-746 5-51 4-736, 4-738 5-52-5-54 4-703-4-705 5-56 4-706 6-1-6-13 6-1-6-13 7-1-7-8 5-1-5-8 8-1 4-300 8-2 4-301 8-3-8-7 4-301-4-305 8.5-1-8.5-3 9-300-9-302 8.5-5-8.5-16 9-350-9-361 8.6-4 9-303 9-1 7-6 9-5 7-8 9-12 7-1 9-13 7-2 9-14 7-4 9-15 7-5 9-17 7-9 9-18 7-10 9-19 7-9 9-20 7-200 9-21 7-200, 7-201 9-23 7-3 9-24 7-203 9-25 7-206 9-26 7-204 9-27 7-205 9-28 7-15 9-29 7-16 9-30, 9-31 7-202 9-32 7-206 9-37-9-40 7-11-7-14 9.5-1 4-400 10-1-10-5 10-400-10-404 10-6-10-11 10-425-10-430 10-12 10-450 10-13-10-23 10-475-10-485 11-1 13-1 11-2-11-13 13-3-13-14 11-15(a), (b) 13-406 11-15(c) 13-408 11-15(d) 13-407 11-24-11-28 13-1208-13-1212 11-29(a) 13-1213 11-30 13-1214 11-31 13-505 11-32 13-506 11-33 13-1215 11-34 13-1216 11-35 13-601 11-35(a)-(d) 13-500 11-36 13-600 11-37-11-39 13-602-13-604 11-40 13-600 11-41 13-805 11-42 13-605 11-43 13-606 11-44 13-701 11-45 13-700 11-46-11-55 13-702-13-711 11-56-11-62 13-450-13-456 11-63 13-1222 11-64 13-1223 11-65-11-67 13-501-13-503 11-68 13-504 11-69 13-301 11-70 13-300 11-71 13-303 11-72 13-304 11-73 13-302 11-74-11-82 13-305-13-313 11-84 13-1224 11-85 13-1225 11-86-11-88 13-403-13-405 11-89 13-613 11-90 13-611 11-91 13-612 11-93, 11-94 13-607 11-96 13-608, 13-609 11-97 13-608 11-98 13-610 11-99-11-103 13-1217-13-1221 11-104-11-111 13-650-13-657 11-116-11-119 13-900-13-903 11-120 13-905 11-121 13-904 12-1 4-600 12-2 4-601 12-3 4-603 12-4 4-604 12-5-12-17 4-636-4-648 12-18 4-660 12-20-12-22 4-669-4-671 12-23-12-25 4-661-4-663 12-30-12-37 4-672-4-679 12-38-12-42 4-679-4-83 13-1-13-7 14-1-14-7 13-8 14-9 13-9 14-17 13-10-13-16 14-200-14-206 13-17-13-20 14-300-14-303 13-21-13-23 14-13-14-15 13-24-13-26 14-400-14-402 13-28-13-31 14-404-14-407 13-32-13-34 14-10-14-12 13-46 14-500 13-47 14-700 13-48-13-53 14-501-14-506 13-54-13-61 14-575-14-582 13-62-13-72 14-507-14-517 13-74-13-79 14-518-14-523 13-80-13-91 14-528-14-539 13-92-13-95 14-524-14-527 13-96-13-107 14-540-14-551 13-108-13-117 14-600-14-609 13-118-13-131 14-701-14-714 13-132 10-22 13-133 10-23 13-134-13-138 14-815-14-819 13-138 14-820 13-140 14-821 13-141-13-144 14-811-14-814 13-145-13-155 14-800-14-810 13-156-13-168 14-840-14-852 13-169-13-177 14-875-14-883 14-1 8-4 14-2 10-6 14-3 10-7 14-5 10-4 14-6 13-400 14-7 10-8 14-8 10-9 14-9(a) 8-5 14-9(b) 11-6 14-10 10-11 14-11-14-13 10-1-10-3 14-14 10-10 14-15 10-5 14-16 10-13 14-17 10-16 14-18-14-22 10-39-10-43 14-23 10-15 14-24 10-17 14-25 8-9 14-25-14-27 8-10-8-12 14-29 10-44 14-30 8-3 14-31 10-45 14-32 10-24 14-33 10-31 14-34-14-38 10-25-10-29 14-39 10-14 14-40 10-18 14-41 10-20 14-42 10-19 14-43-14-45 8-6-8-8 14-47 10-21 14-48(a) 8-200 14-48(b) 8-201 14-48(c) 8-203, 8-210 14-48(d) 8-202 14-49(a) 8-209 14-49(b)-(d) 8-211 14-50-14-54 10-32-10-36 14-55 10-12 14-56 10-30 16-1 4-500 16-2 4-501 16-3 4-500 16-4 4-502 18-1 11-4 18-2-18-5 11-2 18-5 11-4 18-6 11-3 18-7 11-5 18-8-18-10 11-4 18-11 11-3 18-12 11-4 19-1 8-200 19-2-19-6 8-204-8-208 19-7-19-10 8-214-8-217 19-11 8-204, 8-205 19-12 8-212 19-14-19-20 9-400-9-406 20-1 9-200, 9-201 20-2-20-6 9-281-9-285 20-3.1 9-202 20-7, 20-8 9-260 20-8.1 9-280 20-9 9-203 20-10 9-220 20-11-20-15 9-222-9-226 20-16 9-221 20-17-20-24 9-227-9-234 20-25 9-240 20-26 9-244 20-27 9-241 20-31 9-243 20-32, 20-33 9-262 20-34 9-263 20-35, 20-36 9-264 20-38 9-266 20-40 9-268 20-41 9-265 20-42 9-269 20-43 9-270 20-44 9-267 20-45 9-261 20-47-20-50 9-286-9-289 20-51 9-291 20-52 9-290 20-53-20-57 9-292-9-296 21-1 13-800 21-3 13-801 21-4 13-802 21-6 13-803 21-7 13-804 21-8 13-806 21-9-21-11 13-807-13-809 22-1 12-5 22-2 12-2 22-3 12-1 22-4 12-2 22-6 12-3 22-7 12-4 22-8-22-11 12-6-12-9 22-13-22-15 12-10-12-12 22-16-22-18 12-16-12-18 22-20 14-533 22-21 14-715 22-22 14-16 22-23 14-8 22-24 7-7 22-25 12-200 22-26 12-201 22-27 12-203 22-28 12-204 22-29 12-202 22-30-22-32 12-205-12-207 23-1-23-17 13-200-13-216 23-17.1 13-217 23-18-23-20 13-218-13-220 23-21-23-38 13-221-13-238 23-40-23-43 13-1100-13-1103 23-44 13-401 23-45 13-402 23-46-23-52 13-1000-13-1006 24-4-24-9 8-217-8-222 Ch. 25 2-301 25-1-25-5 10-46-10-50  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1971 Code, as supplemented through April 26, 1983, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1971 Code. This table contains some ordinances which precede April 26, 1983, but which were never included in the 1979 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Date Section  Section 
this Code  6-24-65 5.01-5.03 14-845  8-24-71 Ch. 15(note) 12-23-75 Art. II, §§ 1-7 10-200-10-206 Art. III, §§ 1-3 10-300-10-302 Art. III, § 4 10-305 Art. III, § 5 10-306 Art. III, § 6 10-304 Art. III, § 7 10-303  9-27-83 13-401 11-22-83 9-240 11-22-83 10-450  1-24-84 10-400  1-24-84 11-1-11-5  2-14-84 14-700  9-11-84 4-707, 4-710 10-23-84 10-30 10-23-84 14-802 10-24-84 2-300-2-310  7- 9-85 23-55-23-67 13-1300-13-1312 23-69 13-1313  8-27-85 22-34-22-38 12-300-12-304  9-10-85 2-2(d)  9-10-85 10-475 10-22-85 2-32-2-38 2-400-2-406 11-26-85 15-7(H)  2-11-86 Adopting ordinance, p. vii  2-11-86 2-14  2-11-86 2-500-2-503  4-22-86 3-211  5-14-86 2-400, 2-401, 2-403, 2-405  5-27-86 12-208  6-10-86       Rpld 14-714, 14-715  6-10-86 1 Ch. 14, Art. IX(title) 2, 3 14-900, 14-901 4 14-910 5       Rpld 14-911  6-25-86 2-14(a)  6-25-86 2-15  9-23-86 1 4-400 2 4-401-4-413 10-14-86 15-200-15-206 11-25-86 13-239  1-27-87 15-201(a)  3-10-87 15-6(K)  5-27-87 13-201  7-28-87 1-8 11-24-87 14-3  2- 9-88 2-15(d)  2- 9-88 2-201  4-12-88 14-301(c) 10-25-88 12-209, 12-210  1-24-89 2-600-2-606  6-13-89 14-18  6-13-89 14-802  6-13-89 14-847  9-12-89 10-400, 10-401, 10-429, 10-450  9-12-89 13-15 11-14-89 13-455  2-13-90 9-400-9-410 9-500-9-504  2-13-90 8-217-8-224  3-27-90       Added 4-14       Rpld 4-400 4-500-4-502, 4-602  6-12-90 Art. I, §§ 1-6       Added 2-721-2-726 Art. II, §§ 1-16       Added 2-727  7-10-90 1-8  7-24-90 7-200  8-29-90 4-13  2-12-91 2-504, 2-505  2-26-91 13-409  3-26-91 2-701-2-704  4- 9-91 3-211, 3-212  8-13-91 9-245  8-13-91 9-500 11-12-91 9-246  4-28-92 4-700-4-711, 4-800-4-811  4-28-92 14-3 10-13-92 8-300-8-308  1-12-93 13-1223  6-22-93 15-301-15-336  7-27-93       Rpld 4-401-4-413       Added 4-901-4-909  9-14-93 14-822  1-11-94 14-802(a) 10-25-94 4-1, 4-2 10-25-94 4-6-4-8 10-25-94 4-200-4-208 10-25-94       Rpld 4-300-4-305, 4-600-4-604, 4-636-4-648, 4-660-4-683       Added 4-300-4-316 10-25-94 15-3 10-25-94 15-4 10-25-94 15-6(K) 10-25-94       Rpld 15-8(D), 15-9(D), 15-10(D), 15-11(D), 15-12(D) 10-25-94 15-8 10-25-94 15-9 10-25-94 15-17(3)(j) 10-25-94       Rpld 15-18(B) 10-15-94 15-200-15-206 11- 8-94 4-9-4-12 11- 8-94       Rpld 4-401-4-413       Added 4-401-4-410  3-14-95 10-1  6-13-95 15-26  8- 8-95 14-3  9-12-95       Added 8-309  6-25-96 15-6(K) 10-22-96 4-2 10-22-96 4-9 10-22-96 1 4-9.1 10-22-96 4-10 10-22-96 4-12 10-22-96       Rpld 4-13  2-25-97       Rpld 14-200-14-299, 14-875-14-883       Added 14-201, 14-202  5-13-97 15-309  5-13-97 15-401-15-404  8-26-97 10-1  8-26-97 10-5  8-26-97 10-25, 10-27  8-26-97 10-47  8-26-97 10-51  8-26-97 10-52  8-26-97 10-53  8-26-97 10-54  8-26-97 10-55  9- 9-97 8-9-8-14  9-23-97 9-240, 9-242, 9-245, 9-247, 9-248 12- 9-97 10-56  1-27-98 4-9(d), (e), 4-10(1)-(6)  1-27-98 14-13-14-15, 14-19, 14-20  7-28-98 13-220(a), 13-221, 13-228  6-22-99 13-409  8-10-99 2-16 10-12-99 7-6(4)-(6)  1-11-00 14-1, 14-823  9-12-00 15-3, 15-501-15-524 10-24-00 14-824  1-23-01       Rpld 2-500-2-505       Added 2-501-2-523 11-27-01 8-310 12-11-01       Rpld 9-200-9-203, 9-220-9-234, 9-240-9-248, 9-260-9-270, 9-280-9-296       Added 9-1-9-8, 9-200-9-203, 9-220-9-234, 9-240-9-248, 9-260-9-269, 9-280-9-285  5-28-02 2-16  6-11-02 9-5(c)  8-13-02 2-2  8-13-02       Rpld 15-1-15-26, 15-200-15-206, 15-301-15-336, 15-401-15-404, 15-501-15-524       Added 15-1-15-12, 15-14-15-31, 15-301-15-334  9-10-02 5-5 10- 8-02 14-1000  3-25-03 3-500-3-513  4-22-03 2 4-2, 4-9, 4-9.1, 4-10-4-12  5-13-03 2 7-200, 7-201, 7-203, 7-205, 7-206  8-12-03 2-514  8-12-03 2 14-823, 15-3, 15-13, 15-24(c)(1)d.2. 11-25-03 3-12       Rpld 3-211, 3-212 12- 9-03 1 15-3, 15-8, 15-10-15-12, 15-14-15-16  1-27-04 2 9-240       Rpld 9-241, 9-242, 9-246-9-248  7-27-04 15-321  9-28-04 15-24(j) 11- 9-04 15-15(b)(21) 11- 9-04 15-16(c)(11) 11- 9-04 15-24(n)  5-24-05 14-1100  6-28-05 ¶ 1 9-2, 9-4(c)(1), (d)(1), (8)a.5.iii., 9-5(b)(2)b., (c)(1)  7-12-05 14-1100(c) 10-11-05 15-24(o)  7-11-06 7-200       Rpld 7-202  9-12-06 4-9, 4-10, 4-204       Rpld 4-205-4-208 4-300, 4-301       Rpld 4-302-4-316  9-26-06 4-700-4-711       Added 4-712 4-800-8-811       Added 4-812-4-816 10-24-06 2-2(d)  4-10-07 1-8  4-24-07       Added 15-14(e)  4-24-07       Added 15-15(e)  4-24-07       Added 15-16(h)  4-24-07       Added 15-22(a)(48)-(50)  6-12-07 1 13-1301  6-26-07       Added 9-227(b)       Rnbd 9-227(b)       as 9-227(c)  6-26-07       Added 9-600-9-631 11-13-07 2 9-240(a), (b)  2-26-08 2-16  2-24-09 1       Added 9-602(d)  2-24-09 1 9-604  2-24-09 1       Added 9-622(g)  9-28-10 5-1-5-8  6-28-11 2-2(d)  5-28-13 15-328(b)  6-11-13 2 7-200  9-10-13 4-1-4-1       Rpld 4-5-4-8       Added 4-5, 4-6 4-9 4-10, 4-11 4-12(a)-(c) 4-203-4-205 4-300, 4-301 4-403  4-14-15 2-200  5-26-15 15-13(a)(3) 12- 8-15(1)       Added 8-225 12- 8-15(2) 13-209, 13-210 13-213, 13-214       Added 13-1400-13-1415  3- 8-16 8-9-8-13  6-28-16(1) 2-2(d)  6-28-16(2)       Added 4-411  6-28-16(3) 7-200  7-26-16       Added 13-240-13-243  8-23-16 4-9 11-22-16 2-509, 2-510  1-10-17       Added 15-22(a)(51)  8- 8-17 15-24(n)(2)  8-22-17       Added 3-213  9-26-17       Added 10-500-10-502  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
West Virginia Constitution
 
Article Section  Section 
this Code VI 46 Ch. 13, Art. IV(note) VIII 15 Char., § 20  
W. Va. Code 
Section Section  
this Code 2-2-1 1-2 2-2-8 1-5 2-2-9 1-5 2-2-10(2) 1-3 Ch. 3 5-1 3-1-6 5-8 3-1-23 5-8 Ch. 3, Art. 2 5-2 Ch. 3, Art. 5 Char., § 10 Ch. 3, Art. 6 Char., § 10 3-7-6 Char., § 12 3-7-7 Char., § 12 Ch. 5, Art. 11 10-403 5-11-1 Ch. 10, Art. IV(note) 5-11-2 10-401 5-15-1 14-609 5-22-1 et seq. 9-615 7-1-3u 4-702 Ch. 7, Art. 15 9-302(b), 9-303 7-18-1 et seq. 2-400 7-18-13, 7-18-14 13-1313 8-l-5a 13-1400 8-1-6 Char.(note) 8-2-3 12-300 8-5-14 Char., § 10 8-5-18 15-29 8-9-1 Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 2-203 8-10-1a 2-514 8-10-3 2-3 8-11-1 1-8 Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 8-11-3(10) 2-520 9-229 8-11-4(b) 1-1, 7-200 8-12-1 Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 8-12-5 Char., § 21 Ch. 2, Art. II(note) Ch. 12(note) 8-12-5(2) Ch. 12, Art. II(note) 8-12-5(4) Ch. 14(note) 8-12-5(10) Ch. 8, Art. II(note) 8-12-5(14) 7-9 8-12-5(15) Ch. 7(note) 8-12-5(26) Ch. 3(note) 8-12-5(27) 3-5 8-12-5(28) Ch. 4(note) 8-12-5(32) Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 8-12-5(37) 11-2(a) 8-12-5(42), (43) Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 8-12-5(45) 2-204 8-12-7 2-14 8-12-8 2-15 8-12-14 Ch. 4(note) 8-12-15 Ch. 4(note) Ch. 4, Art. II(note) 8-12-16 Ch. 4(note), 4-412 8-12-18 2-505 8-12-19 Ch. 2, Art. II(note) 8-13-3 Ch. 13, Art. XI(note) 8-13-4 Ch. 13(note) 13-409 8-13-5 Ch. 13, Art. II(note) 13-201 8-13-5a 13-1001 8-13-7 13-402 8-13-10 3-202 8-13C-1 13-1400 8-13C-6 13-1409, 13-1410 13-1411, 13-1412 11-10-11c 13-1409 8-13-15 Char., § 18 Ch. 8, Art. 14 2-6, 9-406 Ch. 8, Art. 14A 2-6, 2-7 Ch. 8, Art. 15 2-7 8-15-1 Ch. 4(note) Ch. 7(note) 8-15-5(57) 1-8 8-15-12 2-2 Ch. 8, Art. 16 14-881 8-16-1 9-601 Ch. 14, Art. VIII, Div. 2(note) 8-16-3 14-849 8-16-5 9-608-9-625 9-627-9-629 8-16-18 9-602-9-606 8-16-21 9-602, 9-603 8-18-1 Ch. 9, Art. II(note) Ch. 12(note) 8-18-2 Char., § 38 8-18-20 Ch., § 38 8-19-1 9-400 Ch. 8, Art. 22 2-6, 2-7 Ch. 8, Art. 24 15-2 15-5 8-24-5 15-5 15-6 8-24-18 15-6(K) 8-24-48 Char., 21(24) 8-24-51 15-2 15-6 8-24-56 15-25 Ch. 8, Art. 27 2-8, 2-10 8-27-4 2-12 8-33-1 2-600 8-33-4 2-600 10-2-1 Ch. 11(note) Ch. 11 4-313 11-3-3A 4-700 11-7-1 13-1102, 13-1103 Ch. 11, Art. 9 13-1401 Ch. 11, Art. 10 13-231, 13-1401 11-10-1 13-223-13-227 13-230, 13-233 11-10-11c 13-1409 11-12-7 13-701 11-12-14 13-1210 Ch. 11, Art. 13 Ch. 13, Art. II(note) 11-13-1 13-200 11-13-2 13-202-13-206 11-13-2a-11-13-2e 13-208-13-212 11-13-2g-11-13-2k 13-213-13-217 11-13-3 13-207, 13-218 11-13-4 13-220 11-13-5 13-221 11-13-9 13-228 11-13-10 13-229 Ch. 11, Art. 14C 13-1406 Ch. 11, Art. 15 13-1301, 13-1401 13-1402, 13-1403 11-15-3c 13-1406 11-15A-1 et seq. 13-1400, 13-1401 13-1402 11-15B-1 et seq. 13-1400, 13-1401 13-1402, 13-1403 11-15B-33 13-1409 11-15B-34 13-1405 11-15B-35 13-1407 11-16-2 10-56, 13-451 11-16-3 Ch. 13, Art. IV, Div. 2(note) 11A-2-3 Char., § 18 13-1-1-13-1-32 Char., § 29 15-5-1 Ch. 6(note) 15-5-8 Ch. 6(note) 6-2(c), 6-3 16-1-3 Ch. 8(note) 16-5C-2(e) 15-3 16-5D-2(i) 15-3 16-5H-2(j) 15-3 Ch. 16, Art. 13 Ch. 9, Art. II(note) 9-200 9-227 16-13-1 9-601 16-13-2 9-601 9-608-9-625 9-627-9-630 16-13-16 9-243 9-603-9-607 16-13-17 9-603 9-603.5 9-604 16-13-18 9-220-9-223 9-226 16-13-22 9-232 9-602, 9-603 9-608-9-625 9-627-9-630 16-13-22g 9-232 16-13-23(a) 9-604 9-607 Ch. 16, Art. 14 13-1200 16-17-23(a) 9-603.5 9-604 9-607 17-22-21 10-6 Ch. 17A 14-3 17A-8-4 10-22 17A-8-6 10-23 Ch. 17B 14-3 17B-1-1 8-10 17B-2-1 Ch. 14, Art. V(note) Ch. 17C 14-3 17C-1-1-17C-1-59 14-1 17C-2-1 14-2 17C-2-3(c) 14-5 17C-2-4 14-4 17C-2-5 14-6 17C-2-6 14-7 17C-2-8 Ch. 14(note) Ch. 14, Art. III(note) 17C-3-3 Ch. 14, Art. IV(note) 17C-4-1 14-10 17C-5A-3, 17C-5A-4 14-503(c)(4) 17C-5A-4 14-506 17C-6-1 Ch. 14, Art. V, Div. 2(note) 17C-6-1(a) 14-575 17C-6-3a(a) 14-577 17C-6-4 14-579 17C-6-5(a) 14-580 17C-6-5(b) 14-581 17C-6-7 14-582 17C-7-1-17C-7-3 14-507-14-509 17C-7-4 14-511 17C-7-5 14-510 17C-7-6 14-512 17C-7-7 14-513 17C-7-8(b) 14-534 17C-7-8(c) 14-514 17C-7-9-17C-7-11 14-515-14-517 17C-7-12 14-540 17C-8-2-17C-8-4 14-519-14-521 17C-8-6 14-522 17C-8-8 14-523 17C-8-9 14-528 17C-8-10 14-529 17C-9-1-17C-9-5 14-535-14-539 17C-9-3 14-531 17C-10-1 14-600 17C-10-2-17C-10-4 14-603-14-605 17C-10-5 14-602 17C-10-6(a)-(c) 14-606-14-608 17C-11-1(a), (b) 14-902 17C-11-1(c) 14-900 17C-11-2 14-903 17C-11-3 14-912 17C-11-4 17-901 17C-11-5(a), (b) 14-909 17C-11-5(c) 14-908 17C-11-6 14-913 17C-11-7(a) 14-904 17C-12-1 14-524 17C-12-3 14-526 17C-12-4 14-527 17C-12-5 14-530 17C-12-6 14-524 17C-13-1-17C-13-4 14-800-14-803 17C-13-2 14-13 17C-13-5 14-801 17C-13-6 14-802(a)(19) 17C-13-6(c), (d) 14-802(c) 17C-14-1-17C-14-6 14-541-14-546 17C-14-8-17C-14-10 14-547-14-549 17C-14-11 12-10 17C-15-1 Ch. 14, Art. VII(note) 17C-15-2-17C-15-30 14-703 17C-15-2 14-706, 14-905 17C-15-31, 17C-15-32 14-701 17C-15-33 14-707 17C-15-33(b), (c) 14-708 17C-15-34 14-709 Ch. 17C, Art. 16 14-700(b), (d) 17C-16-1 Ch. 14, Art. VII(note) 17C-19-4 14-700(g) Ch. 17D 14-3 17D-1-1 Ch. 14, Art. VII(note) 17D-2A-1-17D-2A-9 14-700(g) 17D-2A-3 14-700(f) 17D-2A-4 14-700(f) 18-9-2 Char., § 29 19-4-1 13-218(b)(5) 19-9-1-19-9-40 Ch. 3, Art. III(note) 19-10-1-19-10-13 Ch. 3(note) 19-16A-7 4-702 19-18-1 Ch. 3(note) 19-20-1 3-200 19-20-2 3-202 19-20-3 3-200 15-24 19-20-7 Ch. 3, Art. IV(note) 19-20-8 Ch. 3, Art. IV(note) 19-20-8a Ch. 3, Art. III(note) 19-20-9 15-24 19-20A-1 Ch. 3, Art. III(note) 19-20A-2 15-24 19-21-41 8-7 Ch. 21 4-303 21-5A-1 et seq. 9-615 21-11-1 et seq. 4-401(a), 4-403, 4-405(e), 4-408(b), (c) 21-11-3(c) 4-702 21-11-6(c)(6) 4-403 21-11-7(b) 4-405(b) 21-11-13 4-405(e), 4-407(f) 21-11-14 4-405(e), 4-407(a), (f) 21-11-15 4-401(b), 4-405(b) 22-2-29 7-9 Ch. 23 4-313 28-5-5 10-47 Tit.28, Sers. 2, § 3.9(b) 4-708 Tit. 28, Sers. 4, 4-708 Ch. 29 4-303 Ch. 29, Art. 3 Ch. 4(note) 7-9 29-3-5(b) 4-9(a) 29-3-12 Ch. 7(note) 29-5-1 et seq. 4-401(a), 4-407(e) 29-12A-1 et seq. 2-14 29-12A-5(b) 2-14 29-38-4 4-405(c) Ch. 29A 4-306, 4-312, 4-314, 10-484 Ch. 29A, Art. 5 10-480 29A-5-1 4-407(e), 4-409 29A-5-3 10-481 Ch. 30, Art. 13 4-702 30-13-3(f) 4-702 30-29-1 10-47 Ch. 50 Char., § 20 50-2-1 Char., § 37 50-5-11 Char., § 39 50-6-3 Char., § 20 59-3-1 12-300 59-3-1 et seq. 2-515 9-229 59-3-2(b) 15-5, 15-6 60-1-1 Ch. 13, Art. IV(note) 60-3A-1 et seq. 13-409 60-3A-12(e) 13-409 Ch. 60, Art. 7 13-401, 13-403 60A-1-101 14-502(g) 60A-1-101(d) 10-47 60A-1-101(l) 10-47 61-2-9 10-8 61-2-10 10-8 61-3-13 10-24 61-3-18 10-31 61-3-24 10-24 61-3-27 3-6 61-3-33 10-20 61-3-38 13-808 61-3-43 10-20 61-3-47 8-7 61-3A-1 10-25 61-5-17 10-1 61-6-1 10-11 61-6-12 10-11 61-6-20 10-5 61-7-1 et seq. 10-47 61-7-4 10-47 61-7-11 10-51 61-6-17 10-52 61-8-1 10-39 61-8-15 10-15 61-8-16 10-53 61-8-19 3-5 61-8-25 13-613 61-8-27a 10-55 61-8A-1 10-44 61-8A-11 10-44 61-9A-2 10-54 61-10-1 10-16 Ch. 62, Art. 11A 14-502(e) 110-28-1 13-1415  
