ELKINS, WEST VIRGINIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through Ord. No. 271, passed 3-4-2020
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Editor’s note:
The City Charter herein set out is Acts 1901, Chapter 151, as amended by the
state legislature and by Home Rule Amendment pursuant to law as indicated by
the historical citation following affected sections. A frontal analysis has
been added for the convenience of the user. Some section catchlines have been
altered and some material has been inserted in brackets for the purpose of
clarification, no portion of which should be regarded as official. A uniform
system of capitalization has been used and numbers have been spelled out rather
than set out in arabic numerals. Editor’s notes have been added to certain
sections where the section is no longer accurate.
The legislature, in its 1969 revision and consolidation of W.Va. Code Chapters
8 and 8A into a new Chapter 8, recognized, in § 8-1-6, “that when the
provisions of existing special legislative charters are compared with and are
considered in the light of the provisions of this chapter (i.e., the new
Chapter 8), there are five basic possibilities as to the relationship between
such Charter provisions and the provisions of this chapter, namely: (1) As to
any particular Charter provisions, such Charter provisions may be inconsistent
or in conflict with the pertinent provisions of this chapter; (2) although
relating to the same subject matter and although not inconsistent or in
conflict with any provisions of this chapter, certain Charter provisions may be
sufficiently different from pertinent provisions of this chapter as to
indicate, as a matter of practical construction, that either the Charter
provisions or the provisions of this chapter, but not both, should be
applicable; (3) although varying in certain respects, certain Charter
provisions may be similar to and in essential harmony with corresponding
provisions of this chapter; (4) as to any particular Charter provisions, there
may be no counterpart of such provisions in this chapter; and (5) as to any
provisions of this chapter, there may be no counterpart Charter provisions.”
Section 8-1-6, therefore, sets forth certain rules to be applied, in addition
to the usual and ordinary rules of statutory construction, with respect to
construction and applicability of legislative charters, and it is suggested
that users of this City Code refer to W.Va. Code § 8-1-6, in determining the
present construction and applicability of any portion of the Elkins Charter to
any given situation.
   
1.   Corporate name and powers
   
2.   Corporate limits
   
3.   Wards
   
4.   Elective municipal authorities
   
5.   Council to exercise corporate powers
   
6.   Qualification of mayor and councilmen
   
7.   Appointive officers and their qualifications
   
8.   Election of mayor and other officers
   
9.   Election of councilmen; vacancies
   
10.   Qualifications and registration of voters
   
11.   Elections; mode of voting; law governing
   
12.   Determination of ties
   
13.   Determination of contested elections
   
14.   Vacancies
   
15.   Council to have power to provide for additional officers and to set forth
the power, duties, bonds, compensation, etc., of all officers; certain officers
set forth
   
16.   To whom official bonds made payable and proceedings thereon
   
17.   Oaths of officers
   
18.   When officers’ duties begin
   
19.   Procedure when officer-elect is ineligible or fails to qualify
   
20.   Executive and judicial powers of mayor
   
21.   City clerk to keep records, etc., and act as mayor in his absence
   
22.   Quorum
   
23.   Powers and duties and books required to be kept by city clerk
   
24.   Minutes of previous meeting to be read; roll call of council
   
25.   Mayor to vote only in case of a tie
   
26.   Regular and special meetings and compulsory attendance thereto
   
27.   City collector and treasurer to keep all city moneys; how paid out
   
28.   General corporate powers of council
   
28-(a).   Authority to erect community building
   
29.   Mayor’s docket and what shall be contained therein; record of cases
   
30.   Annual estimate of expenses and levy of taxes; statement of receipts and
expenditures to be published annually
   
31.   City assessor-Powers and duties generally
   
32.   Same-Assessment books
   
33.   Lien for taxes, fines, etc., and enforcement thereof
   
34.   Duties, bond, etc., of city collector and treasurer
   
35.   License ordinances and payment of tax thereon
   
36.   Provisions of law applicable to licenses and expiration date of certain
licenses
   
37.   Condemnation of real estate for public use
   
38.   Charter of South Elkins abolished
   
39.   Ordinances, etc., not inconsistent and bonds, etc., remain in effect
   
40.   City to take over corporate assets and assume obligations of town of
South Elkins
   
41.   Duties of council as to first election, etc.
   
42.   Former rights, powers, etc., of city undisturbed
   
43.   Inconsistent ordinances and acts repealed
§ 1.  CORPORATE NAME AND POWERS.
   The inhabitants of so much of the county of Randolph as is within the bounds
prescribed by section two of this act [this Charter], and their successors,
shall be and remain and they are hereby made a body politic and corporate by
the name of “The City of Elkins,” and as such shall have perpetual succession
and a common seal; and by that name may sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded, purchase, lease and hold real estate, and personal property
necessary for the purpose of said corporation.
(1901 ch. 151, § 1)
§ 2.  CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The corporate limits of said city shall hereafter be as follows: Beginning
at the southern abutment of Bridge Number two of the Western Maryland Railway,
across the Tygarts Valley River on its Huttonsville branch, being the bridge of
said railway, situated about one thousand feet south of the junction of the
Belington extension and Huttonsville branch of said railway, and running thence
down said Tygarts Valley River on the east bank thereof to a stone the
southwest corner of the Davis and Elkins College property; thence with six
lines thereof S. 60 E. 478.5 feet to a white oak; N. 47.30 E. 316.8 feet to a
stone; N. 48 E. 268.6 feet to a white oak; N. 59 E. 255.5 feet to a stone; N.
21.30 E. 115.5 feet to a stone; N. 68 E. 328 feet to a stone in the west lines
of the Beverly and Fairmont Pike; thence with the western line of said pike in
a northerly direction 489 feet to a stake; thence N. 62.15 E. 582 feet to a
small oak tree; thence N. 38.55 E. 1405 feet to a small oak; thence N. 19.15 E.
957 feet to the Woolwine Run; thence S. 58 E. 1885 feet to a post in the line
between Woolwine and Taylor 40 feet southeast of Judson Goddin’s corner; thence
N. 17 E. 900 feet to a stone, corner to Wees, Woolwine and Taylor; thence N. 26
W. 2662 feet to the southeastern corner of the reservoir lot on the top of
“Wees Hill”; thence with the back line of said reservoir lot to the northern
corner thereof; the same being an oak; thence by a straight line to a point
where the Buffalo and Leading Creek Pike crosses Cravens Run; thence by a
straight line to the nearest corner of Maplewood Cemetery; thence with the line
of said cemetery on the northern boundary thereof to the northwestern corner of
the new addition to said cemetery; thence by a straight line due west to a
stake in the elongation of Isaac Scott’s eastern line; thence with said line S.
13.45 W. to a large chestnut, a corner of said Scott’s land; thence with
another line of said Scott’s land S. 24.30 W. 1333.7 feet to the western line
of Harrison Avenue; thence with the western line of said avenue S. 77 E. 201.8
feet to a stake; thence S. 25 W. 1024.5 feet to a stake; thence S. 65 E. 166
feet to the western line of Robert E. Lee Avenue; thence with western line of
said avenue; S. 25 W. 690 feet to a stake standing N.65 W. 30 feet from a stone
monument; thence S. 14.40 W. 940 feet to the river; thence with a straight line
to the beginning.
(1901 ch. 151, § 2; 1911, ch. 81; 1915, Munl. Chtr., ch. 16; 1921, Munl. Chtr.,
ch. 8)
Editor’s note:
   The corporate limits description set out in this section is no longer valid
as there have been subsequent additions to the city by annexations as provided
for by state law. Copies of such annexations are on file in the city clerk’s
office.
§ 3.  WARDS.
   The territory of said city shall be divided into wards as follows:
   First ward. Beginning at the beginning point of the corporate boundary, at
Bridge Number two, and running thence down the Tygarts Valley River, with the
meanders thereof, to the point where said river crosses the western boundary of
said city and with said western boundary to the place of beginning.
   Second ward. Beginning at the point where the second corporate boundary line
crosses the Beverly and Fairmont Pike, near the residence of W. H. Head and
running thence with said Beverly and Fairmont Pike to the point where it
intersects the Buffalo and Leading Creek Pike; thence with said last mentioned
pike to the point where it crosses Cravens Run on the corporate boundary and
shall include all the territory lying between said two pikes and the eastern
boundary of the city.
   Third ward. Beginning at the point where the boundary of the First Ward
crosses the West Virginia Central and Pittsburgh Railway, in the Tygarts Valley
River, at Bridge Number one, near the intersection of Railroad Avenue and First
Street, and running thence down said river with the meanders thereof to the
point where the said river crosses the northern boundary of the city, thence
with said northern boundary, in a northern direction to the point where said
boundary line crosses said railroad, near Maplewood Cemetery, thence with said
railroad to the place of beginning.
   Fourth ward. Beginning on the West Virginia Central and Pittsburgh Railway
at the junction of Railroad Avenue and Second Street and running thence with
Second Street to John Street; thence with John Street to Randolph Avenue,
thence with Randolph Avenue to the junction of said avenue with Buffalo Street
(a point in the boundary of the second ward) and shall include all the
territory lying west and south of the streets just named which is not embraced
in the First and Second Wards as above bounded.
   Fifth ward. Shall include all the territory within the corporate boundary
lying north of the Fourth Ward, between the Second and Third Wards as above
bounded.
   The number and boundary of the wards of said city may be changed at any time
by the council thereof, but the number of wards shall not be reduced below
three or increased above seven in number and shall be made as nearly equal in
population as practical; provided, however, that no change in number or
boundary of said wards shall be made nearer than sixty days before any general
or special election to be held in said city; and provided, further, that no
such change shall be made until public notice is given for at least thirty
days, such notice to be posted at the front door of the mayor’s office and at
five or more public places in said city at least one of which notices shall be
posted in each ward. (1901 ch. 151, § 3)
Editor’s note:
   The ward descriptions set out in this section are no longer valid because of
annexations to the city. Present ward boundary descriptions are on file in the
city clerk’s office.
§ 4.  ELECTIVE MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES.
   The municipal authorities of said city shall consist of a mayor, to be
elected by the voters of the whole city, and two councilmen from each ward, to
be elected by the voters of such wards, (ten councilmen as provided by this
Charter but the number thereof to be increased or diminished if the number of
wards be increased or diminished), who together shall form a common council and
who shall receive such compensation as the council shall from time to time
determine, and which shall not be increased or diminished during their term of
office.
(1901 ch. 151, § 4)
Statutory reference:
   For related provisions of general law, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-7(a) and (b)
§ 5.  COUNCIL TO EXERCISE CORPORATE POWERS.
   All the corporate powers of said corporation shall be exercised by said
council or under their authority, except when otherwise provided.
(1901 ch. 151, § 5)
§ 6.  QUALIFICATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCILMEN.
   The mayor and councilmen must severally at the time of their election, be
assessed with property, real or personal, or both in the aggregate, of the
value of at least two hundred dollars and have paid taxes for the preceding
year on property situated within the corporate limits of said city of an
assessed value of at least two hundred dollars, and at the time of their
election be entitled to vote in said city for members of the common council
thereof.
(1901 ch. 151, § 6)
Editor’s note:
   The provisions of this section have been declared unconstitutional. State ex
rel City of Follansbee, 233 SE2d 419 (1977).
Statutory reference:
   For related provisions of general law, providing, inter alia, that mayors
and councilmen of municipalities must be assessed with only $100 worth of
property, with exceptions thereto for honorably discharged veterans of the
armed forces of the United States for two years after discharge, see W.Va. Code
§ 8-5-7(c)
§ 7.  APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND THEIR QUALIFICATIONS.
   There shall be a chief of police, city attorney, superintendent of streets,
commissioner of waterworks, city assessor, city collector and treasurer, and
city clerk, who at the time of their election or appointment shall be entitled
to vote for members of the common council. These several offices or any two or
more of them may be held by the same person, except that the offices of city
clerk and city attorney shall be deemed incompatible with any other city
office. These several offices shall be filled by appointment by the common
council and to be held by the appointee during the pleasure of the council, and
until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified; provided, however,
that the common council by ordinance may provide for the election of any of
said officers and prescribe their term of office at not less than one, nor more
than two years.
(1901 ch. 151, § 7)
Editor’s note:
   Inasmuch as county assessors now perform the duties heretofore performed by
municipal assessors, a city assessor is no longer appointed.
§ 8.  ELECTION OF MAYOR AND OTHER OFFICERS.
   On the first Tuesday in March, one thousand nine hundred and eleven, and
every two years thereafter, on the first Tuesday in March, there shall be
elected by the qualified voters of said city, a mayor and such other officers
as may be prescribed by ordinance as provided for in the preceding section. The
mayor shall hold his office for the term of two years, commencing on the first
day of April after his election until his successor shall be elected and
qualified.
§ 9.  ELECTION OF COUNCILMEN; VACANCIES.
   On the same day mentioned in the preceding section, one member of the common
council shall be elected in each ward of the city, who shall reside in the ward
from which they were [he is] elected, and shall hold their [his] office for the
term of two years, or until their successors are [his successor is] elected and
qualified. On the first Tuesday in March, 1912, one member of the common
council shall be elected in each ward of the said city, who shall reside in the
ward from which they are [he is] elected, and shall hold their [his] office for
the period of three years from the first day of April next succeeding their
[his] election, or until their successors are [his successor is] elected and
qualified; on the first Tuesday in March, 1913, and on the same day of every
second year thereafter, one member of [the common] council shall be elected in
each ward, whose term of office shall begin on the first day of April next
succeeding his election, and continue for the term of four years, and until his
successor is elected and qualified; but if any member of the common council
remove from the ward in which he was elected, his office shall thereby become
vacant, and the council, shall fill such vacancy by appointment, until the next
general election, of some qualified person residing in the ward. Each ward
shall constitute an election precinct, and the council of the city, in office
at the time of the passage of this act [this Charter], shall establish a voting
place in each ward, at which the first election above provided for shall be
held, and unless such new places be established, the election shall be held at
the several places now established therefor. No voter shall be allowed to vote
at any city election, excepting in the ward in which he resides.
(1901 ch. 151, § 9; 1911, ch. 81)
Statutory reference:
   For general law relating to municipal voting precincts and duty of governing
bodies to establish them so as to coincide with county precincts, see W.Va.
Code § 3-1-6 Municipal precinct registration records, see W.Va. Code § 3-1-27
§ 10.  QUALIFICATIONS AND REGISTRATION OF VOTERS.
Editor’s note:
   The text of this section (being Acts 1901, ch. 151, § 10; 1911, ch. 81;
1915, Munl. Chtr., ch. 16; 1921, Munl. Chtr., ch. 8) is omitted as obsolete in
all respects.
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to qualifications and registration of voters, see W.Va.
Code Ch. 3, arts. 1 and 2; see also W.Va. Code § 8-5-13
§ 11.  ELECTIONS; MODE OF VOTING; LAW GOVERNING.
   The mode of voting shall be by ballot, but the voter shall be left free to
vote an open, sealed or secret ballot, as he may elect. The elections in said
city shall be held and conducted and the result thereof certified, returned and
finally determined under the laws in force in this state, relating to general
elections, as they exist at the time any such election is being held, except
that the persons conducting said elections shall on the day after the election
is held deliver the ballots, tally sheets and poll books to the city clerk, and
thereafter the common council of said city shall meet on the sixth day
succeeding said election and canvass the returns of said election, and declare
the result thereof, and in all respects comply with the requirements of the
statutes relating to general elections as they are in force at the time of
holding said election, The corporate authorities of said city shall perform all
the duties in relation to such election required by general law of county
courts [county commissions] and officers in the general election laws of this
state, and the provisions of chapter 3 of the Code of West Virginia, in effect
at the date of such election, concerning elections by the people, shall govern
such elections and be applicable thereto, and the penalties therein prescribed
for offenses relating to elections shall be enforced against the offenders at
such corporate election; and the said general election laws shall have the same
force and effect as if they were specially enacted for corporate elections and
were by this act [this Charter] specially reenacted in extenso, except as
modified in this amended Charter to the city of Elkins.
(1901 ch. 151, § 11; 1911, ch. 81)
Statutory reference:
   Canvassing of municipal elections, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-17
   For general law as to applicability of state election laws to municipal
elections, see W.Va. Code, § 8-5-6
§ 12.  DETERMINATION OF TIES.
   Whenever two or more persons shall receive an equal number of votes for
mayor, councilman or other city office, such tie shall be decided by the
council in being at the time the election was held.
(1901 ch. 151, § 12)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to determination of tie votes in municipal elections, see
W.Va. Code § 8-5-15
§ 13.  DETERMINATION OF CONTESTED ELECTIONS.
   All contested elections shall be heard and determined by the common council
and the contest shall be made and conducted in the same manner as provided for
in contests for county and district officers, and the common council by their
proceedings in such cases shall comply as nearly as practicable in conformity
with like proceedings of the county courts [county commissions] in such cases.
(1901 ch. 151, § 13)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to determination of contested municipal elections, see
W.Va. Code § 8-5-17
§ 14.  VACANCIES.
   Whenever a vacancy from any cause shall occur in any office the council
shall by a majority vote of those present fill such vacancy.
(1901 ch. 151, § 14)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to filling vacancies in elective municipal offices, see
W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
§ 15.  COUNCIL TO HAVE POWER TO PROVIDE FOR ADDITIONAL OFFICERS AND TO SET
FORTH THE POWER, DUTIES, BONDS, COMPENSATION, ETC., OF ALL OFFICERS; CERTAIN
OFFICERS SET FORTH.
   (a)   The council shall also have authority to provide by ordinance for the
appointment of such other officers as shall be necessary and proper to carry
into full force and authority the power, capacity, jurisdiction and duties of
said city which is [are] or shall be vested therein, or in the council, or in
the mayor or any other officer or body of officers thereof, and to grant to the
officers so appointed the power necessary or proper for the purposes above
mentioned. The council by ordinance shall define the duties of all officers so
appointed or elected as aforesaid, and allow them reasonable compensation which
shall be by monthly or quarterly salaries and not otherwise, except as to the
collection of taxes, and fees to the mayor and chief of police in criminal
convictions wherein the fees are recovered from the defendant, which
compensation shall not be increased or diminished during their term of office;
and shall require and take from all of them whose duty it shall be to receive
its funds, assets or property, or have charge of the same, such bonds,
obligations or other writings as they shall deem necessary or proper to insure
the faithful performance of their several duties. All officers whether
appointed or elected may be removed from office for malfeasance, nonfeasance or
misfeasance by the council; but provided always that any appointed officer who
holds his office at the pleasure of the council may be removed from his office
at any time without notice.
Editor’s note:
   For 1974 amendment to state constitution providing, in pertinent part, that
no “judge of a municipal, police or mayor’s court or any officer thereof shall
be compensated for his services on a fee base or receive for his own use for
his services any pecuniary compensation reward or benefit other than the salary
prescribed therefor,” see Const. Art. 8, § 11.
   (b)   Powers, duties, etc., of chief of police. The chief of police shall
have all powers, rights and privileges within the corporate limits of said city
in regard to the arrests of persons, the collection of claims, the execution
and return of process, that can be legally exercised by a constable of a
district within this state; and may without having any warrant or other process
therefor arrest any person who commits any offense against the laws of this
state or infraction of the ordinances of said city, in his presence. He shall
be ex officio the keeper of the jail and have charge of the city prisoners
confined therein, and may confine any persons arrested by him in the city jail
until such time as the charges against such person can be inquired into by the
mayor. Any person fined by the mayor for infraction of any of the ordinances of
the city may pay such fine to either the mayor or chief of police; and the said
chief of police and his sureties shall be liable to all fines, penalties and
forfeitures that a constable of a district is liable to for any failure or
dereliction in his said office to be recovered in the same manner and in the
same courts that the said fines, penalties and forfeitures are now recovered
against a district constable.
   (c)   Powers, duties, etc., of collector and treasurer. It shall be the duty
of the collector and treasurer to collect city taxes, licenses, levies,
assessments, and other such city claims as are placed in his hands for
collection by the council, and [he] may distrain and sell therefor in like
manner as a sheriff may distrain and sell for state taxes, and he shall in all
other respects have the same powers as the sheriff to enforce the payment and
collection thereof.
(1901 ch. 151, § 15)
§ 16.  TO WHOM OFFICIAL BONDS MADE PAYABLE AND PROCEEDINGS THEREON.
   All bonds, obligations or other writings taken in pursuance of any provision
of this act, [this Charter], or under the provisions of any ordinance of said
city, shall be made payable to “The City of Elkins,” and the obligors therein
and their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, bound thereby shall be
subject to the same proceedings on such bonds, obligations or writings for
enforcing the conditions of the terms thereof, by motion or otherwise before
any court of record or justice of the peace having jurisdiction thereof, held
or acting in, or for said Randolph county, or any district thereof or
elsewhere, that the sheriff or collector of said county and his sureties are or
shall be subject to on his bond taken for the enforcement of his duties in the
payment of the county levies.
(1901 ch. 151, § 16)
Constitutional reference:
   For constitutional provision abolishing office of justice of the peace as of
January 1, 1977, see W.Va. Const. Art. 8, § 15
§ 17.  OATHS OF OFFICERS.
   The mayor and council and all other officers provided for in this act [this
Charter] shall each, before entering upon the duties of their office, and
within thirty days after their election or appointment, take the oath or
affirmation prescribed by law for all officers in this state, and make oath or
affirmation that they will truly, faithfully and impartially, to the best of
their ability, discharge the duties of their respective offices so long as they
continue therein. Said oath or affirmation may be taken before any person
authorized to administer oaths under the laws in force at the time the same is
taken, or before the mayor or city clerk of said city, but in any event a copy
of said oath of said officers shall be filed with the city clerk.
(1901 ch. 151, § 17)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to oath of office of municipal officers, and requirement
for filing certified copy in office of the county clerk, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-5
§ 18.  WHEN OFFICERS’ DUTIES BEGIN.
   The mayor and councilmen, and all other elected officers, shall enter upon
the duties of their office on the first day of April next after their election,
or as soon thereafter as they have qualified, and all appointed officers shall
enter upon the duties of their offices as soon as they have qualified; and all
officers shall remain in office until their successors are elected and
qualified or until removed therefrom.
(1901 ch. 151, § 18)
§ 19.  PROCEDURE WHEN OFFICER-ELECT IS INELIGIBLE OR FAILS TO QUALIFY.
   If any person elected to any office shall not be eligible thereto under the
provisions of this act [this Charter] or shall fail to qualify as herein
required, the council shall declare his said office vacant and proceed to fill
the vacancy as required by this act.
(1901 ch. 151, § 19)
§ 20.  EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL POWERS OF MAYOR.
   The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and shall take
care that the orders, by-laws, ordinances, acts and resolutions of the council
thereof are faithfully executed. He shall be ex officio a justice and
conservator of the peace within the city, and shall within the same have,
possess and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties vested by law in
a justice of the peace, except [that] he shall have no jurisdiction in civil
cases or causes of action arising out of the corporate limits of the city
unless the defendant resides or is found therein and process therein served
upon him. He shall have the same power to issue attachments in a civil suit as
a justice of his county has, but in such cases he shall have no power to try
the same, but such attachments shall be made returnable and heard before a
justice of the peace of his county. Any warrant or other process issued by him
may be executed at any place in the county. He shall have control of the police
of the city and may appoint special police officers whenever he deems it
necessary, and may suspend any police officer until the next regular meeting of
the council. And it shall be his duty especially to see that the peace and good
order of the city are preserved, and that persons and property therein are
protected, and to this end he may arrest, or cause the arrest and detention of,
all violators of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city, before
issuing his warrant therefor if the offence is committed in his presence. He
shall have power to issue executions for all fines, penalties and costs imposed
by him, or he may require the immediate payment thereof and in default of such
payment he may commit the party in default to the jail of the county of
Randolph or other place of imprisonment in such corporation, if there be one,
until the fine or penalty and costs shall be paid; but the term of imprisonment
in such cases shall not exceed thirty days. And in all cases when a person is
sentenced to imprisonment or to the payment of a fine of ten dollars or more
(and in no case shall a judgment for a fine be for less than ten dollars if the
defendant, his agent or attorney object to a less fine being imposed), such
person shall be allowed an appeal from such decision to the circuit court of
the county of Randolph upon the execution of an appeal bond with security
deemed sufficient by the mayor, in a penalty sufficient to cover said fine and
costs before the mayor, and the costs in the circuit court in case said
judgment be affirmed, with condition that the person proposing to appeal will
perform and satisfy any judgment which may be rendered against him by the
circuit court on such appeal. If such appeal be taken the warrant of arrest (if
any), a transcript of the judgment, the appeal bond and other papers in the
case, shall be forthwith delivered by the mayor to the clerk of said court, and
the court shall proceed to try the case as upon indictment or presentment, and
render such judgment, including costs, as the law and the evidence may require
The mayor shall from time to time recommend to the council such measures as he
may deem needful for the welfare of the city. The expense of maintaining any
person committed to the jail of the county by him, except it be to answer an
indictment, shall be paid by the city and taxed as costs against the defendant.
The mayor before acting shall execute bond with good security in the penalty of
not less than one thousand dollars, or in such additional penalty as the
council may require, subject to the approval of the council, with the same
conditions as required in bonds executed by [a] justice of the peace by chapter
50 of the said Code [of West Virginia]; and all the provisions of said chapters
relating to money received by a justice shall apply to like moneys received by
the mayor.
(1901 ch. 151, § 20)
Constitutional reference:
   Abolition of office of justice of the peace as of January 1, 1977, see W.Va.
Const. Art. 8, § 15
   Mayor’s courts in incorporated cities shall have jurisdiction to enforce
municipal ordinances, but that on and after January 1, 1977, any other
jurisdiction theretofore exercised by such courts shall cease, see W.Va. Const.
Art. 8, § 11
§ 21.  CITY CLERK TO KEEP RECORDS, ETC., AND ACT AS MAYOR IN HIS ABSENCE.
   The city clerk shall keep an accurate record of the proceedings of the
council, and have charge of and preserve the records of the city, and in case
of the absence from the city, or in case of the sickness or inability of the
mayor to act, or during any vacancy in the office of mayor, he shall perform
such duties of the mayor as pertain to him as chief executive of the city and
be vested with all power necessary for the performance of such duties, but
shall not be vested with any of the authority of the mayor, pertaining to civil
suits. He shall be a conservator of the peace within the city.
(1901 ch. 151, § 21)
Constitutional reference:
   Divesting municipal mayor of jurisdiction over civil suits, see W.Va.
Const., Art. 8, § 11
§ 22.  QUORUM.
   The presence of a majority of the council shall be necessary to make a
quorum for the transaction of business.
(1901 ch. 151, § 22)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to quorum at meetings of municipal governing bodies, see
W.Va. Code § 8-9-1
§ 23.  POWERS AND DUTIES AND BOOKS REQUIRED TO BE KEPT BY CITY CLERK.
   The council shall cause to be kept by the clerk in a well bound book to be
called the “Minute Book,” an accurate record of all its proceedings,
ordinances, acts, orders and resolutions, and in another to be called
“Ordinance Book,” accurate copies of all general ordinances adopted by the
council; both of which shall be accurately indexed and open to [the] inspection
of anyone required to pay taxes in the city, or who may be otherwise interested
therein. All oaths and bonds of officers in the town, and all papers of the
council shall be endorsed, filed and securely kept by the clerk. The bond of
officers shall be recorded in a well bound book to be called “Record of Bonds.”
The clerk shall perform such other duties as may by ordinance of the council be
prescribed. The transcripts of ordinances, acts, orders and resolutions
certified by the clerk under the seal of the city shall be deemed prima facie
correct when sought to be used in any court or before any justice.
(1901 ch. 151, § 23)
Constitutional reference:
   For constitutional provisions abolishing office of justice of the peace as
of January 1, 1977, see W.Va. Const. Art. 8, § 15
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to records and minutes of municipal governing bodies, and
duties of clerks and recorders with respect thereto, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-9-3,
8-10-3
§ 24.  MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING TO BE READ; ROLL CALL OF COUNCIL.
   At each meeting of the council the proceedings of the last meeting shall be
read and corrected if erroneous and signed by the presiding officer for the
time being. Upon the call of any member the ayes and noes on any question shall
be taken and recorded by the clerk in the minute book. The call of the members
for such vote shall be made alphabetically.
(1901 ch. 151, § 24)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of general law, see W.Va. Code § 8-9-3
§ 25.  MAYOR TO VOTE ONLY IN CASE OF A TIE.
   The mayor shall have no vote upon any proceedings before the council except
in the case of a tie.
(1901 ch. 151, § 25)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to authority of municipal mayor to cast tie-breaking vote
“unless he has previously voted,” see W.Va. Code § 8-9-2
§ 26.  REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS AND COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE THERETO.
   The regular meeting of the council shall be held at such time and at such
places in the city as they shall from time to time ordain and appoint; and it
shall be lawful for the council by ordinance to vest in any officer of the
city, or in any member or number of members of their own body, the authority to
call special meetings and prescribe the modes in which notice of such special
meetings shall be given. If a majority of the members of the council do not
attend any regular or special meeting, those in attendance shall have authority
to compel the attendance of absent members under such reasonable penalties as
they may think proper to impose; all questions put to a vote, except such
matters as are hereinafter provided for, shall be decided by a majority of the
members present.
(1901 ch. 151, § 26)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to proceedings of municipal governing bodies, see W.Va.
Code §§ 8-9-1 through 8-9-3
§ 27.  CITY COLLECTOR AND TREASURER TO KEEP ALL CITY MONEYS; HOW PAID OUT.
   All moneys belonging to the city shall be paid over to the city collector
and treasurer; and no money shall be paid out by him except as the same shall
have been appropriated by the council and upon an order signed by the mayor and
city clerk, and not otherwise, except [that] at the expiration of his term of
office upon the order of the council, signed by the mayor and clerk, he shall
pay over to his successor all the money remaining in his hands.
(1901 ch. 151, § 27)
§ 28.  GENERAL CORPORATE POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL.
   (1)   The council of said city shall have the following general powers, and
may provide by ordinance and resolution for the exercise and enforcement of the
same, namely:
   (2)   To lay off, open, close, vacate and maintain public grounds, parks and
public places, and name and re-name the same.
   (3)   To regulate the planting, trimming and preservation of shade trees by
persons and corporations in streets, alleys, roads, public grounds and places,
and to provide for the planting, removal, trimming and preservation of such
trees and other ornamental shrubbery by the municipality.
   (4)   To declare as public nuisances any trees, shrubbery, etc., growing on
private property within said city, the roots of which clog or choke any public
sewer belonging to said city, or damage the streets or sidewalks of said city,
and provide for the removal or destruction of said trees or shrubbery.
   (5)   To establish, maintain and regulate free public libraries and reading
rooms, and to purchase books, papers, maps, and manuscripts therefor, and
receive donations and bequests of money or property for the same, in trust or
otherwise, and to provide for the rent and compensation for the use of any
existing free public libraries established or managed by private corporations
or associations organized for that purpose.
   (6)   To protect divine worship in or about the premises where held.
   (7)   To locate, lay off, close, open, alter, grade, straighten, widen,
narrow, vacate, pave, repave, construct and keep in repair bridges, viaducts,
undergrade crossings, roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks, drains and
gutters, for the use of the public, or any of the citizens thereof, and to
improve and light the same, and keep them clean and free from obstruction on or
over them; provided, the municipality shall not be liable for or respond in
damages for injury to persons or property caused by or from a defect or
obstruction in or on the plat [plot] of ground between the gutter or curb of
any street and the paved or plank sidewalk extending there along, or between
any such sidewalks and the property lying next adjacent thereto, unless the
municipality had actual notice of such defect or obstruction prior to the time
of the injury complained of.
   (8)   To enter into a contract with any internal improvement company for the
joint ownership of any bridge erected by the municipality and such improvement
company, upon such terms as may be prescribed in the contract between them, but
such bridge or bridges shall be in a public highway, and the interest of the
company shall only be such proportionate part thereof as it may pay for, or
that [which] may be named in the contract.
   (9)   To regulate the width of sidewalks and streets, and the width and care
of public grounds or grass plots abutting thereon, and to order the sidewalks,
footways, crosswalks, drains and gutters to be curbed and paved, or repaved and
kept in good order, free and clean, and to provide for the removal of ice and
snow therefrom and for sprinkling the same, by the owners or occupants of the
real estate next adjacent thereto.
   (10)   To regulate the use of walks, highways and bridges and the rate of
speed or travel thereon, and to prevent and punish for fast driving or riding
thereon of any horse, bicycle, wheeled vehicle, wagon, steam or electric or
traction engine, motor car or automobile, and to prevent injury to or waste on
such streets, alleys, roads or highways from overloaded or improperly loaded
vehicles.
   (11)   To regulate the making of division fences and party walls by the
owners of adjoining and adjacent premises and lots, and to regulate or require
drainage by the owner of such lots or other real estate by the proper drains,
ditches and sewers, and to fill and cause to be filled any lot below the
established elevation or grade.
Editor’s note:
   For a case holding that the legislative grant to regulate division fences
does not authorize the municipal council to declare a fence a nuisance unless
and until it has, by a general ordinance, in fact declared the nature and
character of the fences that may properly be built and maintained, see Donohoe
v. Fredlock, 72 W.Va. 712, 79 SE 736 (1913).
 
   (12)   To regulate the erection and use of radio aerials and other radio
equipment.
   (13)   To regulate or prohibit street carnivals, street fairs, or street
parades, advertising exhibitions or other exhibitions thereon, or the
exhibition of natural or artificial curiosities thereon.
   (14)   To regulate or prohibit the ringing of bells, blowing of steam
whistles, sounding of motor car or automobile horns, or use of hand organs or
other musical instruments of any annoying character or other music of itinerant
performers in the streets, roads, parks or public places of the municipality;
provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to common carriers in
the ordinary discharge of their duties.
   (15)   To license, regulate or prohibit auctioneering.
   (16)   To license or prohibit the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, drugs
or medicines on the streets or other public places.
   (17)   To impose a license tax on persons keeping for hire taxis, carriages,
hacks, buggies, wagons or for carrying for hire persons or baggage in such
vehicles, and to regulate the charge for such services within the corporate
limits of said city.
   (18)   To establish and regulate hack stands and stands for automobiles,
coaches, cabs and omnibuses kept on the streets for hire.
   (19)   To regulate, assess and collect a license fee for the use of the
municipality on anything or business for which a state license is required by
chapter 32 of the Code, subject to the exemption as provided therein; and
excepting herefrom the right to require licenses under subsections (s) and (t)
of section 1 of chapter 32 of the Code.
Editor’s note:
   The statutory citations in subsection (19) are to Barne’s Code, Annotated,
1923, which were carried over into the Official Code of West Virginia, 1931, as
article 12, chapter 11 thereof. What was § 1 of ch. 32 of Barne’s Code has
since been repealed; and the whole of article 12, chapter 11 of the Official
Code of 1931, relating to state license taxes, was repealed and reenacted so as
to provide for state business franchise certificates instead; but see W.Va.
Code § 11-12-4 as to authority of municipalities to impose license taxes
pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-13-4, up to the amount of the state license tax in
effect on January 1, 1970, “with like effect as if this article Art. 12, ch. 11
½ had not been enacted.”
 
   (20)   To establish, locate and keep in repair market places and market
houses, and regulate markets, prescribe the time for holding the same and to
authorize the seizure thereat and destruction of any and all such foods and
drink products as shall be found unwholesome, dangerous or offensive, and
without recourse against the municipality for its [the] cost or value.
   (21)   To regulate the sale of all food or drink products, milk, fresh
meats, fish and vegetables, and provide for inspection of the same.
   (22)   To appoint market masters and invest them with power to make arrests
for the violation of the municipal ordinances or regulations.
   (23)   To regulate and provide for the weighing of hay, coal and other
articles for sale in the markets.
   (24)   To prevent injury or annoyance to the public or individuals from
anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome, and to prevent and [or] regulate
the distribution by canvassers, agents or other persons of sample packages of
drugs, medicine, powders, paint, or other articles which may be dangerous or
unwholesome for children.
Editor’s note:
   For a case holding that, under the grant of power “To prevent injury or
annoyance to the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or
unwholesome.. . . ,” the common council may abate only that as a nuisance which
is recognized as such per se or branded as such by lawful statute or ordinance,
see Donohoe v. Fredlock, 72 W.Va. 712, 79 SE 736 (1913).
 
   (25)   To regulate or prohibit the keeping, handling and transportation of
explosives and dangerous combustibles within the municipality.
   (26)   To regulate or prohibit the erection or maintenance, in what council
deems an improper locality within the municipality, of any blacksmith shop,
livery stable, cow house, cattle pen, poultry house, pigpen, privy, billboard,
signboard, gas or other engine, or the use of walls and walks for signs, and to
abate by summary proceedings whatever in the opinion of the council is a
nuisance; provided, that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to common
carriers in the construction, erection or maintenance of shops, engines,
machinery, or structures upon their own property.
Editor’s note:
   For a case holding that, under the legislative grant of power to the common
council “to abate or cause to be abated anything which in the opinion of a
majority of the whole council shall be a nuisance,” the council may abate only
that as a nuisance which is recognized as such per se or branded as such by
lawful statute or ordinance, see Donohoe v. Fredlock, 72 W.Va. 712, 79 SE 736
(1913).
 
   (27)   To regulate or prohibit the distribution of hand-bills, circulars and
other advertisements of like kind on the streets, roads, alleys and public
places, or in private yards or buildings, without first having procured the
consent of the owner or occupier thereof.
   (28)   To prohibit within the municipality or within one mile of its
corporate limits the erection or maintenance of any slaughter house, soap
factory, glue factory, lampblack factory, tannery or other house, shop or
factory, of like kind or character.
   (29)   To establish, regulate and maintain baths, bath houses, swimming
pools, drinking fountains, water troughs and public toilet stations and free
public band concerts, and to regulate the time and place of bathing in pools,
streams and public waters within the police jurisdiction of the municipal
corporation.
   (30)   To prevent hogs, cattle, sheep, horses and other animals and fowls of
all kinds from going at large in the municipality and to establish and maintain
places for their detention, to make regulations respecting the keeping and sale
of same, and to appoint a poundmaster and define his duties.
   (31)   To arrest, convict and punish any person for keeping an assignation
house, house of ill fame, or for leasing or letting to another person any house
or other building for the purpose of being used or kept as an assignation house
or house of ill fame, or for knowingly permitting any house owned by him or
under his control to be used as an assignation house or house of ill fame or
loafing, boarding or loitering in an assignation house or house of ill fame, or
frequenting the same.
   (32)   To arrest, convict and punish any person for importing, printing,
publishing, selling or distributing any book, picture or device or other thing
containing obscene language or pictures, or making indecent representations.
   (33)   To restrain and punish vagrants, mendicants, beggars, tramps, common
prostitutes and their associates, and drunken and disorderly persons within the
municipality, and to provide for their arrest and manner of punishment.
   (34)   To establish a board of health and invest it with the necessary power
to attain its object.
   (35)   To establish quarantine and to erect and maintain pest houses and
places of detention, and to make and enforce necessary orders for controlling
or preventing the spread of infectious and contagious diseases, and for abating
pestilence.
   (36)   To prohibit and punish by fine any person, firm or corporation
knowingly bringing into the corporate limits persons who are paupers, or
persons afflicted with contagious diseases, or to punish by fine, or by fine
and imprisonment, any persons so bringing within the corporate limits such
pauper or diseased person.
   (37)   To provide for the poor of the municipality, and to that end the
municipality may contract with the county court [commission] of Randolph county
for keeping such poor at the county poorhouse at a price and on such terms as
may be agreed upon between the county court and such municipal authorities.
   (38)   To authorize the taking up and provide for the safekeeping and
education, for such periods of time as may be deemed expedient, of all children
who are destitute or are without proper parental or other care and who are
growing up in mendicancy, ignorance, idleness or vice.
   (39)   To arrest, convict and punish any person for cruelty, unnecessarily
or needlessly beating, torturing, mutilating, killing or overloading,
overdriving or wilfully depriving of necessary sustenance, any horse or other
domestic animals.
   (40)   To restrain fraudulent practices within the municipality.
   (41)   To arrest, convict and punish any person for gambling or keeping any
gaming tables, commonly called faro bank, table and chips used in playing such
game; crap table or chips used in playing such game; or roulette or the wheel
or chips used in playing such game; or keno table or table of like kind or
device used in playing the same; or table of like kind under any denomination,
whether the game or games be played with cards, dice or otherwise, or any
person who shall be a partner, or concerned in interest in the keeping or
exhibiting of such gaming table, faro bank table, or chips, roulette table or
chips, crap table or chips, keno table or devices, or keeping or maintaining
any gambling house or place, or betting or gambling for money or anything of
value, and to destroy such gambling paraphernalia as may be found in use on any
such premises.
   (42)   To restrain all felons and persons guilty of offense against this
state or the United States and deliver them over to the authorities or court
having jurisdiction of the offense whereof such person is accused.
   (43)   To apprehend and punish any person, who, without a state license
therefor, is guilty of carrying about his person within the municipality any
revolver or other pistol, dirk, bowie knife, slingshot, razor, billy, metallic
or other false knuckles, or any other dangerous or deadly weapons of like kind
and character, as provided by chapter 51 of the acts of the legislature of 1909
[W.Va. Code § 61-7-1] and the punishment therefor, whether for the first or
other offense, shall be that prescribed by said chapter for any such person
guilty under the misdemeanor clause provided therein, but the place of
confinement of such guilty person may be in the jail or lockup of the
municipality, in lieu of the county jail; provided, that the mayor of the
municipality or other person exercising the functions of his office, may, in
his discretion, decline to inflict the punishment herein mentioned, and instead
thereof may require or hold such guilty person to answer an indictment by the
grand jury of Randolph county for the violation of such law; and it shall be
the duty of the prosecuting attorney of said county, when requested by the
mayor of the municipality, to appear and prosecute such offending person before
such mayor; provided, further, that regularly appointed police officers of the
municipality, whose services are rendered to and paid for by the municipality,
shall not be required to give bond, or any bond provided by said chapter 51 of
the acts of the legislature of 1909 [W.Va. Code § 61-7-2].
   (44)   To provide in or near the corporate limits of the municipality a
cemetery or other place for the burial of the dead, and to regulate interments
therein, and to guard and police the same, and to provide for the cremation and
incineration of dead human bodies when from the nature of the malady or
pestilence from which death ensued, the municipal board of health may direct.
   (45)   To regulate the erection, construction, alteration and repair of
dwelling houses, buildings and other structures within the municipality and to
compel the numbering of the same by the owners or occupants thereof; provided,
that the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to common carriers in the
erection, construction, alteration or repair of structures upon their own
property.
   (46)   To regulate by license and otherwise, plumbers, electricians, sewer
tappers and vault cleaners, except when such persons are employed by a common
carrier upon its own property.
   (47)   To regulate the hanging of doors and construction of stairways,
elevators and fire escapes in theaters, churches, school buildings, factories
and other places where many persons are received at one time, and to require
the construction of fire escapes in such buildings.
   (48)   To establish fire limits, and to regulate the construction of
buildings and designate material to be used in the construction of buildings
within such limits.
   (49)   To regulate the building of fire walls, fireplaces, chimneys,
boilers, smokestacks and stovepipes.
   (50)   To take down and remove, or make safe and secure, any and all
buildings hereafter erected and require the alteration and repair of any by the
owners thereof, that are or may become dangerous, or to require the owners or
their agents to take down and remove them or put them in a safe and sound
condition at their own expense.
   (51)   To regulate the height, construction and inspection of all new
buildings hereafter erected, and the alteration and repair of any buildings now
or hereafter erected in the municipality, and to require permits to be obtained
of the municipality for such building and structures, and the repair and
alteration thereof, and that plans and specifications thereof be submitted to
the council or some person designated by it; provided, that the provisions of
this paragraph shall not apply to buildings or structures located upon the
property of common carriers.
   (52)   To regulate the limits within which it shall be lawful to erect any
steps, porticos, bay windows, bow windows, show windows, awnings, signs,
columns, piers, or other projection or structural ornaments of any kind for the
houses or buildings on any street.
   (53)   To provide for the prevention and extinguishment of fires, and for
this purpose to organize, equip and govern fire companies, and to prescribe the
powers and duties of such companies and department, and of the several officers
thereof, and to impose on those who fail to obey any lawful command of the
officers in charge of such company any penalty which the council is authorized
to impose for the violation of an ordinance, and to give authority to such fire
officer to direct the pulling down of any building or the destruction of any
fence, wall, building or other thing if such officer deem it necessary to
prevent the spreading of fire.
   (54)   To protect the persons and property within the corporate limits and
to preserve the peace and good order therein, and for this purpose to appoint,
when necessary, a police force and such other officers as may be deemed
necessary.
   (55)   To prescribe the powers and define the duties of the officers
appointed under corporate authority, fix their term of service and
compensation, if not otherwise prescribed in this chapter [Charter], and to
require and take from them bonds, when deemed necessary, payable to the State
of West Virginia, or the City of Elkins, with such securities and in such
penalties as may be prescribed, conditioned for the faithful discharge of their
duties.
   (56)   To erect, authorize and prohibit the erection of power plants,
heating plants, gasworks, electric light works or waterworks in the
municipality for public service, and to erect, purchase, own or lease and
maintain within or without the corporate limits of the municipality such
gasworks, electric lights, power works, waterworks and reservoir to supply the
municipality or its inhabitants, water, light, heat and power, and to prevent
injury to the same or the pollution of the water or to impair the healthfulness
thereof and may acquire land for said purposes by purchase, lease or
condemnation.
   (57)   To grant, by ordinance or franchise, for periods not exceeding
twenty-five years, the use of its streets, roads, alleys and public places, to
lay pipes, conduits, manholes, drains, and other necessary fixtures and
appliances, to be used for supplying the municipality and its inhabitants with
steam or hot water, or both, for heat and power purposes, or both, or for
illuminating purposes, and to grant by ordinance or franchise, for periods of
not exceeding twenty-five years, the use of its streets, roads, alleys and
public places for the construction of movable or rolling roads for the
conveying or moving of passengers, freight and other property, and those in
charge of the same, upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
   (58)   To grant by ordinance or resolution permits for the temporary use of
its streets, roads, alleys and public places for the construction of moving or
rolling roads for the conveying or moving of passengers, freight, vehicles,
animals or other property, upon such conditions as may be prescribed.
   (59)   To provide a revenue for the municipality and appropriate the same to
its expense; and to cause to be assessed and collected in each year an ad
valorem tax, within the limits of the general tax laws of the state, on all
property in the municipality subject to state and county taxes, as valued and
returned for such taxation by the county assessor.
   (60)   To levy an annual capitation tax of not more than two dollars upon
each male resident of the municipality who has attained the age of twenty-one
years, and from which persons afflicted with bodily injury and those having
attained the age of fifty years shall be excepted.
Editor’s note:
   Sec. 2, Art. 10 of the Constitution of West Virginia, authorizing a
capitation tax as provided in subsections (60) and (61), has been repealed.
 
   (61)   To provide for the collection of said capitation at the time, and in
the manner as the regular capitation tax is collected, which may be done either
through the county assessor or by any other person designated by the
municipality; but if the county assessor or other person than city assessor, he
shall give such bond as may be required by the council before making such
collection.
   (62)   To issue and sell bonds in the manner provided by general laws
governing the same, and in addition to other taxes, to levy for the maintenance
of a sinking fund where such bonds have been issued and are unpaid, and to
control such sinking fund and to make temporary loans thereof, or to make
temporary investments thereof, or of any specific fund for the time such fund
cannot be advantageously used for the purpose for which it was levied and
collected.
   (63)   To provide for the rent and compensation for the use of any existing
free public hospital, established or managed by a private association or
corporation organized for that purpose.
   (64)   To provide for the removal and abatement of nuisances; and to carry
out and enforce sanitary regulations.
   (65)   To compel the attendance at public meetings of the members of the
council, or other body exercising their respective functions.
   (66)   To buy, lease and operate, either within or without the municipality,
stone quarries, crushers and land for said purposes, for the purpose of
furnishing a supply of stone or other material suitable for macadamizing or
paving the streets, sidewalks and alleys and improving public property.
   (67)   Subject to the approval of the public service commission, the council
may regulate the running of steam and electric cars over and across any street
or alley, and when deemed proper by the council, it may by resolution require
any railroad company or street car company to provide at its own expense a
suitable watchman at any crossing of any street or alley during such hours as
may be designated by the council or otherwise regulate such crossings in order
to protect persons walking or driving over them.
   (68)   Whenever in the opinion and judgment of the council of the
municipality it is necessary, it shall have power to construct such sewers as
in its opinion and judgment are needful to the comfort, health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of said municipality or of the public, and may
construct such sewers at such places within or without the corporate limits,
and in such manner as in the opinion and judgment of said council may be
proper; but so far as practicable, shall construct such sewers under the
streets, alleys or roads of the city; and whenever in the opinion and judgment
of said council any street or alley of said city should be paved or repaired
with brick, or other suitable substance for paving purposes, or surfaced and
repaired with amiesite or other suitable material, the said council may cause
the same to be done in such manner as in the opinion and judgment of the
council is most suitable for the purpose, and whenever in the opinion and
judgment of the council any sidewalks or walks of stone, brick, cement or other
suitable substances, are necessary, or beneficial, and for the best interest of
the inhabitants of said city, the council may order the same to be constructed
in such manner and of such material as in the opinion and judgment of the
council are most suitable for the purpose, and for the purpose of paying the
expenses and cost of any such sewer, paving, sidewalks or footwalks, the said
council may levy a special assessment for the cost thereof against the real
estate benefitted thereby, and which bounds or abuts thereon, and may cause
such special assessment with interest thereon after thirty days from the
levying of such assessment, at the rate of six per cent per annum, to be
collected as city taxes are collected against real estate in said city, as
provided in chapter 151 of the acts of 1901 [this Charter], and as provided for
the collection of state taxes assessed against real estate in said city; but in
the case of any sewer constructed under and along any street, alley or road, or
in case of any pavement constructed upon any street or alley the bounding or
abutting real estate on each side of the street or alley shall be held liable
to pay one-half of the cost of such sewer and pavement, repavement or surfacing
of pavement heretofore laid, and in case of any sidewalks or footwalks, the
real estate next adjacent thereto shall be held liable to pay the whole cost of
such sidewalks or footwalks; provided, that in case of the construction of any
sewer, the amount to be assessed against the abutting property shall be
ascertained by taking one-half of the total costs of such sewer, including
mains and laterals, on all the streets or alleys or through private property
which enters into such mains, and together make one complete sewer line, and
from one-half of the total cost and total length of such sewer, the cost per
foot shall be ascertained. This sum shall then be multiplied by the number of
feet which any lot, part of lot, or other real estate, abuts thereon which is
liable to assessment under this act, and the amount so ascertained shall be
assessed against the abutting property as hereinbefore provided, but no lot
already having sewer service and occupied by a dwelling shall be assessed with
any portion of the cost of any new sewer unless it is necessary for the owner
of such lot to connect with such new sewer.
Editor’s note:
   For a case holding that the language of this subsection to the effect that
“no lot already having sewer service shall be assessed with any portion of the
cost of any new sewer,” does not apply to a property owner who has secured a
connection to an unsanitary sewer, which renders necessary the construction by
the city of the new sewer, see City of Elkins v. Haggerty, 111 W.Va. 422, 162
SE 313 (1932).
   For a case construing similar language in a predecessor of this subsection,
that is “*** and for the purpose of paying the expenses and cost of any ***
sidewalks or footwalks, the said council may levy a special assessment for the
cost thereof against the real estate benefitted thereby which bounds or abuts
thereon. *** and in case of any sidewalks or footwalks the real estate next
adjacent thereto shall be held liable to pay the whole cost of such sidewalks
or footwalks,” see Lee v. City of Elkins, 99 W.Va. 201, 128 SE 83 (1925).
   For a case construing, in the light of prior state Code provisions (now
W.Va. Code § 11A-2-2), certain language of a predecessor of this subsection
which is similar to language hereof, and holding that the city’s right to a
personal judgment was barred five years after the assessment was laid, see City
of Elkins v. Stickley, 114 W.Va. 103, 170 SE 902 (1933).
   For a case construing some similar language of a predecessor of this
section, and holding that “a legal severance of property is not made by a mere
easement over it,” and that a sewer laid through an easement over a single lot
under single ownership did not create separate lots abutting the sides of such
easement, see City of Elkins v. Stickley, supra.
Statutory reference:
   For state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-18-1 et seq.
 
   (69)   The said city council is hereby given full right and authority to
require any person or lot owner in said city to connect a sewer leading from
his or her house or lot into any public sewer which is located in any public
street or alley adjoining the same, and if such house or lot owner fails or
refuses so to do after having been given reasonable notice, the said council
may enter upon said lot and construct such sewers and may levy the actual cost
thereof against the lot upon which the same is built and collect such cost from
the owner of such lot in the same manner as city or state taxes are collected.
   (70)   And, provided, further, that in the case of the grading, regrading,
paving, repaving, and surfacing old pavements, the cost of construction,
including material and labor, grading, cuts and fills, shall be charged to the
bounding and abutting property ratably, according to the extent of the several
parcels of real estate adjacent thereto, and assessed and collected from the
owners thereof as other assessments and taxes are collected, and the amount of
such assessments against the several properties shall be ascertained by the
apportionment of the total cost thereof upon any particular street or part of a
street or alley so paved or improved, according to the relative frontage of
each parcel to the entire extent of such work; and the council may also cause
certificates of the several assessments so made, showing the separate parcels
of property, the owner, amount of the assessment thereon, with such general
description as will identify the property, to be prepared, certified and
recorded in the deed of trust record in the office of the clerk of the county
court [commission] of Randolph county, and such record shall constitute a lien
upon such property in favor of the said city for the amount of such assessment
and may be enforced in equity as other liens are enforced. The amount so
assessed and for which such certificates are issued shall be payable in ten
payments as follows: One-tenth of such amount shall be payable as soon as said
assessments are laid; and a like one-tenth, together with interest on the whole
remaining unpaid for one year, shall be paid on or before one year thereafter
until all of such assessments are paid; providing [provided], that any abutting
owner so liable for any portion of the costs of such improvement shall have the
right at any time after the same is certified as aforesaid to the treasurer for
collection to anticipate the payment of any and all such assessments, and shall
be allowed to pay the face of any and all such assessments with interest at six
per cent per annum only to the time of such payment.
   (71)   When such assessments or certificates are perfected, as aforesaid,
the council may by resolution entered of record by it, sell, assign or transfer
to any person or persons for cash all or any of the assessments or
certificates, perfected as herein provided, and apply the proceeds received
thereby to the cost of such improvements, providing that the city in
transferring such certificates shall not be held as guarantor or in any way
liable therefor, except upon the direct action of the council, expressed by
resolution of record before sale.
   (72)   Said certificates shall be exempt from state, county, district end
municipal taxes.
   (73)   When all assessments are paid, the treasurer shall issue a release of
such lien which may be recorded in the office of the clerk of the county court
[commission].
   (74)   But in case of grading, paving, or repaving, or otherwise permanently
improving any street or alley, before the council shall direct the undertaking
of such work, it shall enter an ordinance reciting the necessity thereof and
the opinion and judgment of the council favoring such work, and shall cause
survey, profiles and estimates of the cost thereof to be made and filed with
the council, and give notice to all parties affected thereby, by publication of
notice for two successive weeks in some newspaper of general circulation in the
city, describing in a general way the work to be undertaken and appointing a
day after the completion of the publication of the said notice, for hearing
before the council upon the advisability of undertaking said work, at which
time all parties interested therein may appear, either in person or by agent or
attorney and shall have access to the said surveys, plans, specifications,
etc., and upon such hearing the council may undertake the said work; provided,
the same is favored by three-fifths vote of the members of said council, or may
decline to undertake the said work.
   (75)   In case the council shall determine to undertake said work, it shall
be carried on, completed and paid for as hereinbefore provided for; and in
which case the certificates or liens acquired on failure of any property owner
to pay his assessment and apportionment, such certificates may be issued and
sold, or negotiated to the contractor doing the work, or to any other person if
the council deems it expedient to do so; provided, the city, in issuing such
certificates, shall not be held as guarantor or in any way liable for the
payment thereof, except upon a direct action of the council expressed by
resolution, of record, before such sale; provided, the city shall pay for
street intersections and also engineering, supervision and inspection out of
the city treasury.
   (76)   The council shall have the authority to pass all ordinances not
repugnant to the Constitution [and] laws of the United States, and of this
state, which shall be necessary or proper to carry into full effect and power,
authority and capacity, the jurisdiction which is or shall be granted to or
vested in the said city, or in the council, or in any officer or body of
officers of said city, and to enforce any or all their ordinances by reasonable
fines and penalties, and by imprisoning the offender or offenders, and upon
failure to pay any fine or penalty imposed may compel the offender to labor
without compensation at and upon any of the public works or improvements
undertaken or to be undertaken by said city, or to labor at any work which the
said council may lawfully employ [any such offender] upon at such a reasonable
rate per diem as the council may fix, until any fine or fines and costs imposed
upon any such offender by said city have been fully paid and discharged, after
deducting reasonable charges of support while in the custody of the officers of
the city; provided, however, that no fine shall be imposed exceeding one
hundred dollars and costs, and that no person shall be imprisoned or compelled
to labor as aforesaid for more than one hundred days for any one offense. And
in all cases where a fine is imposed for an amount exceeding ten dollars and
costs, or a person be imprisoned or compelled to labor as aforesaid for a term
greater than ten days, an appeal may be taken from such decision upon the same
terms and conditions that appeals are taken from the judgment of a justice of
this state.
Constitutional reference:
   For constitutional provision abolishing office of justice of the peace as of
January 1, 1977, see W.Va. Const., Art. 8, § 15
 
   Such fines and penalties shall be imposed and recovered, and such
imprisonment inflicted and enforced by and under the judgment of the mayor of
said city; or, in case of his absence or inability to act, by the clerk of said
city, or if he be unable to act, then by any member of the council to be
appointed by the council for that purpose; and for his services in trying
cases, whether civil, criminal or infractions of the ordinances of the city,
the mayor shall be entitled to receive such fees as are paid to justices of the
peace for similar services, but in cases of infractions of the ordinances of
the city the mayor shall not be paid such fees unless they are collected from
the defendant, and in all cases the chief of police shall be entitled to
receive such fees as are paid to constables for similar services, except that
for cases for the infraction of the ordinances of the city he shall not receive
such fees unless collected from the defendant; and, provided, further, that the
fees for making any arrest shall be one dollar, to be paid to the officer
making the arrest, whether such offender be the chief of police or other
officer, if collected from the defendant, but not otherwise.
Constitutional reference:
   For 1974 Amendment to state Constitution providing, in pertinent part, that
no “judge of a municipal police or mayor’s court or any officer thereof” be
compensated for his services on a fee basis, but only by salary, see W.Va.
Const. Art. 8, § 11
 
   An alternative method of making certain improvements.
   (77)   In addition to the foregoing powers, the council shall have the full
right and power to provide by ordinance for establishing an alternative method
for grading, paving, repaving and surfacing streets and alleys, within the city
of Elkins, and also for laying sewers and sewer mains within and also without
the city limits where necessary to afford adequate drainage facilities to
promote the health of the city, whereby the full amount of the costs thereof
shall be assessed and charged to adjacent and abutting property, either in case
of lots or parts of lots, or to property not laid off in lots, within the city
as well as lands and property not within the city limits, in cases where it is
or may become necessary to afford such adequate drainage, ratably, according to
the extent of continuity of such property.
Statutory reference:
   For state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-18-1 et seq.
 
   (78)   But this alternative method shall be adopted and enforced in cases
only where a majority of the owners of such adjacent and abutting property
petition therefor in writing.
   (79)   And then in such cases the council shall prepare plans, profiles,
specifications and estimates of costs and appoint a time for hearing thereon,
not less than twenty days after giving written notice to all parties affected
thereby, but where owners of such property are not known or do not reside in
the county of Randolph, such notice may be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county, for two successive weeks before the hearing, at
which hearing all persons affected by such proposed improvement may appear in
person or by agent or attorney and be heard in favor of, or in opposition
thereto.
   (80)   If the council shall determine to undertake such work they shall
advertise for bids therefor according to said plans and specifications for four
successive weeks in two newspapers of general circulation, and award the
contract, if satisfactory, to the lowest and best bidder. Such contract shall
provide for an alternative method of payment, that is to say, those who elect
to do so may pay their proper share of the total cost when the work is finished
and the final estimates and assessments are made, or give negotiable notes
acceptable to the contractor; and as to the shares of those who do not settle
as above provided, the council shall charge them to the property and make out
proper assessment certificates showing in detail the property, the work, the
name of the owner, amount of the payments, divided into ten equal annual
payments, and when duly certified such certificates shall be recorded in the
deed of trust records of Randolph county and when so recorded shall be and
constitute a lien on such property from that date until paid for such share or
assessment, together with the interest thereon from the date of the assessment.
And the cash so paid shall go to contractor, and the notes and certificates
shall be assigned and transferred to him by the mayor when authorized by order
of council and such notes and certificates may be enforced by said contractor
or his assignees in any court having jurisdiction thereof. And when payment in
full or in part is made, proper releases shall be executed and recorded in the
record of the release of liens.
   (81)   The council shall provide at public expense all engineering, plans,
specifications and inspection, and reserve the right of supervision and
inspection of all work and material, in progress, as well as final approval of
all such work, and the council shall likewise pay the full cost of paving all
street and alley intersections.
   (82)   No part of the proceeds or funds arising from any such improvement
shall be applied to any other purpose, but all such proceeds and funds shall be
used and applied to the identical job and improvement from which the same
arose.
   (83)   All assessment certificates of deferred payments that may be issued
hereunder shall be exempt from taxation.
   (84)   In contracting such improvements, the council may agree with the
contractor to accept the method of payment provided for herein, that is to say,
that such contractor, upon completion of the work, shall receive the cash
payments, negotiable notes, if any, and the certificates and liens, to be
assigned and delivered to him, in full payment and discharge of his claims
against the city for such improvement. And upon acceptance and receipt thereof,
the city shall not be liable as assignor or otherwise for any part of such
contract or work.
Statutory reference:
   For state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-18-1 et seq.
 
   (85)   All acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
(1901 ch. 151, § 28; 1905, ch. 6; 1911, ch. 81; 1915, (Munl. Chtr.), ch. 16;
1917, ch. 115; 1921, (Munl. Chtr.), ch. 8; 1927, (Munl. Chtr), ch. 3)
Editor’s note:
   The subsection numbers in this section are supplied by the editors to
facilitate reference thereto, and are not to be regarded as official.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to general powers of municipalities, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-
12-1 et seq.
§ 28-(a).  AUTHORITY TO ERECT COMMUNITY BUILDING.
   The council of the City of Elkins shall have power to erect a community and
municipal building or buildings for such purposes as shall be designated by the
council. The council shall have power to borrow a sum or sums not exceeding in
the aggregate one hundred thousand dollars from the reconstruction finance
corporation or other source to be used to pay the cost of construction and of
the land upon which the building shall be erected, and may execute a lien or
liens upon such land and building to secure payment of such loan or loans and
may do any and all other things required by the reconstruction finance
corporation or necessary and proper to obtain such loan or loans, to secure
payment thereof and to build and maintain the building. The council shall make
provision for the payment of such loan or loans from the income of the building
but in no event shall it incur any indebtedness or issue any evidence of
obligation imposing any liability upon the city or its taxpayers with respect
thereto or impose any tax or assessment to provide for the payment of such loan
or loans.
(1933, 1st Ex. Sess., ch. 67)
§ 29.  MAYOR’S DOCKET AND WHAT SHALL BE CONTAINED THEREIN; RECORD OF CASES.
   A well bound book, indexed, to be denominated the “Mayor’s Docket,” shall be
kept in the office of the mayor in which shall be noted each case brought
before or tried by him together with the proceedings therein, including a
statement of the complaint, the warrant or summons, the return, the fact of
appearance or nonappearance, the defense, the hearing, the judgment, the costs,
and, in case the judgment be one of conviction, the action taken to enforce the
same. The record of each case shall be signed by the mayor and the original
papers thereof, if no appeal be taken, shall be kept together and preserved in
his office.
(1901 ch. 151, § 29)
§ 30.  ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF EXPENSES AND LEVY OF TAXES; STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND
EXPENDITURES TO BE PUBLISHED ANNUALLY.
   The council shall cause to be made up annually and spread upon its minute
book an accurate estimate of all sums which are or may become chargeable
against the city and which ought to be paid within one year; and it shall order
a levy at a meeting held by it in either the month of June or July of each
year, of so much as will in its judgment be necessary to pay the same, such
levy shall be upon all real and personal property therein subject to a state
tax, and shall designate the same as the “general tax,” and may include a poll
tax of not exceeding two dollars each year upon each able-bodied man therein
who is above the age of twenty-one years and not over fifty years of age; which
poll tax shall be used exclusively upon the opening, improving and maintaining
the roads, streets and alleys of the city, and shall designate the same as the
“street tax”; provided, that such levy for the general tax shall not exceed one
dollar on every one hundred dollars of assessed value of the property upon
which the same is levied; and the said council may also impose such license tax
upon dogs and other animals as they may deem proper and collect the same from
the owners of such animals as other taxes are collected and prescribe such
rules, regulations and penalties governing the payment of such tax on animals
as they may deem reasonable. At least once in each year the council shall cause
to be made up and published in one or more of the newspapers published in the
city an accurate statement of the revenue received from all sources and of all
the expenditures upon all the different accounts for the preceding year.
(1901 ch. 151, § 30)
Editor’s note:
   W.Va. Const., Art. 10, § 2, which authorized a capitation (poll) tax has
been repealed; and Art. 10, § 1 has been amended so as to limit the aggregate
of taxes for any one year on personal property used for agricultural purposes
and upon money and securities 50¢ per $100 of valuation; on realty occupied by
its owner for a residence to $1 per $100 of valuation; and to $2 per $100 of
valuation on all other realty within a municipality. In addition to these
constitutional provisions, the general laws of the state have been amended
since enactment of this section in 1901 so as to render it almost wholly
obsolete.
Statutory reference:
   Dog taxes, see W.Va. Code § 11A-1-15
   For general law as to annual financial estimate and tax levies by
municipalities, see W.Va. Code §§ 11-8-9, 11-9-14
§ 31.  CITY ASSESSOR–POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
Editor’s note:
   The text of this section is omitted as obsolete. The city no longer has an
assessor, as his functions have been taken over completely by the county
assessor; see W.Va. Code ch. 11, arts. 2 through 6. As to payment by county
sheriff to municipal treasury of municipal taxes collected by him, see W.Va.
Code § 11A-1-15.
§ 32.  SAME–ASSESSMENT BOOKS.
Editor’s note:
   The text of this section is omitted for the reasons stated in the note under
§ 31 of this Charter.
§ 33.  LIEN FOR TAXES, FINES, ETC., AND ENFORCEMENT THEREOF.
   There shall be a lien on real estate within said city for city taxes
assessed thereon, and for all fines and penalties assessed to or imposed upon
the owners thereof, by the authorities of such city, including expenses for
making sidewalks and streets and paving the same, and constructing sewers, and
for furnishing water, electric lights or other public utility when furnished by
said city, from the time the same are so assessed or imposed, which shall have
priority over all other liens except taxes or dues due the United States and
the lien for taxes due the state, county or district; and such lien may be
enforced by the council in the same manner provided by law for the enforcement
of a lien for county taxes, and any time after six months after such lien
attaches the city may in its own corporate name proceed to the enforcement of
said lien against the real estate chargeable therewith by a suit in equity. If
any real estate within said city be returned delinquent for the non-payment of
city taxes due thereon, a copy of such delinquent list shall be certified by
the council to the auditor of this state and the same may be sold for city
taxes, interest and commissions thereon in the same manner, at the same time,
and by the same officers as real estate is sold for state taxes; and a return
of such sales made to and deed executed therefor, if not redeemed, in the same
manner and with like effect, as the return of sales of real estate sold for
state taxes are made and deeds therefor executed to purchasers.
(1901 ch. 151, § 33; 1911, ch. 81)
Editor’s note:
   The last sentence of this section is now obsolete; see W.Va. Code §§ 11A-3-
1 et seq.
§ 34.  DUTIES, BOND, ETC., OF CITY COLLECTOR AND TREASURER.
   It shall be the duty of the city collector and treasurer, when the extended
copies of the assessor’s books are completed, to receive a copy thereof,
receipting to the council for the same, and it shall be his duty to collect
from the parties the entire amount of the taxes with which they are severally
charged therein, and may proceed to collect the same at any time after the
first day of August, and may enforce payment thereof by levy upon the personal
property and sale thereof, of the person so charged with taxes at any time
after the first of October next after said taxes are assessed; said taxes shall
be a lien upon the property upon which they are assessed from and after the
time the assessor’s books are completed, verified and returned to the city
council, and shall write the word “paid” opposite the name of each person who
pays the taxes assessed against him and shall also give to the person paying
such taxes a receipt therefor; provided, however, that said assessor
[collector] and treasurer may distrain at any time for any taxes assessed
against a person who is about to remote or who has removed from said city after
such taxes are assessed, and the books returned as aforesaid. He shall also
receive such other moneys of the city as he is authorized by this act [Charter]
to receive, and also all moneys ordered by the council to be paid to him,
giving receipt therefor to the parties paying the same, and shall keep an
accurate, itemized account of all moneys received by him; and his books shall
at all times be open for the inspection of the mayor, council, city clerk, and
to any taxpayer of the city. He shall pay out the money in his hands only upon
the order of the council upon orders signed by the mayor and city clerk and
keep an itemized statement of the money so paid out by him. He shall on or
before the last meeting of the council in each year just before the expiration
of the term of office of the mayor, and at such other times as the council may
require, present to the council a full and complete statement of all the moneys
with which he is chargeable or that have been received by him and not
previously accounted for, and shall at the same time, in like manner, furnish a
complete statement, by separate items of all disbursements made by him during
such period, with his vouchers evidencing the same. He shall receive all taxes
upon licenses and receipt to the party paying the same by endorsement upon the
permit granted by order of the council, or mayor as the case may be.
Editor’s note:
   The provisions of this subsection as to assessment of property for taxes and
the collection of taxes are now obsolete, inasmuch as the county assessor and
the sheriff perform the duties herein imposed upon the city collector and
treasurer; see W.Va. Code § 8-13-1, Ch. 11, Art. 1, and Ch. 11A.
 
   He shall receive upon all moneys coming into his hands and paid out by him
as his compensation for receiving and disbursing the same such sum as may be
fixed by the council, not to exceed five per cent thereof. He shall upon the
expiration of his term of office turn over to the council all books and other
property in his possession belonging to the city, except the money in his
hands, which he shall turn over to his successor upon the order of the council
as hereinbefore provided; and shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, execute a bond with good security payable to said city, in a penalty of
not less than double the estimated amount of money that is liable to come into
his hands each year during his term of office, conditioned that he will
faithfully discharge the duties of his office and account for and pay over as
required by law and the orders, ordinances, rules and regulations of the
council of said city, all money which shall come into his hands, which bond
shall be subject to the approval of the council. He shall be chargeable with
all the city taxes, levies and assessments and money of the city which shall
come into his hands and shall account therefor.
(1901 ch. 151, § 34)
Editor’s note:
   The city collector and treasurer no longer receives any percentage of city
money collected by him.
§ 35.  LICENSE ORDINANCES AND PAYMENT OF TAX THEREON.
   The council shall prescribe by ordinance the time and manner in which
licenses of all kinds shall be applied for and granted, and shall require the
payment of the tax thereon to the city collector and treasurer before the
delivery thereof to the person applying therefor.
(1901 ch. 151, § 35)
§ 36.  PROVISIONS OF LAW APPLICABLE TO LICENSES AND EXPIRATION DATE OF CERTAIN
LICENSES.
   The provisions of the section 29 of chapter 32 of the Code of West Virginia
shall be deemed applicable to licenses of a similar character to those therein
mentioned when granted by or under authority of the council of said city;
licenses for the keeping of dogs, or other animals, shall also expire on the
thirteenth day of April next after they are granted.
(1901 ch. 151, § 36)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 32 of the state Code as of 1901 related to state licenses, and the
subject matter thereof, as in effect at the time of adoption of the Official
Code of West Virginia, 1931, was carried over into that Code as article 12 of
Chapter 11, which article has since been repealed, and replaced by a new
article 12 which related to state business franchise registration certificates.
See, however, W.Va. Code § 11-12-4 as to authority of municipalities to impose
license taxes pursuant to W.Va. Code, § 8-13-4, up to the amount of state
license tax in effect on January 1, 1970, “with like effect as if this article
(art. 12, ch. 11) had not been enacted.”
Statutory reference:
   The provisions of this section as to dog taxes are completely obsolete, see
W.Va. Code § 15-20-2
§ 37.  CONDEMNATION OF REAL ESTATE FOR PUBLIC USE.
   The council shall have a right to institute and prosecute proceedings in the
name of the city for condemnation of real estate for streets, alleys, roads,
drains, sewers, market grounds, city prison, water works, electric light plant
or other works, or purpose of public utility. Such proceedings shall conform to
the provisions of chapter 42, [eminent domain] of the Code of West Virginia,
and the expenses thereof shall be borne by the city, except in cases where it
is proper under said chapter to charge such expenses or any part thereof
against the defendant.
(1901 ch. 151, § 37)
Statutory reference:
   For general law as to eminent domain, see W.Va. Code Ch. 54
§ 38.  CHARTER OF SOUTH ELKINS ABOLISHED.
   The Charter of the Town of South Elkins is hereby abolished.
(1901 ch. 151, § 38)
§ 39.  ORDINANCES, ETC., NOT INCONSISTENT AND BONDS, ETC., REMAIN IN EFFECT.
   All the ordinances, by-laws, resolutions and rules of the city of Elkins in
force on the day preceding the passage of this act [Charter], which are not
inconsistent therewith, shall be and remain in full force over the whole of the
territory embraced in the boundary of said city as established by this act, and
the officers in office in the city of Elkins at the time this act takes effect
shall remain in office until their successors are elected, or appointed, and
qualified under the provisions of this act; and after this act takes effect,
shall have jurisdiction over the whole of the territory embraced in the
boundary specified in this act; but nothing in this act shall be construed or
held to in any way affect or impair any of the bonds or obligations of said
city of Elkins issued or contracted prior to the passage of this act; on the
contrary, all such bonds and obligations shall be and remain in full force and
effect just as though this act had not been passed, except that the whole of
the taxable property of persons residing within the corporate limits of said
city as created by this act shall be subject to taxation to pay and discharge
such bonds and obligations.
(1901 ch. 151, § 39)
§ 40.  CITY TO TAKE OVER CORPORATE ASSETS AND ASSUME OBLIGATIONS OF TOWN OF
SOUTH ELKINS.
   The corporate authorities of the town of South Elkins shall, before July
first, 1901, turn over to the corporate authorities of the city of Elkins all
corporate assets, including money, taxes, license fees payable, and all other
corporate property, to the council of the city of Elkins to be disposed of by
it as corporate property now owned by said city of Elkins is disposed of; and
if said town of South Elkins at the time this act [Charter] takes effect has
any outstanding contracts or obligations proper for it to contract, including
licenses granted, the said city of Elkins shall assume the same and carry the
same into execution in manner, form and effect as contracted by said town of
South Elkins.
(1901 ch. 151, § 40)
§ 41.  DUTIES OF COUNCIL AS TO FIRST ELECTION, ETC.
   The council in being in the city of Elkins at the time this act [Charter]
shall take effect shall provide places for voting in the several wards in said
city and appoint commissioners residing in each ward to hold and conduct the
first election hereinbefore provided to be held, and shall pass all proper
ordinances and orders to give this act full force and effect.
(1901 ch. 151, § 41)
§ 42.  FORMER RIGHTS, POWERS, ETC., OF CITY UNDISTURBED.
   The said city shall succeed to all the rights, powers and responsibilities
of the City of Elkins as they exist the day preceding the day on which this act
[Charter] takes effect, and shall enjoy such rights, exercise such power and
discharge such responsibilities in the same manner as the same should have been
enjoyed, exercised or discharged if this act had not been passed.
(1901 ch. 151, § 42)
Editor’s note:
   For a case holding that this section preserves to the city all of the
rights, powers and responsibilities which it had prior to enactment of this
Charter, (such rights, etc., being contained in the then W.Va. Code ch. 47);
and that by virtue of the language of § 28 of that ch. 47 (now set out in W.Va.
Code 1931, as amended, § 8-12-5, subsec. (15)), the city council is empowered
to “make regulations guarding against danger or damage by fire,” see Harvey v.
City of Elkins, 65 W.Va. 305, 64 SE 247 (submitted 1907, decided 1909).
§ 43.  INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES AND ACTS REPEALED.
   All ordinances of the City of Elkins as they exist at the time of the
passage of this act [Charter] which are inconsistent therewith are hereby
abrogated, and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this act are hereby repealed.
(1901 ch. 151, § 43)
Editor’s note:
   The Elkins Charter act was approved by the governor February 18, 1901, in
effect 90 days from passage.
TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions and rules of construction
   
10.03   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
   
10.04   Catchlines and headings of portions of code
   
10.05   Severability of parts of this code, and of codes and other regulations
adopted by reference
   
10.06   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance
   
10.08   Grades and elevations; official city base established
   
10.09   Grades and elevations; primal bench mark located
   
10.10   Grades and elevations; elevations to be described in relation to
official base
   
10.11   Grades and elevations; fixing property elevations; cross-section of
pavement when street is paved
   
10.12   Grades and elevations; determination of street grade
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances contained in this title and the following titles, chapters
and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of the City of
Elkins, West Virginia”, and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited
as the “Elkins City Code”, “city code” or “code of ordinances”.
(1991 Code, § 1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt a comprehensive code of ordinances, see W.Va.
Code § 8-11-4(b)
§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code and of all other ordinances and resolutions
of the Council, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be
observed, unless it shall be expressly provided otherwise by any section,
ordinance or resolution, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS. Whenever authority is conferred on or an act is
required to be performed by a city officer, such authority may be exercised or
performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy, agent or subordinate,
unless such authority cannot lawfully be deputed.
   CHARTER; THE CITY CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Elkins, West Virginia,
as amended and currently in effect.
   CITY. The City of Elkins, West Virginia.
   CITY CODE; THIS CODE. The Code of the City of Elkins, West Virginia, as
amended and currently in effect.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME; REASONABLE TIME. The time within which an act is to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; or,
if the last day be Sunday or a holiday, it shall also be excluded; but this
provision shall not be deemed to change any rule of law applicable to bills of
exchange or negotiable instruments; provided, that if time is expressed in
hours, the whole of any Sunday or holiday shall be excluded, unless the clear
intent of the Council is to the contrary. In all cases where provision is made
for an act to be done or notice to be given within a REASONABLE TIME, it shall
be construed to mean only such time as may be necessary, under the
circumstances then and there existing, for the prompt performance of such act
or the giving of such notice.
   COUNCIL; THE COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Elkins, West Virginia.
   COUNTY. The County of Randolph, West Virginia.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only may be construed to
include the feminine and neuter as well as the masculine.
   GENERAL RULE. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Council
may be fully carried out. Words and phrases shall be taken in their usual
sense, but technical words having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law
shall be understood according to their technical import.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such JOINT AUTHORITY to a majority of
such persons or officers, and not to any lesser number.
   MONTH; YEAR; FISCAL YEAR. The word MONTH shall mean a calendar month; the
word YEAR shall mean a calendar year; the word YEAR alone shall be equivalent
to the expression YEAR OF OUR LORD. The FISCAL YEAR for the city and all bodies
or officers collecting or disbursing funds shall begin on July 1 and expire
with the expiration of the next following June 30.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elkins, West Virginia.
   NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may be applied to several
persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; a word importing the
plural number only may be applied to one person or thing as well as to several.
   OATH; SWORN. A solemn affirmation shall be the equivalent to an oath in all
cases, unless otherwise expressly provided, and the word OATH shall be deemed
to include an affirmation and the word SWEAR or SWORN to be complied with if
the person referred to makes solemn affirmation.
   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND THE LIKE. Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers,
departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Elkins, unless
the content clearly indicates otherwise.
   OWNER. As applied to any property, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or of a part of such property.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, society, club or any
other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual, unless restricted
within the context.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Goods, chattels, real and personal, money, credits,
investments and the evidence thereof.
   PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PREMISES. When used as applicable to real property, shall include land and
buildings.
   PROPERTY. Real, personal and mixed property.
   REAL PROPERTY; REAL ESTATE; LAND; LANDS. Lands, buildings, tenements and
hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein, except chattel
interests.
   SHALL; MAY. The word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY is permissive.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb line or, where there is
no curb, the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians. If there is no public area between the
lateral lines of the roadway and the abutting property line, then that area
immediately abutting the street line shall be considered SIDEWALK AREA.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. A mark made by a signer or subscriber who
cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by
a witness who shall write his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s
name.
   STATE. The State of West Virginia.
   STATE CODE REFERENCES. References to the West Virginia Code shall be to the
Official Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended and currently in effect.
   STREET. Alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, lane, viaduct, bridge and
approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and the
entire width thereof between abutting property lines; also a sidewalk or
footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the intent of the Council.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, any person holding a
written or oral lease to or who occupies the whole or part of such building or
land, either alone or with others.
   TENSES. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; the future
includes the present.
   WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message comprehensible by ordinary
visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or
authorized by this code or other ordinance or resolution of the city, it shall
be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided
otherwise.
(1991 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Acts by agent or deputy, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-5
   Computation of time, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-3
   Construction of statutes, see W.Va. Code §§ 2-2-10, 2-2-10(a), 2-2-10(b), 2-
2-10(d)
   Corresponding state law relating to construction of statutes, see W.Va. Code
§ 2-2-10(c)
   Definition of “personal property” relating to construction of statutes, see
W.Va. Code § 2-2-10(q)
   Definition of “property” relating to the construction of statutes, see W.Va.
Code § 2-2-10(r)
   Definition of “real property” relating to the construction of statutes, see
W.Va. Code § 2-2-10(p)
   Definition of “writing” relating to the construction of statutes, see W.Va.
Code § 2-2-10(c)
   Definitions of “person” relating to the construction of statutes, see W.Va.
Code § 2-2-10(i)
   Definitions of words and phrases in the Municipal Code of West Virginia, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-1-1, 8-1-2
   Month; year; fiscal year, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-4
   Oath; sworn, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-7
§ 10.03  PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, insofar as they are substantially the
same as those of ordinances in effect immediately preceding the effective date
of this code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.
(1991 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.04  CATCHLINES AND HEADINGS OF PORTIONS OF CODE.
   The chapter, article, division and section headings of this code are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents thereof and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles thereof, nor as any part thereof; nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such chapters,
articles, divisions or sections, including the headings or catchlines, are
amended or reenacted.
(1991 Code, § 1-4)
Statutory reference:
   Construction of statutes, see W.Va. Code §§ 2-2-10(z), 2-2-12
§ 10.05  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF THIS CODE, AND OF CODES AND OTHER REGULATIONS
ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code and of each
of the technical codes and other regulations herein adopted by reference are
severable, and that if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or
section of this code or of any such technical code or other regulations shall
be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs,
divisions and sections thereof, since they would have been enacted by the
Council without the incorporation therein of any such unconstitutional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, division or section.
(1991 Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.06  EFFECT OF REPEAL OR EXPIRATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance or its expiration, by virtue of any
provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (B)   When any ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed,
the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that
effect.
(1991 Code, § 1-6)
Cross-reference:
   Ordinance procedures of the Council, see §§
31.20 to
31.22
Statutory reference:
   Effect of repeal or expiration of statutes, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-8
   Repeal of an act repealing a statute, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-9
§ 10.08  GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; OFFICIAL CITY BASE ESTABLISHED.
   The official city base, or plane of reference for elevations in the city, is
hereby fixed at an elevation of 1,809.895 feet above sea level, as determined
by the United States coast and geodetic survey, in the adjustment made in 1903.
(1991 Code, § 1-8)
Cross-reference:
   Applications to have sidewalk grades and lines established, see §
93.034
§ 10.09  GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; PRIMAL BENCH MARK LOCATED.
   The upper horizontal surface of the United States geodetic survey bench
mark, a bronze tablet placed in the stone step of the west entrance of the
W.M.R.R. office building standing on the northeast corner of Railroad Avenue
and Third Street “1903 A. D. J. 1903”, is hereby declared to be the primal
bench mark of the city, and the elevation thereof is 120 feet above the city
base.
(1991 Code, § 1-9)
§ 10.10  GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; ELEVATIONS TO BE DESCRIBED IN RELATION TO
OFFICIAL BASE.
   All official elevations hereafter established in the city shall be
described, with reference to their elevations, as compared with the official
base, in feet and decimal parts of a foot. No grade of official elevation shall
be established other than by ordinance and in the manner described in §§
10.08 and
10.09.
(1991 Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.11  GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; FIXING PROPERTY ELEVATIONS; CROSS- SECTION OF
PAVEMENT WHEN STREET IS PAVED.
   All elevations established shall be fixed at the property lines, sidewalks
and curb lines; but the cross- section of the pavement, when a street shall be
paved, shall be determined so as to conform with the nature of the material
used in paving.
(1991 Code, § 1-11)
§ 10.12  GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; DETERMINATION OF STREET GRADE.
   The grade of the street shall be on straight lines connecting the points
where the elevations are fixed as provided by this chapter; except, that where
the grade breaks in a block between intersecting streets, the sidewalks and
curbs shall be on vertical curves; however, the grades of such curves shall be
established in conformance to §§
10.08 through this section.
(1991 Code, § 1-12)
§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance or resolution of the Council or in
any rule, regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of
the city under authority duly vested in him, her or it, any act is prohibited
or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or
an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the
violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this code or of any
such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, notice or order shall be punished
by a reasonable fine, not exceeding an amount set by Council from time to time
or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day any violation of this code or of any such ordinance,
resolution, rule, regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute,
except where otherwise provided, a separate offense.
(1991 Code, § 1-7)
Charter reference:
   Penalties for violations of election laws, see Char. §
11
   Penalty for violating W.Va. Code § 61-7-1, and duty of county prosecuting
attorney to prosecute if requested by Mayor, see Char. §
28, subsec. (43)
   Sentences by Mayor to imprisonment being limited to 30 days, see Char. §
20
Cross-reference:
   Deferred payment of fines and costs, see §§
37.25 to
37.29
Statutory reference:
   State law as to penalties authorized to be imposed, subject to certain
limitations, for violations of municipal ordinances and means available to
municipalities for the recovery thereof, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-5(55)
TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   COUNCIL
      
32.   CITY OFFICERS
      
33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   POLICE
      
35.   ELECTIONS
      
36.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
      
37.   MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Official bonds
   
30.02   Compensation of city officers and employees
   
30.03   Federal Social Security
   
30.04   City to be participating public employer; state employees’ retirement
system adopted
   
30.05   Indemnification of certain officers and employees
   
30.06   No smoking policy in Council chambers
Competitive Bidding
   
30.20   When required; publication of notice
   
30.21   Transmitting and receiving bids; bonds; specifications and the like
 
   
30.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Corporate name and powers of city, see Char. §
1
   General powers and duties of the Council, see Char. §§
28,
37
Cross-reference:
   Administration and enforcement of the Building Code, see §
150.036
   Animal humane officer, see §
90.13
   Board of Zoning Appeals, see §§
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251
   Department of sanitation’s duties with respect to garbage collection, see §
50.02
   Elections generally, see
Ch. 35
   Fire Chief generally, see §§
92.035,
92.036
   Fire Department, see §§
92.035 through
92.041
   Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission, see §
92.037
   Firefighter’s Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
92.055 and
92.056
   Interference with city personnel generally, see §
130.010
   Municipal Court, see
Ch. 37
   Office of Building Official generally, see §
150.002
   Police Civil Service Commission, see §
34.01
   Police generally, see
Ch. 34
   Police Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
34.15,
34.16
   Powers and duties of nuisance abatement and enforcement officer, see §§
91.080,
91.081
   Public utility service tax, see
Ch. 36
   Sanitary Board, see
Ch. 52
   Water Committee, see §
51.02
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to cities, towns and villages generally, being the
Municipal Code of West Virginia, see W.Va. Code Ch. 8
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01  OFFICIAL BONDS.
   (A)   Every officer, employee or agent of the city who, in the course of his
or her official duties, receives, handles or has custody of or control of city
funds over more than an amount set by Council from time to time, negotiable
instruments or securities at any time shall, before entering upon his or her
duties as such officer, employee or agent and within ten days of his or her
election or appointment, give bond, payable to the city, with corporate surety,
in an amount no less than an amount set by Council from time to time,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and a true
accounting of all city funds, negotiable instruments and securities received or
handled by him or her or coming within his or her custody or under his or her
control, and payment thereof to the city; provided that the bond of the City
Collector and Treasurer shall be in an amount no less than an amount set by
Council from time to time; the bond of the City Clerk shall be no less than an
amount set by Council from time to time; and provided further, that during any
period when two or more positions are held by the same person, the bond for
such person shall be in an amount no less than the highest amount required for
any one of such positions.
   (B)   The Council may adopt a system of blanket faithful performance and
honesty bonding as an alternative to the individual bonds provided by division
(A) above; provided, that the minimum amounts specified in division (A) above
for the positions named therein shall remain the same as therein specified.
   (C)   All persons hired by the city to work during the Forest Festival
shall, when required by the Council, give bond, payable to the city with
corporate surety, in an amount no less than an amount set by Council from time
to time, as may be specified by the Council and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties and the payment of any judgment or decree rendered
against them for the negligent or unlawful performance of those duties.
   (D)   All regularly appointed police officers and all officers, employees
and agents of the city who, in line of duty, are required or authorized to
carry firearms, shall give bond, payable to the city, with corporate surety, in
an amount no less than an amount set by Council from time to time, as may be
specified by the Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of
their respective duties and the payment of any judgment or decree which may be
rendered against them for the negligent or unlawful use or handling of such
firearms and shall save the city harmless from all claims and demands
whatsoever for the negligent or unlawful use or handling of such firearm.
   (E)   The City Attorney shall approve all bonds required by this section
with respect to their form and legality, and the premiums thereon shall be paid
by the city. The Council shall approve all bonds required by this section with
respect to their sufficiency. All bonds required by this section shall be in
the custody of the City Clerk; except, that the bond of the City Clerk shall be
in the custody of the Mayor. Certified copies of all such bonds shall be filed
in the County Clerk’s office.
   (F)   The Council shall have authority to increase the penalty of the bonds
at any time it may deem necessary, and a failure by any city office, employee
or agent to comply with the requirements of the Council within a reasonable
time shall be sufficient reason for declaring the office or position vacant and
the Council may proceed to fill such vacancy.
(1991 Code, § 2-1)
Charter reference:
   For Charter provisions as to official bonds of officers, see Char. §§
15,
16,
20,
23 and
28, subsec. (55)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require bonds of its officers, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5
(46)
   Bonds of public officers generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 6-2-1 et seq.
   Bonds required of police officers, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-5
   Requirement that municipal officers who handle public funds give bond, see
W.Va. Code § 6-2-11
§ 30.02  COMPENSATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Mayor, Council members and other city officers and employees shall
receive such salaries and wages as may be provided for them, from time to time,
by the Council in the annual budget or other ordinances; provided, that the
salary of no city officer shall be increased or diminished during his or her
term.
   (B)   The Council may prescribe compensation, in addition to the
compensation paid Council members, to the Chairperson of any standing or
special committee when such Chairperson has arduous duties to perform, beyond
those expected of a Council member; when such services are performed upon any
project for which a bond issue is in force, such additional compensation may be
paid from the proceeds of the bond issue, unless prohibited by state law.
   (C)   Except as may be provided otherwise in this code or other ordinance,
all fees paid to city officers and employees shall be deemed to be moneys
belonging to the city, and shall be paid over to the City Collector and
Treasurer, or other officer designated by this code or other ordinance, by the
recipients thereof, no less frequently than once each week.
   (D)   Members of Council and the Mayor may, in a writing directed to the
City Treasurer, at the beginning of the terms of their offices but prior to
being sworn in, elect to receive less than the maximum compensation which is
provided for at the beginning of said term. This written election as to
compensation may be reviewed and revised by the individual requesting it for
each subsequent term for which he or she has been elected to serve, if he or
she shall serve more than one term, provided that such revision occurs at the
beginning of the new term but before being sworn into said office.
(1991 Code, § 2-2)  (Ord. 165, passed 3-21-2013; Ord. 188, passed 2-5-2015)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to fix compensation of city officers generally, see
Char. §§
15,
28, subsec. (55)
   For Charter provisions as to elective officers and their salaries, see Char.
§
4
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council, by ordinance, to fix the compensation of city officers
and employees, notwithstanding any Charter provision to the contrary, see W.Va.
Code § 8-5-12
§ 30.03  FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch.
5, Art. 7, and shall be construed to render it in conformance with that article
and the applicable federal law and agreement mentioned in W.Va. Code § 5-7-3.
   (B)   All services which constitute employment, as defined by W.Va. Code §
5-7-2, and which are performed in the employ of the city in a nonproprietary
capacity and, in addition, in a proprietary capacity for the operation and
maintenance of the city waterworks, a municipally owned public utility, and the
Department of Sanitation, a municipally owned project, shall be covered by this
plan.
   (C)   It is a further purpose of this section to obtain the coverage of a
Federal Old Age and Survivors’ Insurance, commonly called Social Security, for
both the nonproprietary employees of the city and the proprietary employees of
the city who engage in the operation and maintenance of the city waterworks, a
municipally owned public utility and the Department of Sanitation, a
municipally owned project, and another municipally owned project, the city
municipal airport, subject to the approval of the state agency, as defined by
W.Va. Code § 5-7-2, to be effective hereby from January 1, 1951; except the
city municipal airport, which is to be effective January 1, 1953, and
thereafter as a regular part of the city budget for which levy is made and as a
regular part of the expenditures of the city waterworks, Department of
Sanitation and the city municipal airport, to be derived from its revenue.
   (D)   The Council hereby declares that the plans for extending these federal
Social Security benefits to all eligible city officers and employees, as
heretofore submitted to and approved by the State Auditor in his or her
capacity as the “state agency”, shall continue in full force and effect and
that the city shall conform to all applicable provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 5-7-
1 through 5-7-10.
   (E)   The Mayor, the City Clerk and the City Collector and Treasurer shall
be, ex officio, the Social Security Committee, which Committee shall administer
the plan in such methods as may be found by the “state agency”, as defined by
W.Va. Code § 5-7-2(d), to be necessary for the proper and efficient
administration of the plan.
   (F)   The city shall make such reports, in such form and containing such
information, as the state agency may, from time to time, require, and shall
comply with such provisions as the state agency or as the federal agency,
mentioned in W.Va. Code § 5-7-5(a)(5), may, from time to time, find necessary
to ensure the correctness and veracity of such reports.
   (G)   The city agrees to pay into the contribution fund, as defined by W.Va.
Code § 5-7-6, such amounts as are required to be paid by W.Va. Code § 5-7-5(c)
and (d).
   (H)   The “state agency” is authorized to terminate this plan in its
entirety, if it finds that there has been a failure to comply substantially
with any provisions contained in this plan or any provisions of W.Va. Code Ch.
5, Art. 1, and necessary federal laws and regulations, such termination to take
effect at the expiration of such notice and on such conditions as may be
provided by regulations of the state agency and consistent with applicable
federal law.
(1991 Code, § 2-5)  (Ord. passed 11-29-1950; Ord. passed 4-16-1953)
Editor’s note:
   The plans herein referred to are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 30.04  CITY TO BE PARTICIPATING PUBLIC EMPLOYER; STATE EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT
SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   The Council, having elected on July 1, 1961, by vote of three-fifths of its
members, to have the city become a participating public employer and thereby
include its eligible officers and employees in the membership of the state
employees’ retirement system, hereby declares that the city shall continue to
be a participating public employer and shall conform to all applicable
provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 5-10-1 through 5-10-51.
(1991 Code, § 2-6)
Cross-reference:
   Firefighter’s Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
92.055,
92.056
   Police Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
34.15,
34.16
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to municipalities becoming participating public employers
within state public employees retirement system, see W.Va. Code §§ 5-10-16, 8-
22-1
§ 30.05  INDEMNIFICATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide authority for the Mayor
with the concurrence of Council by resolution or motion, to indemnify with city
funds or provide liability insurance for any officer, agent or employee of the
city.
      (2)   It is the intent of this section to provide indemnification and
liability insurance coverage as extensive as permitted by W.Va. Code § 8-12-7,
as amended unless otherwise restricted or limited by this section.
   (B)   Indemnification.
      (1)   The city shall indemnify all of its elected or appointed officers,
agents or employees against any and all legal liability, including, not limited
to, expenses, costs, damages, judgments, fines, settlements, court costs,
reasonable attorney fees and any other  amounts actually and personally
incurred in connection with, arising from, growing out of, by reason of or in
any way connected with, any acts or omission of the city, or its officers,
agents or employees while acting within the scope of their official duties.
      (2)   Such indemnification shall extend to any officer, agent or employee
of the city who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party, to any
proceeding by reason of the fact that such person is or was an officer, agent
or employee of the city, without regard to the period of time in which such
official duties were performed, and without regard to the fact that the
performance of such official duties may have been professional in nature.
      (3)   Such indemnification shall be provided to the officers, agents or
employees of the city by the purchase of insurance as provided in division (C)
below, or by the expenditure of funds from the General Fund of the city as
provided in division (C) below.
   (C)   Insurance. The Mayor, with the concurrence of Council, shall have
plenary power and authority to contract and expend public funds for the
purchase of one of more policies of public liability insurance, which may
include professional liability insurance, providing the city and its officers,
against and employees, insurance coverage for any and all legal liability,
including, but not limited to, expenses, costs, damages, judgments, fines,
settlements, court costs, reasonable attorney fees, and any other amounts
actually and personally incurred in connection with, arising from, growing out
of, by reason of or in any way connected with, any acts or omissions of the
city, or its officers, agents or employees while acting within the scope of
their official duties.
   (D)   Expenditures from General Fund. If the insurance coverage provided
pursuant to division (C) above is deemed to exclude an act or omission of the
city or any of its officers, agents or employees, or if an insurance carrier
refuses to provide coverage for city or any of its officers, agents or
employees for any reason, expenditures from the city’s General Fund shall be
made for payment of any and all of the legal liability contemplated by division
(B) above.
   (E)   Exclusions. No indemnification shall be made under this section to any
officer, agent or employee of the city for any conversion or diversion of
public funds; any criminal act as defined by the laws of the United States, any
state, municipality or other governmental body; any criminal act which could or
does result in civil liability to any third party or the city; any act or
omission committed by such officer, agent or employee while the same was insane
or mentally incompetent; any amounts in settling or otherwise disposing of a
threatened or pending proceeding without approval of the city; any expenses
incurred in defending a threatened or pending proceeding which is settled or
otherwise disposed of without approval of the city; provided however, none of
the exclusions contained herein shall be interpreted to inure to the benefit of
any liability or other insurance carrier of the city, unless specifically
contained in the contract of insurance by between the city and such carrier.
   (F)   Indemnification by independent agencies. Any of the independent
agencies of the city, such as the Sanitary Board and the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission, shall likewise have plenary power and authority to adopt
a resolution at a regular or special meeting called for that purpose providing
for the expenditure of the public funds of such agency to indemnify its elected
or appointed officers, agents or employees for any acts or omissions while
acting within the scope of their official duties in the manner and to the
extent provided in this section.
(1991 Code, § 2-6.1)  (Ord. 229, passed 2-16-2017)
§ 30.06  NO SMOKING POLICY IN COUNCIL CHAMBERS.
   No person shall smoke any form of tobacco, including, but not limited to,
cigarettes, pipes and cigars in the Council chamber.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1992)  Penalty, see §
30.99
COMPETITIVE BIDDING
§ 30.20  WHEN REQUIRED; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Every contract for the procurement of goods and services by the city,
except as hereinafter provided, shall be by competitive bidding and shall not
be approved and let until notice of the intent to so contract and an invitation
to sealed bids shall have been advertised once per week, for a period of two
successive weeks, in one newspaper of general circulation in the city, the last
of which publications shall occur no less than five days prior to the meeting
at which the bids are to be opened and examined; provided, that the above
requirements shall not apply to any contract for a gross amount of less than an
amount set by Council from time to time; nor shall this section preclude the
use by the city of or be applicable to the purchasing of goods or services
through the State Director of the Purchasing Division of the State Department
of Finance and Administration as provided by the W.Va. Code § 5A-3-9.
   (B)   (1)   The provision of division (A) above shall not be applicable when
the Council, by vote, finds that:
         (a)   Compliance therewith would be inimical to the public welfare;
         (b)   Procurement of the contemplated goods or services is of such
urgency as to brook no delay;
         (c)   Other circumstances exist which would render the interests of
the city better served by noncompliance than by compliance with division (A)
above;
         (d)   As a practical matter it is determined that there exists only
one supplier of the goods or services sought to be obtained;
         (e)   The goods or services sought to be obtained are for the purpose
of maintenance or repair of existing city goods or equipment; or
         (f)   No suppliers of goods or services sought to be obtained are
located within the general circulation area of any of the city newspapers.
      (2)   When the Council determines that division (A) above is not
applicable, the Council shall, at the time of the approval of the contract for
the procurement of goods and services, refer to the applicable provision of
this division (B) which is relied upon for the waiver of the bidding process.
   (C)   (1)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this subchapter, in any
instance that a purchase of goods or services by the city is required under the
provisions of this subchapter to be made upon competitive bids, such purchase
shall be made from a vendor resident in the city if such bid does not exceed
the lowest qualified bid from a nonresident vendor by more than 2% of the
latter bid, and if such resident vendor has made written claim for such
preference at the time the bid was submitted.
      (2)   A vendor shall be deemed to be a resident of the city if such
vendor is an individual, partnership, association or corporation that maintains
an active, bona fide place of business within the city and maintains therein a
representative inventory of the commodities on which the bid is submitted and,
in the case of a corporation, is duly qualified to do business in the state as
is in good standing under the laws of the state and under the ordinances of the
city.
(1991 Code, § 2-3)  (Ord. passed 11-1-1979; Ord. 175, passed 3-20-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require competitive bidding for purchases of supplies
and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-10
   Availability to municipalities of facilities of state division of purchases,
see W.Va. Code § 5A-3-9
§ 30.21  TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING BIDS; BONDS; SPECIFICATIONS AND THE LIKE.
   The form and manner of transmitting and receiving bids under the provisions
of §
30.20, the amount of deposit or performance bond, if any, to accompany such
bids, the terms, specifications, reservation of right to reject bids or waive
irregularities therein shall be determined by the Council prior to each
respective advertisement for bids and, insofar as is practical, be stated in
the published notice.
(1991 Code, § 2-4)
§ 30.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   No smoking policy.
      (1)   First offense. Any person who violates §
30.06 shall first be warned that smoking is not allowed in the Council chamber
and that any further violation will necessitate his or her removal from the
Council chamber.
      (2)   Second offense. Any person who violates §
30.06 after the first offense shall be excluded from the Council chamber.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1992)
CHAPTER 31:  COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Clerk of the Council; records generally
   
31.02   Meetings generally
   
31.03   Rules
   
31.04   Chief of Police to attend meetings and preserve order; arrest of
persons for disobedience
   
31.05   Addressing the Council
   
31.06   Voting
   
31.07   Expenditure
Ordinances, Resolutions and Intergovernmental Agreements
   
31.20   Generally
   
31.21   Attestation; record of ordinances
   
31.22   Ordinances to repeal, amend or add to provisions of this code, and
records thereof
   
31.23   Resolutions and records thereof
   
31.24   Disposition of municipal property to non-profit organizations
   
31.25   Conveyance of city property without auction
   
31.26   Conveyance by sealed bid
   
31.27   Conveyance by auction
   
31.28   Intergovernmental agreements
Charter reference:
   Disqualification of Council members, see Char. §
9
   Duty of Mayor to make recommendations to the Council, see Char. §
20
   Election and term of Council members, and filling vacancy in office of
Council member, see Char. §
9
   Election and term of Mayor, see Char. §
8
   Exercise by the Council of city’s corporate powers, see Char. §
5
   Municipal authorities, their salaries, and composition of the Council, see
Char. §
4
   Oath of officers, see Char. §§
17,
23
   Powers and duties of Council generally, see Char. §§
15,
28,
35 and
37
   Qualifications of Mayor and Council members, see Char. §
6
   Removal of elective and appointive officers for malfeasance and the like,
see Char. §
15
   Result of failure to qualify for office, see Char. §
19
   When term of office begins, see Char. §
18
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of officers, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-12
   Composition of municipal governing bodies and the qualifications and
election of Mayor, Council members and recorder, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-7
   Filling vacancies in office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
   General and specific duties and the like of Council, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-
1 et seq.
   Oath of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-8
   Powers and duties of Council with respect to ordinances, see W.Va. Code §§
8-11-1 et seq.
   Terms of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-9
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01  CLERK OF THE COUNCIL; RECORDS GENERALLY.
   The City Clerk shall be ex officio clerk of the Council and shall keep all
records of the Council, as required by the city’s Charter and general laws of
the state, as well as by this code and other ordinances, resolutions and orders
of the Council; and he or she shall, in general, perform for the Council such
duties as are normally performed by recording and corresponding secretaries.
(1991 Code, § 2-7)
Charter reference:
   Duty of City Clerk to keep records of the Council, see Char. §§
23,
27
   Record of proceedings, ordinances, resolutions and the like be properly kept
and indexed, and open to inspection by persons interested, see Char. §
23
   Requirement that, at each meeting of the Council, the minutes of the last
meeting be read, corrected and authenticated, see Char. §
24
Statutory reference:
   Duty of municipal recorders (clerks) to keep the records of governing
bodies, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-3
   Records required to be kept by municipal governing bodies; and requirement
for reading, correcting and authenticating minutes of meetings, see W.Va. Code
§ 8-9-3
§ 31.02  MEETINGS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Regular meetings. There shall be a regular meeting of the Council on
the first and third Thursday of each month, at 8:00 p.m.; provided, that when a
first or third Thursday of any month falls upon a holiday, the Council may, by
resolution or by motion duly put, carried and entered in the minutes, designate
another day for such meeting.
   (B)   Special or adjourned meetings. There may be a special or adjourned
meeting of the Council held at any time fixed by the Council.
   (C)   Special called meetings. There may be special called meetings of the
Council at any time fixed by the Mayor or by any three members of the Council;
but there shall be a notice, in writing, of any such called meeting, served
upon every member of the Council by the Chief of Police, at least two hours
before the time at which such meeting is called; and, in such notice, it shall
be clearly stated for what purpose the meeting is called; and, at such meeting,
no other matter shall be considered, except by the unanimous consent of all the
members present.
   (D)   Notice of special called meetings. It shall be a part of the public
duty of the Chief of Police to serve the notice required by division (C) above;
but no notice shall be required to be given to any member of the Council of the
time of holding any regular meeting or any meeting called by the Council or any
adjourned meeting.
   (E)   Place of meetings. All meetings of the Council shall be held in the
Council chamber at City Hall; provided, that the Council may designate another
place, open to the public and within the city when, in the opinion of a
majority of the members, the Council chambers would not be adequate to
accommodate the number of persons expected to be present for a meeting, or
when, for other good reason, the Council chamber is not deemed suitable.
   (F)   Open to public; exceptions. All meetings of the Council shall be open
to orderly members of the public; provided, that the Council may, during any
meeting, resolve itself into a Committee of the Whole and, thereupon, go into
executive session, as provided by W.Va. Code § 6-9A-4; at which time, the
Committee may exclude from attendance all nonmembers of the committee whose
presence is not necessary for the consideration of such subject as have been
referred to the Committee; and provided further, that no final decision shall
be made or vote or action taken upon any matter until the meeting has been
reopened to the public and the Committee of the Whole has resumed its identity
as the Council.
(1991 Code, § 2-8)
Charter reference:
   City Clerk being acting Mayor during absence or disability of Mayor or when
office of Mayor is vacant, see Char. §
21
   Duty of Council to ordain time and places for regular meetings; to provide
by ordinance for the calling of special meetings; and authority of members
present to compel the attendance of absent members under reasonable penalties,
see Char. §
26
   Quorum, see Char. §
22
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for open meetings of governing bodies, with exceptions, see
W.Va. Code Ch. 6, Art. 9A
   Who presides at meetings of municipal governing bodies and what constitutes
a quorum, see W.Va. Code § 8-9-1
§ 31.03  RULES.
   (A)   (1)   The Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules as may be
deemed desirable for the conduct of its meetings, the transaction of its
business and the official conduct of its members, and may include therein
reasonable penalties for the violation thereof; but no such rule shall be
inconsistent with the state law, the Charter or this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Such rules may include, among other subjects, the following:
         (a)   The appointment, jurisdiction and duties of standing and special
committees of the Council;
         (b)   Attendance at meetings of the Council by members and by others;
         (c)   Investigations and hearings, the compulsory attendance thereat
of witnesses and the production of books and papers thereat as evidence;
         (d)   Parliamentary procedure;
         (e)   The preservation of order at meetings; and
         (f)   The manner and form of petitions, applications and other papers
intended for presentation to the Council, and procedures relating thereto.
   (B)   Until such time as the Council shall adopt rules pursuant to the
provisions of division (A) above, the rules of the Council in force immediately
preceding the effective date of this code and which are not codified herein or
in conflict herewith shall continue in full force and effect.
(1991 Code, § 2-9)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to compel attendance of its members at meetings, see
Char. §§
26,
28, subsec. (65)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to investigate and inquire into all matters of concern
to the city and its inhabitants, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(48)
   Authority of Council to make all needful by-laws and rules to carry into
effect the authority granted to it by law, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-5
(45), (55)
   Power of Council to compel attendance of witnesses and production of books
and papers, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-2(c)
§ 31.04  CHIEF OF POLICE TO ATTEND MEETINGS AND PRESERVE ORDER; ARREST OF
PERSONS FOR DISOBEDIENCE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or of some one of his or her
assistants to be designated by him or her, to attend all meetings of the
Council and to preserve order both in the Council chamber and in the vicinity
thereof, and to enforce all orders of the presiding officer by arresting,
without warrant, anyone who refuses to obey any order given by the presiding
officer; and the person so arrested shall be held in custody until such time as
he or she can be taken before a court having jurisdiction over the premises, to
then be dealt with according to law.
(1991 Code, § 2-10)
§ 31.05  ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Privilege of citizens and taxpayers to be heard; limitation on time to
speak. Any citizen or taxpayer of the city may be heard either in person or by
counsel upon any matter introduced or pending before the Council; but no speech
or hearing shall exceed five minutes, except by the unanimous consent of the
Council. If a citizen or taxpayer of the city requests to be heard either in
person or by counsel upon any matter which is not introduced or pending before
the Council, said citizen or taxpayer of the city may be permitted to address
Council upon unanimous consent of the Council. Said speech or hearing shall not
exceed five minutes, except again by unanimous consent of the Council.
   (B)   Citizens or counsel to speak only once on one subject at any one
meeting. No citizen or taxpayer of the city or his or her counsel shall speak
more than once on one subject at any one meeting of the Council, except by
unanimous consent.
   (C)   Manner of addressing Council. Any person, before addressing the
Council, shall rise to his or her feet, respectfully address the presiding
officer and remain standing while delivering his or her address. The person
addressing Council shall state his or her name and address, and if the person
represents a group or is speaking on behalf of someone other than himself or
herself.
   (D)   Order of recognition. If two or more persons desire to address the
Council at the same time, the presiding officer shall recognize the person who
first addressed the chair, and the other person shall at once be seated.
   (E)   Acknowledgment. The Mayor or the presiding officer of the meeting
shall acknowledge the person addressing the Council.  The Mayor or the
presiding officer may request that the matter being addressed in the public
comment be referred to the appropriate Council committee.
(1991 Code, § 2-11)  (Ord. 133, passed 11-17-2011)
§ 31.06  VOTING.
   (A)   Method. All votes taken in the Council, except for the election of
city officers, shall be by yeas and nays; but, upon the demand of the Mayor,
any member made before such vote is taken, the roll shall be called and a
record made by the City Clerk of the vote of every member voting.
   (B)   Roll calls.
      (1)   All roll calls made for a vote in the Council shall be made in a
random order. The random order shall be determined by the City Clerk at the
beginning of each and every Council meeting for all roll call votes during that
meeting.
      (2)   Each member shall vote when his or her name is called, unless
personally interested in the matter being voted upon or excused from voting by
the Council.
   (C)   Council members to elect city officers by ballot. The city officers
who are appointed by the Council shall be elected by ballot, and no person
shall be declared elected unless he or she receives a majority of the votes
cast.
(1991 Code, § 2-12)  (Ord. 167, passed 4-4-2013)
Charter reference:
   Mayor voting in Council only to break a tie, see Char. §
25
   Recording of ayes and noes upon call of any member, see Char. §
24
   Requirement for majority vote unless otherwise provided, see Char. §
26
Statutory reference:
   Prohibiting member of municipal governing body from voting on any subject on
which he or she may be interested other than as a citizen, see W.Va. Code § 8-
9-1
   Requirement that yeas and nays be recorded upon call of any member, see
W.Va. Code § 8-9-3
§ 31.07  EXPENDITURE.
   The Council may expend funds, for the purpose of advertising the
municipality and the entertainment of visitors, to $1 per capita per annum,
including, but not limited to, the following manner of expenditure:
   (A)   Sponsorship for non-profit organizations, civic groups, cultural and
art events and sponsorship of special downtown events or programs;
   (B)   Local meetings with business and civic colleagues;
   (C)   Out-of-town travel to meet with prospective businesses and hosting
groups and visitors to the city; and
   (D)   Advertising the city through television, radio, newspapers and various
other media, including websites, magazines, brochures and social media.
(Ord. 258, passed 2-7-2019)
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
§ 31.20  GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall not be necessary, except where otherwise provided by state
law or by this code, for the Council to publish in a newspaper any proposed
ordinance prior to the adoption thereof or any enacted ordinance subsequent to
the adoption thereof; and any and all ordinances shall be adopted in accordance
with the following requirements, except where different or additional
requirements are specified in other provisions of state law or this code; in
which event, such other different or additional requirements shall be
applicable.
      (1)   A proposed ordinance shall be read by title at not fewer than two
meetings of the Council, with at least one week intervening between each
meeting, unless a member of the Council demands that the ordinance be read in
full at one or both meetings. If such demand is made, the ordinance shall be
read in full as demanded.
      (2)   At least five days before the meeting at which a proposed
ordinance, the principal object of which is the raising of revenue for the
city, is to be finally adopted, the Council shall cause notice of the proposed
adoption of such proposed ordinance to be published as a Class I-O legal
advertisement, in compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 59, Art. 3,
and the publication area for such publication shall be the city. The notice
shall state the subject matter and general title or titles of such proposed
ordinance, the date, time and place of the proposed final vote on adoption and
the place or places, within the city, where such proposed ordinance may be
inspected by the public. A reasonable number of copies of the proposed
ordinance shall be kept at such place or places and be made available for
public inspection. Such notice shall also advise that interested parties may
appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance.
      (3)   A proposed ordinance shall not be materially amended at the same
meeting at which finally adopted.
   (B)   The Council may adopt, by ordinance, building codes, housing codes,
plumbing codes, sanitary codes, electrical codes, fire prevention codes or any
other technical codes dealing with the general public health, safety or welfare
or a combination thereof, as the manner prescribed by this division (B). Before
any such ordinance shall be adopted, the code shall be either printed or
typewritten and shall be presented in pamphlet form to the Council at a regular
meeting, and copies of such code shall be made available for public inspection.
The ordinance adopting such code shall not set out such code in full, but shall
merely identify such code. The vote on the adoption of such ordinance shall be
as on any other ordinance. After the adoption of the ordinance, such code or
codes shall be certified by the Mayor and shall be filed as permanent records
in the office of the City Clerk, who shall not be required to transcribe and
record such code in the ordinance book as other ordinances are transcribed and
recorded. Consistent with the provisions of division (A) above, it shall not be
necessary that any such ordinance, either as proposed or after adopted, be
published in any newspaper, and it shall not be necessary that the code itself
be so published; but before final adoption of any such proposed ordinance,
notice of the proposed adoption of such ordinance and code shall be given by
publication, as herein provided for ordinances the principal object of which is
the raising of revenue for the city, which notice shall also state where,
within the city, the code or codes will be available for public inspection.
   (C)   (1)   The Council may enact an ordinance without complying with the
rules prescribed in this section only:
         (a)   In the case of a pressing public emergency, making procedure in
accordance with the provisions of this section dangerous to the public health,
safety or morals, and by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members elected
to the Council; and
         (b)   When otherwise provided by state law.
      (2)   The nature of any such emergency enactment shall be set out in full
in the ordinance.
(1991 Code, § 2-13)
Cross-reference:
   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance, see §
10.06
Statutory reference:
   Ordinances and ordinance procedures, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1 et seq.
   State law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 8-11-4
§ 31.21  ATTESTATION; RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   Each ordinance, upon its final passage, shall be signed by the presiding
officer of the Council and attested to by the City Clerk, who shall then number
it consecutively in relation to other ordinances, and record it in the record
of ordinances.
(1991 Code, § 2-14)
§ 31.22  ORDINANCES TO REPEAL, AMEND OR ADD TO PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE, AND
RECORDS THEREOF.
   (A)   Each bill which proposes an ordinance to repeal, amend or add to any
portion of this code, and each bill which proposes an ordinance of a general
and permanent nature, suitable for inclusion in this code though constituting
new subject matter not therein contained, shall be so drafted as to specify the
specific section numbers, divisions and the like of this code of ordinances
which are to be repealed or amended and, with respect to additions and to new
subject matter, as to provide appropriate chapter, subchapter, section and the
like numbers therefor; and each amendment of and addition to this code shall be
set out in full, and appropriate chapter and subchapter headings and section
catchlines shall be included.
   (B)   Upon the adoption of an ordinance to repeal, amend or add to any
portion of this code or to include new subject matter in this code, the City
Clerk shall separate the several chapters, subchapters, sections and the like
of such ordinance and enter them in their proper places in each file copy of
this code, and shall remove therefrom any portion so repealed or amended and,
in the margin of each insertion in the file copies of this code, he or she
shall note and initial the date of passage, effective date and number of the
amending or repealing ordinance.
   (C)   Items removed from the file copies of this code, pursuant to division
(B) above, shall be maintained by the City Clerk in a separate, loose-leaf
volume, arranged properly according to their respective chapters, articles,
sections and the like, and each item so removed from the file copies of this
code shall, in the margin of each such item, be noted and initialed by the City
Clerk to show the effective date and the number of both the enacting and
repealing or amending ordinances. The volume in which such repealed and amended
items are to be included shall be known as the “Record of Repealed and Amended
Portions of the Code of the City of Elkins, West Virginia”, the purpose or
which shall be to enable city officers, and other persons interested, to
ascertain the status of this code at any given time in the past.
   (D)   The requirements of division (B) above are in addition to the
requirement that each ordinance, upon adoption, shall be included in the record
of ordinances.
(1991 Code, § 2-15)
§ 31.23  RESOLUTIONS AND RECORDS THEREOF.
   (A)   Each resolution shall, before its introduction, be reduced to writing
and, when adopted, shall be signed by the presiding officer and attested to by
the City Clerk, who shall then date and number it and file it in his or her
office in a book for that purpose, which shall be known as the record of
resolutions.
   (B)   Resolutions and portions of resolutions which are repealed or amended
by subsequent resolutions or ordinances shall be noted and initialed in the
margin thereof by the City Clerk, so as to show the date and number of the
repealing or amendatory ordinance or resolution, but shall not be removed from
the record of resolutions.
(1991 Code, § 2-16)
§ 31.24  DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TO NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A) The city may lease or convey city property to non-profit organizations
for less than fair market value, and without public auction, when the non-
profit organization is providing services that benefit the public and are
services that the city could lawfully provide; provided that Council has made a
factual determination that:
      (1)   There is a lack of need for such property by the city in comparison
to the benefit to the city if property is leased or conveyed; and
      (2)   There is a demonstrable need for such property by the non-profit
organization to be able to perform the services benefitting the public.
   (B)   In the event the non-profit organization should cease to provide such
services to the public, the property shall by operation of law, revert to and
vest in the city, and such non-profit organization shall thereafter have no
right, title or interest therein or thereto.
   (C)   Any lease, deed or other instrument of property transfer executed
pursuant to this section shall contain the reversion wording in division (B)
above.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.25  CONVEYANCE OF CITY PROPERTY WITHOUT AUCTION.
   (A)   The city may sell its real or personal property valued in excess of
$1,000 for fair market value, but without public auction, provided that Council
has made a factual determination that the property is to be used to facilitate
economic development projects and/or to provide a necessary and convenient
resource for the benefit of the citizenry.
   (B)   With respect to real property, fair market value may be determined by
a real estate appraiser licensed by the state.
   (C)   Any proposed conveyance of city property pursuant to this section
shall be published as a Class II legal advertisement in compliance with the
provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq., and the publication area for the
publication shall be the city.
   (D)   Prior to the approval by the Council of any conveyance of city
property pursuant to this section, the Council shall be provided with
documentation evidencing that all project plans have been approved by all
necessary and relevant state and/or municipal committees and departments, all
necessary and relevant state and/or municipal permits are in place or are
approved subject to purchase of the property, and funding for the project is
secured.
   (E)   Any full- or part-time employee, elected official or their immediate
family members, business partners or associates, are expressly prohibited from
purchasing any public properly under this section except at public auction
unless otherwise prohibited by statute.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.26  CONVEYANCE BY SEALED BID.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in §
31.24(A) or elsewhere in the city code, all municipal property, both real and
personal, shall be sold only after the receipt of sealed bids after the time
and place of the sale has been published as a Class II legal advertisement in
compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq., and the
publication area for the publication shall be the city.
   (B)   The first publication is to be made at least 15 days before the date
when bids are to be received and opened.
   (C)   The property shall be sold to the highest bidder but the city shall
have the right to reject any and all bids for any reason.
   (D)   If the property is not sold pursuant to such advertisement, the city,
by resolution, may set a date for an open meeting of Council to be held within
60 days after the date when the bids were opened.
   (E)   At the meeting held pursuant to such resolution, the city may sell by
public auction the property for a consideration not less than the highest
sealed bid previously received pursuant to the advertisement.
   (F)   At the meeting, any interested party may bid for cash, certified check
or other surety that is acceptable to the city and the property shall be sold
to the highest bidder. The city shall have the right to reject any and all
bids.
   (G)   The city may require a written confirmation of bids received at such
called meeting before selling the property at auction, but it shall not be
necessary that sealed bids be received before conducting the auction.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.27  CONVEYANCE BY AUCTION.
   The city may, at its election, continue to convey any city property, real or
personal, utilizing the procedure set out in W.Va. Code § 8-12-18(b). Under
this section and pursuant to authority granted under W.Va. Code § 8-1-5a, the
city is exempt from the auction requirement imposed by W.Va. Code § 8-12-18(b)
under the circumstances stated herein.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.28  INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS.
   For any action providing for a contractual or other agreement with another
jurisdiction, the city may enter into such agreement by passage of a resolution
by the Council.
(Ord. 250, passed 2-1-2018)
CHAPTER 32:  CITY OFFICERS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Requirements for appointive positions
Specific Officers
   
32.15   Mayor
   
32.16   City Collector and Treasurer
   
32.17   Deputy City Treasurer
   
32.18   City Attorney
   
32.19   Public Works Director
   
32.20   City code editor
City Clerk
   
32.35   Election; term; qualifications
   
32.36   Powers and duties generally
   
32.37   Duties as to assessments, taxes, service charges and the like
Charter reference:
   City officers generally, elective and appointive; and authority of Council
to prescribe their duties, terms of office, bond, compensation and the like,
see Char. §§
7,
15 and
28, subsec. (55)
   Dual office holding, see Char. §
7
   Filling vacancies in offices, see Char. §
14
   Oath of office, see Char. §§
17,
23
   Removal of officers for malfeasance and the like, see Char. §
15
   Result of officer failing to qualify, see Char. §
19
   When term of office begins, see Char. §
18
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council, by ordinance, to determine and prescribe offices and
positions to be filled; the qualifications, powers, duties and the like of
those to be appointed or elected and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-11
   Compensation of officers and employees, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-12
   Filling vacancies in elective offices, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
   Oath of office, see W.Va. Code §§ 6-1-3, 8-5-8
   Procedure for removal from office, see W.Va. Code § 6-6-7
   Public officers generally, see W.Va. Code Ch. 6
   Terms of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-9
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01  REQUIREMENTS FOR APPOINTIVE POSITIONS.
   All appointive officers of the city to be appointed by the Council pursuant
to the Charter, including the Chief of Police, the City Attorney, the
Superintendent of Streets, the Commissioner of Waterworks, the City Collector
and Treasurer, the City Clerk, the City Engineer and other permanent officers
appointed in the city by the Council, shall be elected by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 2-17)
SPECIFIC OFFICERS
§ 32.15  MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and the
head of the city government. He or she shall take care that all provisions of
this code and other ordinances, resolutions and orders of the Council are
faithfully executed; he or she shall faithfully perform the duties and exercise
the powers prescribed for the Mayor by the Charter; and he or she shall preside
over all meetings of the Council. The Mayor shall have such additional powers
and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed for mayors and other
chief executive officers of municipalities by applicable provisions of state
law, and as may be prescribed by this code and by other ordinances, resolutions
and orders of the Council.
   (B)   The Mayor, in such instances of the absence of the City Clerk from the
city, or the inability of the City Clerk to perform his or her duties, may
direct the City Treasurer to sign an attestation on an official city document
on behalf of the city so that the official business of the city may continue.
The Mayor may only request the City Treasurer to sign the official city
document if he or she deems it necessary to carry out the official business of
the city. The attestation signed by the City Treasurer shall have the same
force and effect as if the document were signed by the City Clerk. The Mayor
may only direct the City Treasurer to sign the attestation in the limited
circumstances as described herein.
(1991 Code, § 2-18)  (Ord. 126, passed 6-17-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Filling vacancy in elective office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
   Powers and duties of municipal Mayors generally, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Qualifications of municipal Mayors, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-7(c)
   Term of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-9
§ 32.16  CITY COLLECTOR AND TREASURER.
   (A)   General powers, duties and the like. The City Collector and Treasurer
shall collect assessments, levies, licenses, water rents and all other bills,
accounts and charges placed into his or her hands by the Council or by the City
Clerk and as may be required by law, and shall duly give receipt therefor. He
or she shall be chargeable with all such taxes, levies, licenses, water rents,
charges or other collections placed in his or her hands for collection, and
shall account therefor to the Council, as required by law.
   (B)   Keeping or paying out money. The City Collector and Treasurer shall
act as Treasurer and shall issue all checks when properly signed by the Mayor
and City Clerk and when he or she has sufficient funds in hand to so pay. He or
she shall keep all money collected by him or her in banks in so the city. He or
she shall not pay out any of such funds except upon such orders as are herein
specified and as allowed by law.
   (C)   Monthly reports to Council; settlement of accounts.
      (1)   Upon the request of the Mayor or a member of Council, the City
Collector and Treasurer will make a report to the Council, at its first
regularly scheduled meeting following such request, regarding the status of
city accounts.
      (2)   The Collector and Treasurer shall make full settlement of his or
her accounts as required by the rulings of the State Tax Commissioner and by
the laws of the state and as the Council, by resolution, may require.
   (D)   Records. The City Collector and Treasurer shall keep complete and
accurate fiscal accounts and records, as required by law and as prescribed by
the State Tax Commissioner and other state officers having authority to
prescribe therefor, and in accordance with directives from the Council.
   (E)   Rules and the like to which Collector subject. The City Collector and
Treasurer shall be subject to the provisions of the city’s Charter and to the
acts of the legislature relating to such officer and his or her duties, and
also to all applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances,
resolutions and orders of the Council.
   (F)   Election; term; qualifications. The City Collector and Treasurer shall
be elected by the Council at the first regular meeting held in the month of
September of each odd year, or as soon thereafter as practicable. He or she
shall be a citizen and qualified voter of the city at the time of his or her
election, and shall hold office, during the pleasure of the Council, for a term
of two years or until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The term
of his or her office shall commence on the first of October next succeeding his
or her election.
   (G)   Oath of office. Before entering upon the discharge of his or her
duties, the City Collector and Treasurer shall take and subscribe the oath of
office required by law in such cases for the faithful performance of his or her
duties.
(1991 Code, § 2-22)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1981)
Charter reference:
   Duty of City Collector and Treasurer to keep all city money, and to pay out
money only on orders signed by Mayor and City Clerk, see Char. §§
27,
34
   Fidelity bond required to be given by City Collector and Treasurer, see
Char. §
34
   Powers and duties of City Collector and Treasurer, see Char. §§
15,
34,
35
   Requiring Council to appoint a qualified voter to office of City Collector
and Treasurer, to serve at the pleasure of the Council and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified, see Char. §
7
Statutory reference:
   Payment of money from municipal treasuries, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-22
   Powers and duties of Municipal Treasurers, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-13-15, 8-13-
16
§ 32.17  DEPUTY CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   There shall hereby be created the official position of Deputy City
Treasurer, who shall be granted all the powers, duties and responsibilities of
the acting City Treasurer, in the absence or inability of the City Treasurer to
exercise said powers, duties and responsibilities. The position of Deputy City
Treasurer shall be subject to all the provisions of the city code enumerating
the terms, qualifications, duties, responsibilities and powers of the City
Treasurer, with the sole exception that the Deputy City Treasurer shall not be
required to be a qualified voter or resident of city to act on a temporary
basis as City Treasurer.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, TEMPORARY BASIS shall be defined as
a period not to exceed six months.
(Ord. 046, passed 6-15-2006)
§ 32.18  CITY ATTORNEY.
   The Council shall appoint a City Attorney, who shall be an attorney at law,
admitted to practice in the State of West Virginia, and he or she shall be the
head of the Department of Law of the city. He or she shall be the legal
adviser, attorney and counsel for the city and for the officers of the
departments thereof in matters relating to their official duties. He or she
shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions and procedures for and on behalf
of the city, shall prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments, in
writing, in which the city is concerned and shall endorse on each his or her
approval of the form and correctness thereof. He or she shall, if required by
the Mayor, appear and assist in the prosecution of persons arrested for
violating the laws and ordinances of the city or those laws of the state over
which the Municipal Court may have jurisdiction. The Mayor or any member of the
Council may require the opinion of the City Attorney, in writing, upon any
question of law involving his or her powers and duties. The term of office
shall be for one year commencing on April 1 of each year, and he or she shall
receive such compensation as shall be deemed appropriate.
(1991 Code, § 2-23)
Charter reference:
   Requiring Council to appoint a qualified voter to the office of City
Attorney, to serve at the pleasure of the Council and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified, see Char. §
7
§ 32.19  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Council may appoint a Public Works Director, who shall serve
during such periods as the Council may prescribe and who shall be paid such sum
as the Council may determine from time to time.
   (B)   The Public Works Director shall maintain on file in his or her office
copies of plans and specifications for street and sidewalk construction and for
the construction of other public improvements, works and buildings not required
to be filed elsewhere, as well as copies of all plans, plats, drawings and
diagrams which, by law, this code or other ordinance, require his or her
approval. He or she shall maintain a record of street grades and bench marks
within the city and such other records of an engineering or topographical
nature as may be of use to the city or to any of its officers or employees in
the discharge of their official duties. Except as may be otherwise provided by
law, this code or other ordinance, the Public Works Director shall supervise
all engineering, construction and surveying work done by or for the city, shall
perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by the Council and
shall make a monthly report to the Council, advising it of the status of such
projects as he or she is currently supervising.
(1991 Code, § 2-24)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 32.20  CITY CODE EDITOR.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be, ex officio, the city code editor. As such,
he or she shall prepare or cause to be prepared supplements to, or otherwise
revise, this code, noting the sections which have been repealed, generally
updating this code, and including, at his or her discretion, updated
annotations of court decisions or citations to other laws. He or she may make
and enter into all contracts and execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments necessary or incidental to the performance of his or her duties
under this section, subject to the availability of funds appropriated for such
purposes.
   (B)   In performing his or her duties and exercising his or her authority
under this section, the city code editor shall not alter the sense, meaning or
effect of any act of the Council, but he or she may:
      (1)   Renumber and rearrange sections or parts of sections;
      (2)   Transfer sections or divide sections, so as to give distinct
subject matters separate section numbers, but without changing the meanings
thereof;
      (3)   Insert or change the wording of headnotes and catchlines;
      (4)   Change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters or
sections;
      (5)   Substitute the proper section or chapter number for the terms “this
ordinance”, “the preceding section” and the like;
      (6)   Strike out figures where they are merely a repetition of written
words, and vice versa;
      (7)   Change capitalization for the sake of uniformity;
      (8)   Correct manifest typographical and grammatical errors; and
      (9)   Make any other purely formal or clerical changes in keeping with
the purposes of the revision.
   (C)   The city code editor shall omit all titles of ordinances, all
enacting, resolving and repealing clauses, all appropriation measures, all
temporary ordinances, all declarations of emergency and all validity,
declaration of policy and construction clauses, except when the retention
thereof is necessary or desirable to preserve the full meaning and intent of
the Council; and he or she may add such editor’s notes as he or she deems
appropriate.
(1991 Code, § 2-25)
CITY CLERK
§ 32.35  ELECTION; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Clerk shall be elected by the Council at its first regular meeting
in December, 1914, and every second year thereafter, for a term of two years.
He or she shall be a qualified voter of the city at the time of his or her
election. His or her term of office shall begin on January 1 next succeeding
his or her election, and he or she shall hold office for the term for which he
or she was elected and until his or her successor is elected and qualified,
unless sooner removed for cause by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 2-19)
§ 32.36  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be custodian of the city seal and of all records,
books, documents and papers for which custody is not otherwise provided, and he
or she shall certify to all true copies thereof and charge such fees therefor
as may be prescribed by this code or other ordinances of the Council. The City
Clerk shall issue all city permits not issued by other city officers and keep
full and accurate records thereof, and he or she shall serve as recording
Secretary to the Council. The City Clerk shall have such other powers and
perform such other duties as may be provided for municipal clerks and recorders
in applicable provisions of state law, and as may be prescribed by this code
and other ordinances, resolutions and orders of the Council.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall keep accurate records of every transaction in
relation to the affairs or business of the city which come within the purview
of his or her office, and such records shall be kept under proper headings, and
shall be legible, intelligible and comprehensive.
(1991 Code, § 2-20)
Charter reference:
   City Clerk being acting Mayor when Mayor absent, ill or disabled or when
office of Mayor is vacant, see Char. §
21
   City Clerk being custodian of bonds and of copies of oaths of office taken
by city officers, see Char. §
17
   Powers and duties of City Clerk, see Char. §§
21,
23,
24
   Requiring Council to appoint a qualified voter to office of City Clerk, to
serve at the pleasure of Council and until a successor is appointed and
qualified, see Char. §
7
   Signatures of City Clerk and Mayor being required on orders to City
Collector and Treasurer to pay out city money, see Char. §§
27,
34
   Transcripts of records certified by City Clerk under the city seal being
deemed prima facie correct when sought to be presented as evidence in court,
see Char. §
23
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of municipal recorders generally, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-3
§ 32.37  DUTIES AS TO ASSESSMENTS, TAXES, SERVICE CHARGES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk shall annually, not later than March 7, procure
from the County Assessor a certified statement showing, in separate amount, the
aggregate value of all real and personal property within the city which is
subject to taxation by the city, and showing the classification of such
property for tax purposes, as provided by W.Va. Code § 11-3-6.
      (2)   Upon procurement of such list from the County Assessor, the City
Clerk shall place such list before the Council at its next regular meeting.
   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk shall make out, on blanks provided for the
purpose, all assessments, allowances and orders of the Council and shall place
such forms into the hands of the City Collector and Treasurer for collection,
charging him or her with all such forms and taking his or her receipts
therefor.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall keep, in a well-bound book kept for that
purpose, a full, accurate and complete list of taxes, water rents, fines,
licenses and other orders placed by him or her into the hands of the City
Collector and Treasurer.
(1991 Code, § 2-21)
Statutory reference:
   Assessment of dogs, see W.Va. Code § 19-20-2
   Classification of property for levy purposes, see W.Va. Code § 11-8-5
   Providing that assessment of property for taxation by municipalities
generally shall be governed by the provisions of W.Va. Code Chs. 11 and 11A,
see W.Va. Code § 8-13-1
CHAPTER 33:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Attendance of members at public meetings
   
33.002   Submission of reports and statements
Board of Library Directors
   
33.015   Created; composition; appointments, compensation and terms of members
   
33.016   Powers and duties
Planning Commission
   
33.030   Created; short title
   
33.031   Composition; appointments, term and compensation of members;
vacancies; removal
   
33.032   Officers
   
33.033   Planning Commission’s powers and duties
   
33.034   Prior Council approval of expenses and contracts
   
33.035   Additional powers and duties
   
33.036   Planning Commission meetings; quorum
Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners
   
33.050   Creation
   
33.051   Composition; compensation; terms; vacancies
   
33.052   Officers; by-laws, rules and regulations
   
33.053   Powers and duties generally
   
33.054   Appointment of Superintendent or Director of Recreation and personnel
   
33.055   Annual budget
   
33.056   Authority to receive gifts and bequests
   
33.057   Reports
   
33.058   Fees and charges for use of recreational services and facilities
   
33.059   Cooperation and the like with other governmental units
   
33.060   Additional powers and duties
Elkins Municipal Building Commission
   
33.075   Created
   
33.076   Public corporation; perpetual existence
   
33.077   Board
   
33.078   Powers
   
33.079   Indebtedness
   
33.080   Surplus funds
   
33.081   Contributions
   
33.082   Sale of property on direction of Council
   
33.083   Transfer of property to Commission
   
33.084   Worker’s compensation
Municipal Historic Landmarks Commission
   
33.095   Created
   
33.096   Composition; appointments, term and compensation of members; vacancies
   
33.097   Officers; by-laws; rules and regulations
   
33.098   Meetings; quorum; voting
   
33.099   Powers, authority and duties
Parking Authority
   
33.110   Established
   
33.111   Composition; appointment and terms of members; vacancies
   
33.112   Officers; chief administrative officer; compensation
   
33.113   Powers and duties generally
   
33.114   Contracts
   
33.115   Jurisdiction
   
33.116   Bonds
Editor’s note:
   The Elkins-Randolph County Airport Authority was established by the mutual
agreement creating the joint ownership and operation and control of the Elkins-
Randolph County Airport. The particulars of that agreement are not set out
herein but are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001  ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS AT PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   Each board, commission or other body established by this code or by
other ordinance or resolution of the Council is hereby vested with the
authority to require the Chief of Police to compel the attendance of its
members at any public meeting, except as to any such member who has been
excused from attendance by the presiding officer of such board, commission or
other body, and except as to any such member who, by reason of illness or
physical disability, is unable to attend any such meeting.
   (B)   The Council reserves the right to suspend or revoke the appointment of
any member of any board, commission or other body established by this code or
by other ordinance or resolution of the Council who, without having been
properly excused and being physically fit, fails to attend two or more public
meetings of such board, commission or other body in any one calendar year.
(1991 Code, § 2-26)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council, by ordinance, to provide for the compulsory attendance
at public meetings of the members of the bodies exercising, respectively,
functions of the Council, see Char. §
28, subsec. (65)
§ 33.002  SUBMISSION OF REPORTS AND STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Each board, commission or other body established by this code or other
ordinance or resolution of the Council shall promptly submit all reports or
statements that are required of it by this code, state law or other ordinances,
resolutions or orders of the Council.
   (B)   No funds shall be released for the use of any such board, commission
or other body until all such reports or statements have been submitted.
(1991 Code, § 2-26.1)
BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
§ 33.015  CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS, COMPENSATION AND TERMS OF
MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created a Board of Library Directors of the city. Such Board
shall consist of five members. Initially, one member shall be appointed to
serve for one year; one member shall be appointed to serve for two years; one
member shall be appointed to serve for three years; one member shall be
appointed to serve for four years; and one member shall be appointed to serve
for five years, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of
five years each. All appointments shall be made by the Council and all
Directors so appointed shall serve without compensation and at the will and
pleasure of Council.
(1991 Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. passed 10-20-1966)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to establish, maintain and regulate free public
libraries, and to receive money therefor and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (5)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to operate and the like, a public library and appoint
and support a library board, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(38) and (39)
   Interstate library pact, see W.Va. Code Ch. 10, Art. 1A
   Public libraries generally, see W.Va. Code Ch. 10, Art, 1
§ 33.016  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Library Directors, with respect to any public library
established pursuant to the provisions of the Charter §
28, subsec. (5) or W.Va. Code § 10-1-2, shall have the powers and perform the
duties prescribed for municipal boards of library directors by W.Va. Code Ch.
10, Art. 1, and shall conform to the requirements and limitations of that
article in all respects.
(1991 Code, § 2-28)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.030  CREATED; SHORT TITLE.
   There is hereby created a municipal Planning Commission in and for the city,
pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code § 8A-2-1. The title of the commission
shall be the “Planning Commission of the City of Elkins”, and it shall be known
as the Planning Commission.
(1991 Code, § 2-29)  (Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal Planning Commissions, see W.Va. Code §§ 8A-2-1 et seq.
   Urban and rural planning and zoning generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 8A-7
§ 33.031  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS, TERM AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS;
VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of one Council member and the
Mayor or another administrative officer of the city, each to be appointed by
the Council, for a term coextensive with his or her term as Council member or
administrative officer, unless removed for cause prior to the expiration of
such term; and five resident freeholders, five of whom must have been residents
of the city for at least three years prior to nomination and appointment,
herein referred to as “citizen members”, who shall be nominated by the Mayor
and appointed by the Council, each for a term of three years and until his or
her successor has been duly appointed and qualified, unless removed for cause
prior to the expiration of his or her term of office. Vacancies in the citizen
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term only and made in the same
manner as original selections were made. The governing body of the municipality
may establish procedures for the removal of members of the Planning Commission
for inactivity, neglect of duty or malfeasance. The procedures must contain
provisions requiring that the person to be removed be provided with a written
statement of the reasons for removal and an opportunity to be heard on the
matter.
   (B)   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in
the performance of their official duties.
(1991 Code, § 2-30)  (Ord. passed 6-5-1947; Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
Statutory reference:
   State law basis of this section, and requirement that citizen members be
appointed so as to be representatives of various segments of the population,
see W.Va. Code § 8A-2-3
§ 33.032  OFFICERS.
   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Planning Commission shall
elect from its members a President and a Vice President; and the Vice President
shall have the authority to act as President during the absence or disability
of the President. The City Clerk shall act as Clerk of the Commission.
(1991 Code, § 2-31)  (Ord. passed 6-5-1947; Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
Statutory reference:
   State law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 8A-2-9
§ 33.033  PLANNING COMMISSION’S POWERS AND DUTIES.
   A Planning Commission has the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Exercise general supervision for the administration of the affairs of
the Commission;
   (B)   Prescribe rules and regulations pertaining to administration,
investigations and hearings; provided, that the rules and regulations are
adopted by the governing body;
   (C)   Supervise the fiscal affairs and responsibilities of the Commission;
   (D)   With consent from the governing body, hire employees necessary to
carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Planning Commission; provided,
that the governing body sets the salaries;
   (E)   Keep an accurate and complete record of all Planning Commission
proceedings;
   (F)   Record and file all bonds and contracts;
   (G)   Take responsibility for the custody and preservation of all papers and
documents of the Planning Commission;
   (H)   Make recommendations to the appropriate governing body concerning
planning;
   (I)   Make an annual report to the appropriate governing body concerning the
operation of the Planning Commission and the status of planning within its
jurisdiction;
   (J)   Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances and other material
relating to the activities authorized under this subchapter;
   (K)   Adopt a seal, and certify all official acts;
   (L)   Invoke any legal, equitable or special remedy for the enforcement of
the provisions of this subchapter or any ordinance, rule and regulation or any
action taken thereunder;
   (M)   Prepare and submit an annual budget to the appropriate governing body;
   (N)   If necessary, establish advisory committees;
   (O)   Delegate limited powers to a committee composed of one or more members
of the Commission; and
   (P)   Contract for special or temporary services and professional counsel
with the approval of the governing body. Upon request, a County Prosecuting
Attorney, the County Surveyor, the County Engineer or any other county employee
may render assistance and service to a Planning Commission without
compensation.
(Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 33.034  PRIOR COUNCIL APPROVAL OF EXPENSES AND CONTRACTS.
   The Planning Commission shall not incur any debt or expense chargeable to or
for which the city may be liable or responsible, nor enter into any contract
for the services of any engineer, clerk or other help without first having had
and obtained the consent and approval of the Council in each instance,
manifested by an order duly approved by the Council for payment thereof, and so
entered in the minute records of the Council.
(1999 Code, § 2-35)  (Ord. passed 6-5-1947; Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 33.035  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have such further powers and perform such
further duties with respect to municipal planning and zoning as may be
specified for municipal planning and zoning commissions in W.Va. Code Ch. 8A,
Art. 2, and shall conform to the requirements and limitations contained in that
article.
(1991 Code, § 2-36)  (Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 33.036  PLANNING COMMISSION MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8A-2-7, the Planning
Commission shall meet at least quarterly and may meet more frequently at the
request of the President or by two or more members.
   (B)   Special meetings. Notice for a special meeting must be in writing,
include the date, time and place of the special meeting, and be sent to all
members at least two days before the special meeting. Written notice of a
special meeting is not required if the date, time and place of the special
meeting were set in a regular meeting.
   (C)   Quorum. Pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8A-2-8, the Planning Commission must
have a quorum to conduct a meeting. A simple majority of Planning Commission
members present (minimum of four), constitute a quorum. No action of a Planning
Commission is official unless authorized by a majority of the members present
at a regular or properly called special meeting.
(Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
BOARD OF PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSIONERS
§ 33.050  CREATION.
   There is hereby created a Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners, for
the purpose of establishing, constructing, improving, extending, developing,
maintaining and operating a city public park and recreation system.
(1991 Code, § 2-37)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
Statutory reference:
   Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-21-1 to 8-
21-14
   Public recreation and playgrounds generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 10-2-1 to 10-
2-5
§ 33.051  COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION; TERMS; VACANCIES.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall consist of five
persons, serving without compensation, who shall be appointed by the Council
and who, at the time of their appointment, shall be residents and freeholders
of the city. Membership on the Council shall not disqualify any member for
appointment to the Board, if otherwise qualified; however, not more than two
members of the Council may be so appointed. The term of the Board membership of
any such member of the Council so appointed shall continue during his or her
term as a member of the Council and until his or her successor is appointed.
The terms of other appointed members shall be for six years and until their
successors have been duly appointed; except, that the members of such Board
first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member
shall expire annually thereafter. When any member of the Board, during his or
her term of office, shall cease to be a resident and freeholder of the city, he
or she shall thereby be disqualified as a member of the Board and his or her
office shall thereupon become vacant. When a vacancy occurs on the Board by
reason of death, resignation, change of residence from the city, failure to
remain a freeholder of the city or due to any other cause, the remaining
members of the Board shall appoint a successor, or if there should be no
members left on the Board, the Council shall appoint successors, and in either
event, the appointments shall be for the unexpired term or terms.
(1991 Code, § 2-38)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 33.052  OFFICERS; BY-LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall organize by electing
one of its members President and by installing such other officers as may be
necessary. The Board shall have the power to adopt by-laws, rules and
regulations for the proper conduct of public recreation for the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-39)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.053  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall be responsible
for all policies, rules and regulations relating to the administration of a
public recreation program.
   (B)   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall provide, conduct
and supervise public playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and other
recreational facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or
controlled by the city or on other properties, with the consent of the owners
and authorities thereof. It shall have the power to conduct any form of
recreational activity which will constructively and wholesomely employ the
leisure time of the people.
(1991 Code, § 2-40)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
Statutory reference:
   General powers of the Board, see W.Va. Code § 8-21-10
§ 33.054  APPOINTMENT OF SUPERINTENDENT OR DIRECTOR OF RECREATION AND
PERSONNEL.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall have the power to
appoint a Superintendent or Director of Recreation who shall be trained and
properly qualified for such work; and, upon the recommendation of the
Superintendent or Director, such other personnel as may be required.
(1991 Code, § 2-41)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.055  ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall annually submit a
budget to the Mayor and Council for their approval.
(1991 Code, § 2-42)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.056  AUTHORITY TO RECEIVE GIFTS AND BEQUESTS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners may solicit or receive any
gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donations to be
allocated, permanently or temporarily, in principal or by interest, to
playgrounds or for other recreational purposes.
(1991 Code, § 2-43)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.057  REPORTS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall make to the Mayor and
Council full and complete annual and other required reports, and shall also
make reports requested by other governmental agencies.
(1991 Code, § 2-44)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.058  FEES AND CHARGES FOR USE OF RECREATIONAL SERVICES AND FACILITIES.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners upon the recommendation of
the Superintendent or Director of Recreation, shall have the authority to levy
fees and charges which it deems appropriate to provide recreational services or
facilities.
(1991 Code, § 2-45)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.059  COOPERATION AND THE LIKE WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners is authorized to work jointly
with other municipal departments or political subdivisions to provide,
establish, operate, conduct and maintain a supervised recreation system and to
acquire, operate, improve and maintain property, both real and personal, for
parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and other recreation facilities and
activities.
(1991 Code, § 2-46)  (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.060  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall have such further
powers and perform such further duties with respect to the establishing,
constructing, improving, extending, developing, maintaining and operating a
city public park and recreation system as may be specified for such a Board in
W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 21, and shall conform to the requirements and
limitations contained in that article.
(1991 Code, § 2-46.1)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
ELKINS MUNICIPAL BUILDING COMMISSION
§ 33.075  CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Municipal Building Commission for the city which
shall be known as Elkins Municipal Building Commission.
(1991 Code, § 2-47)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.076  PUBLIC CORPORATION; PERPETUAL EXISTENCE.
   The Commission shall be a public corporation and shall have perpetual
existence.
(1991 Code, § 2-48)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.077  BOARD.
   (A)   All property, powers and duties and the management and control of the
Commission shall be vested in a Board of three members appointed by the Council
for terms of five years. Members first appointed shall serve respectively for
terms of one year, two years and three years. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed for terms of five years each. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term only. As the term of each initial appointee
expires, the successor to fill the vacancy created by such expired term, shall
be appointed for a term of five years. No more than two of the members of such
Board shall be from the same political party, and no member of such Board shall
hold any office, other than the office of notary public, or employment under
the United States of America, the state, any county or political subdivision
thereof, or of any political party. All members of such Board shall be
residents of the city. No member of such Board shall receive any compensation
for his or her services as such, but each member shall be reimbursed by the
Commission for any reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the
discharge of his or her duties as a member of the Board.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under the State
Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program, under W.Va. Code § 8-l-5a, the city hereby
declares itself to be exempt from the requirement that no more than two-thirds
of the total number of its Building Commission be members of the same political
party as required by W.Va. Code § 8-33-3.
   (C)   All property, powers and duties and the management and control of the
Commission shall be vested in a Board of three members appointed by the Council
for terms of five years. Members first appointed shall serve respectively for
terms of one year, two years and three years. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed for terms of five years each. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term only. As the term of each initial appointee
expires, the successor to fill the vacancy created by such expired term, shall
be appointed for a term of five years. No member of such Board shall hold any
office, other than the office of notary public or employment under the United
States of America, the state, any county or political subdivision thereof or
any political party. All members of such Board shall be residents of the city.
No member of such Board shall receive any compensation for his or her services
as such, but each member shall be reimbursed by the Commission for any
reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the discharge of his or
her duties as a member of the Board
(1991 Code, § 2-49)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976; Ord. 233, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 33.078  POWERS.
   The Commission shall have plenary power and authority to:
   (A)   Sue and be sued;
   (B)   Contract and be contracted with;
   (C)   Adopt, use and alter a common seal;
   (D)   Make and adopt all necessary, appropriate and lawful by-laws and rules
and regulations pertaining to its affairs;
   (E)   Elect such officers, appoint such committees and agents and employ and
fix the compensation of such employees and contractors as may be necessary for
the conduct of the affairs and operations of the Commission;
   (F)   Acquire, purchase, own and hold any property, real or personal; and
acquire, construct, equip, maintain and operate public buildings, structures,
projects and appurtenant facilities of any type for which the governmental body
or bodies creating such Commission are permitted by law to expend public funds
(all hereinafter in this subchapter referred to as facilities);
   (G)   Apply for, receive and use grants-in-aid, donations and contributions
from any source, including, but not limited to, the United States of America or
any department or agency thereof, and accept and use bequests, devices, gifts
and donations from any source whatsoever;
   (H)   Sell, encumber or dispose of any property, real or personal;
   (I)   Issue negotiable bonds, notes, debentures or other evidences of
indebtedness and provide for the rights of the holders thereof, incur any
proper indebtedness and issue any obligations and give any security therefor
which it may deem necessary or advisable in connection with exercising powers
as provided herein;
   (J)   Raise funds by the issuance and sale of revenue bonds in the manner
provided by the applicable provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 16, and to the
extent provided by §
33.079, without regard to the limitations specified in said W.Va. Code Ch. 8,
Art. 16, and the Commission is hereby declared to be a “governing body” as that
term is used in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 16 only;
   (K)   Exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided for in
W.Va. Code Ch. 54 for business corporations, for the purposes set forth in
division (F) above, which purposes are hereby declared public purposes for
which private property may be taken;
   (L)   Lease its property or any part thereof, for public purposes, to such
persons and upon such terms as the Commission deems proper, but when the city
is a lessee under any such lease, such lease must contain a provision granting
the city the option to terminate such lease during any fiscal year covered
thereby; and
   (M)   Do all things reasonable and necessary to carry out the foregoing
powers.
(1991 Code, § 2-50)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.079  INDEBTEDNESS.
   No statutory limitation with respect to the nature of amount of indebtedness
which may be incurred by municipalities or other public or governmental bodies
shall apply to the indebtedness of the Commission. No indebtedness of any
nature of the Commission shall constitute an indebtedness of the municipality
or a charge against any property of said municipality. No obligation or
indebtedness incurred by the Commission shall give any right against any member
of the Council or any member of the Commission. The rights of creditors of the
Commission shall be solely against the Commission as a corporate body and shall
be satisfied only out of property held by it in its corporate capacity.
(1991 Code, § 2-51)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.080  SURPLUS FUNDS.
   If the Commission should realize a surplus over and above the amount
required for the maintenance, improvement and operation of its facilities and
for meeting all required payments on its obligations, it shall set aside such a
reserve for future operations, improvements and contingencies as it shall deem
proper and shall then apply the residue of such surplus, if any, to the payment
of any recognized and established obligations not then due; and after all such
recognized and established obligations have been paid and discharged in full,
the Commission shall, at the end of each fiscal year, set aside the reserve for
future operations, improvements and contingencies, as aforesaid, and then pay
the residue of such surplus, if any, to the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-52)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.081  CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   Contributions may be made to the Commission from time to time by the
Council and such other persons that may desire to do so. All funds received by
the Commission shall be deposited in such banking institution or banking
institutions as the Commission may determine and shall be withdrawn therefrom
in such manner as the Commission may direct.
   (B)   The Commission shall keep strict account of all of its receipts and
expenditures and shall quarterly report to the counties, municipalities,
persons, firms or corporations which have made contributions to it. Such report
shall contain an itemized account of the Commission’s receipts and
disbursements during the preceding quarter. Such report shall be made within 60
days after the end of the quarter.
   (C)   (1)   Within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Commission
shall make an annual report containing an itemized statement of its receipts
and disbursements for the preceding year and publish the same as a Class II-
O legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 59,
Art. 3.
      (2)   The publication area for such publication shall be each county in
which the Commission’s facilities are located.
      (3)   The books, records and accounts of the Commission shall be subject
to audit and examination by the State Tax Department and by other proper public
officials or bodies in the manner provided by law.
(1991 Code, § 2-53)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.082  SALE OF PROPERTY ON DIRECTION OF COUNCIL.
   In the event a majority of the Council shall so direct in writing and if all
indebtedness of the Commission has been paid in full, the Commission shall
sell, or transfer all or any of its properties and assets so directed and
distribute the proceeds thereof, if any, to the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-54)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.083  TRANSFER OF PROPERTY TO COMMISSION.
   The city is hereby empowered and authorized to convey or transfer to the
Commission property of any kind, which has been acquired by the city, to carry
out the purposes of the Commission. When property is conveyed or transferred as
aforesaid, the city and the Commission shall agree in writing at the time the
conveyance or transfer is made as to the fair market value of such property.
(1991 Code, § 2-55)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.084  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   The Commission shall subscribe to the worker’s compensation fund of the
state and pay all necessary premiums thereto, to the end that all eligible
employers of such Commission shall be covered by worker’s compensation.
(1991 Code, § 2-56)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
MUNICIPAL HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMISSION
§ 33.095  CREATED.
   There is hereby created a municipal historic landmarks commission for the
city which shall be known as the “Elkins Municipal Historic Landmarks
Commission”.
(1991 Code, § 2-56a)  (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.096  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS, TERM AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS;
VACANCIES.
   (A)   This Historic Landmarks Commission shall consist of five members
appointed by the Mayor, a majority of whom shall be residents of the city.
Initially, one member shall be appointed to serve one year; one member shall be
appointed to serve for two years; one member shall be appointed to serve for
three years; one member shall be appointed to serve for four years; and one
member shall be appointed to serve for five years. As the term of each initial
appointee expires, the successor shall be appointed for a term of five years.
   (B)   Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the
unexpired term.
   (C)   No member of such Board shall receive any compensation for his or her
services as such, but each member shall be reimbursed for any reasonable and
necessary expenses actually incurred in the discharge of his or her duties as a
member of the Board.
(1991 Code, § 2-56b)  (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.097  OFFICERS; BY-LAWS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Commission shall elect from
its members a President and a Secretary. The Commission shall have the power to
adopt by-laws and rules and regulations for the conduct of its affairs. The by-
laws may provide for the election of additional officers.
(1991 Code, § 2-56c)  (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.098  MEETINGS; QUORUM; VOTING.
   The Commission shall hold at least ten regular meetings per year which
meetings shall take place at City Hall or at such other place as the President
may direct. A majority of the members of the Commission shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No member shall vote upon
any matter or proposition in which he or she may be interested other than as a
citizen. No action of the Commission shall be official unless authorized by a
majority of all members of the Commission at the meeting at which any vote is
taken.
(1991 Code, § 2-56d)  (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.099  POWERS, AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have power and authority within the jurisdictional
limits of the city and within the limits of available funds, to:
   (A)   Make a survey of, and designate as historic landmarks, buildings,
structures and sites which constitute the principal historical and
architectural sites which are of local, regional, statewide or national
significance. No building, structure or site shall be deemed to be an historic
one unless it has been prominently identified with, or best represents, some
major aspect of the cultural, political, economic, military or social history
of the locality of the city; the region, the state or nation, or has had a
major relationship with the life of an historic personage or event representing
some major aspect of, or ideals related to, the history of the locality of the
city, region, state of nation. In the case of buildings or structures which are
to be so designated, they shall embody the principal or unique features of an
architectural type or demonstrate the style of a period of our history or
method of construction, or serve as an illustration of the work of a master
builder, designer or architect whose genius influenced the period in which he
or she worked or has significance in current time;
   (B)   Prepare a register of buildings, structures and sites which meet the
requirements of division (A) above, publish lists of such properties and, with
the consent of the property owners, inspect such properties from time to time
and publish a register thereof from time to time setting forth appropriate
information concerning the registered buildings, structures and sites;
   (C)   With the consent of the property owners, certify and mark with
appropriately designed markers, buildings, structures and sites which it has
registered;
   (D)   Establish standards for care and management of certified landmarks and
withdraw such certification for failure to maintain the standards so
prescribed;
   (E)   Acquire by purchase, gift or lease and administer registered landmarks
and easements, and interests therein, both real and personal;
   (F)   Lease or sell property so acquired under terms and conditions designed
to ensure the proper preservation of the landmark in question;
   (G)   Establish historic districts for registered landmarks, utilizing the
same guidelines set forth in said division (A) above, and designate the area
thereof by appropriate marker;
   (H)   Identify historical districts for registered landmarks and aid and
encourage the municipality and county in which the district or landmark is
located to adopt rules and regulations for the preservation of historical or
architectural values;
   (I)   Prepare and place historical markers on or along the highway or street
closest to the location which is intended to be identified by such markers;
   (J)   Seek the advice and assistance of individuals, groups and departments
and agencies in the government who or which are conducting historical
preservation programs and coordinate the same insofar as possible;
   (K)   Seek and accept gifts, bequests, endowments and funds from any and all
sources for the accomplishment of the functions of the commission;
   (L)   Adopt rules and regulations concerning the operation of the
Commission, the functions and responsibilities of its officers, employees,
assistants and other personnel and such other matters as may be necessary to
carry out the purpose of this section;
   (M)   Adopt such other rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this section, but no such rules and regulations
shall be inconsistent with the provisions of this section or with any plan of
the Planning Commission of the city;
   (N)   To employ, within the limits of funds available therefor, such
employees, assistants, technical personnel and consultants as are necessary to
discharge the duties and responsibilities of the Commission;
   (O)   Keep an accurate and complete record of all Commission proceedings;
   (P)   Make an annual report to the Council of the city concerning the
operation of the Commission and the status of the Commission’s activities in
all matters pending before it; and
   (Q)   Exercise such additional powers, authority and duties as may be
provided by the provisions of W.Va. Ch. 8, Art. 26a.
(1991 Code, § 2-56e)  (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
PARKING AUTHORITY
§ 33.110  ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established and continued in the city a Parking Authority as
provided in W.Va. Code § 8-16-4.
(1991 Code, § 2-57)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.111  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES.
   The Parking Authority shall be composed of five members who shall be
appointed by the Council, of whom one shall be appointed for three years, two
for two years and two for one year, and the Mayor of the city who shall be an
ex officio member thereof, without a vote. Upon the expiration of each term,
except for the Mayor, and for each succeeding term thereafter, the successor
shall be appointed for a term of three years. The Mayor’s term shall coincide
with his or her tenure of office and shall terminate coincidentally with his or
her termination of office as Mayor. Vacancies in the Parking Authority shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointments and, except for the
Mayor’s term, shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(1991 Code, § 2-58)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.112  OFFICERS; CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Council shall designate one of the members of the Parking
Authority as Chairperson each year. The City Clerk is hereby designated as
Treasurer of the Parking Authority.
   (B)   The Parking Authority shall adopt rules of procedure, organize and
designate one of its members as Secretary. The Mayor is hereby designated as
the chief administrative officer of the authority.
   (C)   Members of the authority shall receive no salary but shall be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
(1991 Code, § 2-59)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.113  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Parking Authority shall have such powers as are granted by and subject
to the limitations of W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 16, as amended, or as may be
hereafter amended.
(1991 Code, § 2-60)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.114  CONTRACTS.
   The Parking Authority shall have power to take all steps and proceedings and
to make and enter into all contracts or arguments necessary or incidental to
the performance of its duties in the execution of its powers under this
subchapter and as provided by statute; provided, that any contract relating to
the financing or the acquisition, construction, extension or improvements of
off-street parking facilities or of any trust indenture relating thereto shall
be approved by the Council of the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-61)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.115  JURISDICTION.
   The Parking Authority shall be limited to the acquisition, construction,
operation and extension and improvement of off-street parking facilities within
the city and shall have no authority over on-street parking or on-street
traffic within the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-62)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1970; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 33.116  BONDS.
   Any bond issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be found by and subject to
all the covenants, agreements and provisions of the ordinance authorizing the
issuance of revenue bonds to finance such off-street parking and the provisions
of this subchapter shall be enforceable by the holders of such revenue bonds.
(1991 Code, § 2-63)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
CHAPTER 34:  POLICE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Civil Service Commission
   
34.02   Chief of Police
   
34.03   Department; powers and duties generally
   
34.04   Special officers
Pension and Relief Fund
   
34.15   Established; sources; powers and duties
   
34.16   Board of Trustees
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to appoint a police force and such other officers as
may be necessary to protect persons and property within the city and to
preserve the peace and good order, see Char. §
28, subsec. (54)
   Mayor having control over the city police, with authority to appoint special
police officers when he or she deems it necessary, see Char. §
20
Cross-reference:
   Giving false alarms and reports, see §
130.005
   Motor vehicles and traffic generally, see Title VII
   Municipal court, see
Ch. 37
   Police pension fee added to court costs, see §
37.11
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to establish, equip and maintain a Police Department, see
W.Va. Code § 8-14-1
   Authority of Mayor over police force and to appoint special police officers,
see W.Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Execution of warrants and service of process by police officers anywhere in
the county, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of city for police purposes, see W.Va. Code §§
8-12-5(48), 8-12-19
   Municipal Police Departments generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-14-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Generally. The police officer’s Civil Service Commission existing
immediately prior to the effective date of this code is hereby continued in
full force and effect; and all the pertinent provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 8-14-
6 through 8-14-23, inclusive, are hereby adopted by the Council and made
applicable to the regular members of the Police Department, except the Chief of
Police, and to applicants for such regular membership.
   (B)   Appointment from the list of eligibles. Every position, unless filled
by promotion, reinstatement or reduction, shall be filled, in the manner
specified in W.Va. Code § 8-14-15, from the Commission’s list of eligible,
except that the eligible list may contain the names of less than three
individuals. If the current list has been exhausted or if such list has been in
existence in excess of a three-year period next preceding the date of the
prospective appointment, the Commission shall proceed to establish an undated
list of eligible in accordance with the code and with these rules and
regulations and certify names from the new list of eligibles to the appointing
officer.
   (C)   Political party. Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under
the State Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program, under W.Va. Code § 8-l-5a, the
city hereby declares itself to be exempt from the requirement that no more than
two of the members of its Police Civil Service Commission be members of the
same political party as required by W.Va. Code § 8-14-7.
(1991 Code, § 14-1)  (Ord. 231, passed 3-2-2017; Ord. 251, passed 2-1-2018)
Editor’s note:
   The police officer’s Civil Service Commission was established in this city
under the provisions of W.Va. Code prior Ch. 8, Art. 5A, since superseded by
the sections mentioned in the text of this section.
§ 34.02  CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall be the commanding officer of the Police Department
and, under the general direction of the Mayor, he or she shall be responsible
to the Mayor and to the Council for the administration, training, discipline,
morale and effective deployment and utilization of the members of the Police
Department and of the property and equipment of the Police Department, for the
enforcement of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city, the prevention
of crime, the protection of persons and property and the maintenance of peace
and order within the city.
(1991 Code, § 14-2)
Charter reference:
   Powers and duties of Chief of Police generally, see Char. §
15
   Qualifications, appointment and term of office of Chief of Police, see Char.
§
7
Cross-reference:
   Arrest of persons for disobedience at Council meetings, see §
31.04
§ 34.03  DEPARTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Police Department and the members thereof shall, under the overall
direction of the Mayor and the immediate direction of the Chief of Police,
protect persons and property and preserve law and order within the city and,
for such purposes, all police officers shall have the powers and authority
conferred upon municipal police officers by state law.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department shall be vigilant in the enforcement
of the laws of the state, as they may be applicable within the city, and the
provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city. They shall cooperate
with other city officers and employees.
   (C)   In addition to their duties assigned by the head of the Police
Department or by the Mayor, the police secretary and the police radio operators
shall have the authority to collect all costs, fines, forfeitures and penalties
which may be payable to the Municipal Court. The moneys so collected shall be
accounted for and paid over to the Municipal Judge or City Treasurer as soon
after their collection as is practicable.
(1991 Code, § 14-3)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of authority beyond city limits for one mile, see W.Va. Code § 8-
12-19
   Powers, authority and duties of members of municipal police departments, see
W.Va. Code § 8-14-3
§ 34.04  SPECIAL OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointment; term, compensation. If at any time, in the opinion of the
Mayor, extra police officers are necessary for the protection of persons and
property or for the preservation of the peace and order, he or she shall
appoint such number of extra police officers as, in his or her judgment, are
necessary. Any extra police officer so appointed shall hold office during the
term for which he or she was appointed, unless sooner removed from his or her
office by the Mayor or Council, and shall have the same power to arrest persons
as is exercised by the Chief of Police and shall have general power to preserve
the peace and order of the city. For their services, such extra police officers
shall receive such sum as the Mayor shall prescribe. All members of the Police
Department shall not be less than 18 nor more than 45 years of age on the date
of his or her application; provided, however, persons qualifying for
appointment by reinstatement may be over 45 years of age.
   (B)   Indemnity bond. The Mayor shall require each such special officer to
give bond in the penalty of not less than $3,500 with good security approved by
the Mayor, conditioned that such special officer shall indemnify and save the
city harmless on account of any unlawful or improper acts done by him or her
and to satisfy and pay any damages that may be sustained by any person by
reason of any unlawful or improper act done by him or her while acting as such
special police officer; and, if he or she is authorized to carry a firearm, his
or her bond shall be in amount not less than the amount specified in §
30.01(C), and with the additional condition specified in §
30.01(C).
   (C)   Provisional or part-time paid officers. The city shall have the
authority and shall be permitted to hire provisional or part-time paid police
officers for periods of employment exceeding three months, provided said
provisional or part-time paid police officers shall:
      (1)   Already be certified and trained police officers, through the West
Virginia State Police Academy and practical experience; and
      (2)   Shall not be employed by the city for more than 1,040 hours during
any one calendar year.
(1991 Code, § 14-4)  (Ord. 205, passed 1-7-2016; Ord. 207, passed 4-7-2016;
Ord. 241, passed 6-15-2017; Ord. 260, passed 5-2-2019)
Charter reference:
   As to whom official bonds shall be payable, and proceedings on bonds, see
Char. §
16
   Authority of Council to require officers to give faithful performance bonds,
see Char. §
15
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require bonds of its officers, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5
(46)
   Bonds of public officers generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 6-2-1 et seq.
   Bonds required of police officers, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-5
   Requirement that municipal officers who handle public funds give bond, see
W.Va. Code § 6-2-11
PENSION AND RELIEF FUND
§ 34.15  ESTABLISHED; SOURCES; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   A Police Officer’s Pension and Relief Fund is hereby established,
pursuant to the authority of W.Va. Code § 8-22-16, for the purposes enumerated
in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 22. Such Fund shall consist of any gift, grant,
devise or bequest of any money or real or personal property, upon such terms as
to the investment and expenditure thereof as may be fixed by the grantor
thereof or determined by the Board of Trustees of the Fund, plus other funds,
assessments, fees and levies as provided in W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-19 and 8-22-20.
   (B)   Such fund shall be administered as provided by the West Virginia Code.
   (C)   (1)   The existing pension plan for police officers employed by the
city is hereby closed to new entrants, in accordance with the authority
provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-16(e).
      (2)   The city shall utilize the optional method of financing the
unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the existing Police Officer’s Pension
and Relied Fund as provided in W.Va Code § 8-22-20(e).
      (3)   Newly hired police officers shall be enrolled in a retirement plan
created in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 22A and approved and administered by the
State Consolidated Public Retirement Board.
      (4)   All current active members, retirees and other beneficiaries
covered by the existing Police Officer’s Pension and Relief Fund shall remain
covered by that plan and shall be paid all benefits of that plan in accordance
with applicable provisions of the West Virginia Code.
(1991 Code, § 14-5)  (Ord. 192, passed 3-19-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Federal Social Security benefit, see §
30.03
   Participation of city in state employees’ retirement system, see §
30.04
Statutory reference:
   Duty of Council to levy annual tax for fund, see W.Va. Code § 8-22-19
   Municipal police officer’s pension and relief funds, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-
16 to 8-22-28
§ 34.16  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   There shall be a Board of Trustees for the Police Officer’s Pension and
Relief Fund which shall be composed and have the powers and duties as are
provided by W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-17 and 8-22-18.
(1991 Code, § 14-6)
CHAPTER 35:  ELECTIONS
Section
   
35.01   Applicability of state law; duties of Council and City Clerk
   
35.02   Designation of chief election official
   
35.03   Voter eligibility
   
35.04   Registration of voters
   
35.05   Duty of Clerk to procure and return county registration books
   
35.06   Voting precincts
   
35.07   Calling of election
   
35.08   Candidate filing period
   
35.09   Filing announcement of candidacy; requirements; filing fees
   
35.10   Prohibition against running for two offices
   
35.11   Prohibition against city employees holding office
   
35.12   Withdrawal of candidates
   
35.13   Write-in candidates
   
35.14   Election of Mayor and Council members
   
35.15   Ballot Commissioners; selection; duties generally
   
35.16   Drawing for ballot position
   
35.17   Election Commissioners and Clerks; notice; instructions; vacancies
   
35.18   Compensation of election officials; expenses
   
35.19   Electronic voting systems
   
35.20   Tie votes
   
35.21   Contested elections
   
35.22   Absentee voting
   
35.23   Early voting
   
35.24   Vacancies
   
35.25   Publication of ballot
   
35.26   Campaign finance
   
35.27   Construction
Charter reference:
   Date of election and term of office of Mayor, see Char. §
8
   Date of election and terms of office of Council members, see Char. §
9
   Elective officers of the city be a Mayor and two Council members from each
ward, see Char. §
4
   Qualifications of Mayor and Council members, see Char. §
6
Cross-reference:
   Election of City Clerk, see §
32.35
Statutory reference:
   Expenses of general elections, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-14
   Judicial review of orders of Council relating to city elections, see W.Va.
Code § 8-3-16
   West Virginia Election Code, see W.Va. Code Ch. 3
§ 35.01  APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW; DUTIES OF COUNCIL AND CITY CLERK.
   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3 referring to elections, insofar as such
provisions can be applied within the city and insofar as not otherwise provided
by the city’s Charter or this code, shall govern the conduct of city elections.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006; Ord. 170, passed 7-18-2013; Ord. 234, passed 3-2-
2017)
§ 35.02  DESIGNATION OF CHIEF ELECTION OFFICIAL.
   The chief election official of the city shall be the City Clerk, who shall
perform such other duties as required by ordinance and W.Va. Code Ch. 3.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.03  VOTER ELIGIBILITY.
   Only persons who are bona fide residents of thee city and are registered to
vote as provided by law shall be entitled to vote in any municipal election.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Persons entitled to vote, see W.Va. Code § 3-1-3
§ 35.04  REGISTRATION OF VOTERS.
   (A)   The registration of voters of city shall be integrated with the system
of permanent registration of voters established by the West Virginia Code. No
voter otherwise qualified shall be permitted to vote an unchallenged ballot at
any election within the municipality unless he or she is duly registered under
the provisions of state law.
   (B)   The registration record shall remain in the possession of the Clerk of
the County Commission, except for use in municipal elections.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-2-1 et seq.
and 8-5-13
§ 35.05  DUTY OF CLERK TO PROCURE AND RETURN COUNTY REGISTRATION BOOKS.
   (A)   At least one day prior to every municipal election it shall be the
duty of the City Clerk to procure from the municipal precinct file in the
office of the Clerk of the County Commission the registration records necessary
for the conduct of such election.
   (B)   Such records shall, within ten days after the date of the municipal
election, be returned to the office of the Clerk of the County Commission by
the City Clerk.
   (C)   In case of a contested municipal election, the registration record of
any challenged voter shall be made available by the Clerk of the County
Commission to the municipal Council to determine the contest. Such record shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk of the County Commission within a
reasonable time after the contest shall have been finally decided.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 3-1-27
§ 35.06  VOTING PRECINCTS.
   (A)   Voting precincts. There shall be the following five voting precincts
established in the city for the purpose of city elections:
      (1)   First ward voting precinct: for all voters in the first ward;
      (2)   Second ward voting precinct: for all voters in the second ward;
      (3)   Third ward voting precinct: for all voters in the third ward;
      (4)   Fourth ward voting precinct: for all voters in the fourth ward; and
      (5)   Fifth ward voting precinct: for all voters in the fifth ward.
   (B)   Polling places. The Council, before each election, shall secure, for
each voting precinct in the city, a suitable room or building in which to hold
the election and shall cause the same to be suitably provided with heat,
drinking water, light and a sufficient number of booths or compartments, each
containing a table, counter or shelf, and furnished with proper supplies for
preparing ballots, or at/in which voters may conveniently prepare their
ballots, so that in the preparation thereof they may be secure from the
observation of others. The number of such booths or compartments shall not be
less than two or more than five. Such room or building shall be located in such
precinct; provided, however, that upon a determination of the Council that a
suitable room or building in which to hold the election is not reasonably
available in such precinct then the Council may secure a suitable room or
building in which to hold the election for such precinct in an adjacent
precinct in the city.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1980; Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Designation and arrangement of polling places, see W.Va. Code § 3-1-23
   Duty of Council to provide by ordinances for making precincts coincide, as
nearly as possible, to the boundaries of precincts established by the county,
see W.Va. Code § 3-1-6
§ 35.07  CALLING OF ELECTION.
   (A)   The Council shall issue the call for each election not later than 124
days preceding each election.
   (B)   The call shall set forth the date of the election, the time and the
procedure for filing certificates of candidacy, the filing fees and such other
information as Council may deem appropriate. The Council shall cause the call
of election to be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city within five days after the call is issued and shall cause the same to
be posted on the bulletin board in the front lobby of City Hall.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.08  CANDIDATE FILING PERIOD.
   (A)   The candidate filing period shall commence on the third Monday
following the issuance of the call of the election. The candidate filing period
shall continue until midnight of the third Friday following the day of its
commencement.
   (B)   Before distributing certificate of announcement filing forms to
candidates, the Clerk shall enter the date of drawing for ballot position on
the reverse side of the certificate of announcement, in order to meet the
requirement that candidates be given notice of the drawing at the time of
filing.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.09  FILING ANNOUNCEMENT OF CANDIDACY; REQUIREMENTS; FILING FEES.
   (A)   Any person who is eligible and seeks to hold the office of Mayor or
member of Council shall file a certificate of announcement with the City Clerk
declaring as a candidate for election to office. The certificate of
announcement shall be in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State on which
the candidate shall make a sworn statement before a notary public or some other
officer qualified to administer oaths. An incomplete certificate of
announcement which lacks essential information may be rejected.
   (B)   The filing of the announcement with the City Clerk shall be made by
the last day of the candidate filing period, and must be received by the Clerk
before midnight, Eastern Standard Time, of that day or, if mailed, shall be
postmarked before that hour; provided, however, that if the last day for filing
is a Saturday or Sunday, such certificate shall be filed and must be received
by the Clerk before midnight, Eastern Standard Time, of the following Monday
or, if mailed, shall be postmarked before that hour.
   (C)   Every person who becomes a candidate for election to office in any
election shall, at the time of filing the certificate of announcement as
required in this section, pay a filing fee as follows:
      (1)   A candidate for the office of Mayor shall pay a fee of an amount
set by Council from time to time; and
      (2)   A candidate for the office of Council member shall pay a fee of an
amount set by Council from time to time.
   (D)   Any candidate unable to pay the filing fee may have it waived by
filing an oath that he or she is unable to pay the filing fee and a petition
containing signatures of four registered voters of the municipality for an
amount set by Council from time to time of the filing fee. The completed
petition must be filed no later than the close of candidate filing.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.10  PROHIBITION AGAINST RUNNING FOR TWO OFFICES.
   A candidate’s name shall not appear on the ballot for any office if the
candidate files a certificate of announcement for more than one office and does
not formally withdraw from all but one office before the close of the candidate
filing period.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 3-5-7(f)
§ 35.11  PROHIBITION AGAINST CITY EMPLOYEES HOLDING OFFICE.
   A city employee shall not serve on Council or as Mayor while employed by the
city.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.12  WITHDRAWAL OF CANDIDATES.
   A candidate who files a signed and notarized written statement of withdrawal
received by the Clerk by the third Tuesday following the close of filing shall
be removed from the ballot.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 3-5-11
§ 35.13  WRITE-IN CANDIDATES.
   Write-in candidates are required to file a certificate of announcement at
least 21 days before the election in order to have their votes counted. Also,
once they announce the intention to run a write-in campaign, they are required
to file campaign financial statements, just as with other candidates. Write-in
candidates shall not be required to pay a filing fee.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-6-4a and 3-6-
5
§ 35.14  ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   On the first Tuesday in March, 1981 and every two years thereafter on
the first Tuesday in March, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of
the city a Mayor and such other officers as may be prescribed by ordinance as
provided for in the Charter § 7. The Mayor shall hold office for the term of
two years, commencing on April 1 after the election and continuing until a
successor shall have been elected and qualified.
   (B)   On the same day mentioned in division (A) above, one member of the
Council shall be elected in each ward of the city, who shall hold his or her
office for the term of four years, commencing on April 1 after the election and
continuing until a successor shall have been elected and qualified.
   (C)   At the city election to be held in the year 1987, and at each such
election held thereafter, the person receiving the highest number of voles cast
for the office of Mayor and the person receiving the highest number of votes
cast for the office of Council member in each ward shall be elected.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1980; Ord. passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.15  BALLOT COMMISSIONERS; SELECTION; DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall, in consultation with Council, appoint two other
Ballot Commissioners. Those appointments shall be made not later than 75 days
before the election, and they shall be for terms of two years, or until their
respective successors are duly appointed and qualified.
   (B)   Of the two appointments to be made by the Clerk, one shall be from
each of the two parties whose candidates for governor received the largest and
second largest number of votes at the last preceding general election of the
state. The Clerk and two appointees shall constitute the Board of Ballot
Commissioners, and the Clerk shall be Chairperson. Together, they shall perform
the duties of such Commissioners at all regular and special elections held in
the city during their term of office.
   (C)   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3 with respect to the duties and
responsibilities of Ballot Commissioners, so far as they are applicable, shall
apply to city elections.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-1-2a, 3-1-19,
3-1-20, 3-1-21, 3-1-24, 3-5-10 and 3-6-3
§ 35.16  DRAWING FOR BALLOT POSITION.
   (A)   Position of candidate names on the ballot shall be determined by a
random drawing whenever more than one candidate has filed for the same office.
The drawing for ballot position shall commence at 9:00 a.m. on the fourth
Tuesday after the close of the candidate filing period. Should the
aforementioned drawing date be a legal holiday then the drawing shall commence
at the appointed hour on the first business day immediately thereafter.
   (B)   Once the drawing has been held, the Ballot Commissioners shall meet to
certify the ballot before it is conveyed to the printer.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-5-13a and 3-
6-2(d)(2)
§ 35.17  ELECTION COMMISSIONERS AND CLERKS; NOTICE; INSTRUCTIONS; VACANCIES.
   (A)   Uniform Election Board. No later than the second regular Council
meeting of January of each election year, the Council shall appoint a Uniform
Election Board, consisting of two Election Commissioners and two poll clerks,
to conduct each election in each precinct of the city in which an electronic
voting system has been adopted and is to be used. At the Council meeting
immediately preceding the meeting at which the appointments are to be made, the
City Clerk, in consultation with the Council members from each ward, shall
submit a list of persons proposed for appointment by the Council to serve as
election officials in each ward.
   (B)   Notice. The Clerk shall mail notices to every person appointed as an
election official within seven days following appointment. The appointed
official must respond within 14 days following appointment and state whether or
not they will serve. If the person fails to respond in time, the Clerk appoints
a replacement from the alternate list or, after all alternates have been used,
any eligible voter.
   (C)   Instruction of election officials. The Council shall call the
necessary meeting(s) for the instruction of all election officials in the use
of the electronic voting system. Such meeting(s) shall be held and the proper
instruction given not less than seven days prior to any election in which the
electronic voting system is to be used. No election officer, upon being so
notified to appear for instruction, shall fail without just cause to do so. If
any officer does so fail to appear, the Council may appoint some other
qualified person and such person, after instruction, shall act in the place of
the defaulting officer.
   (D)   Qualifications. As to qualifications of election officials, the city
hereby adopts and will adhere to W.Va. Code § 3-1-28, Election officials;
eligibility, suspension of eligibility.
   (E)   Oaths. As to oaths to be administered to election officials, the city
hereby adopts and will adhere to W.Va. Code § 3-1-30a, Oaths of election
commissioners and poll clerks, substitution of persons.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-1-30, 3-1-46,
3-4A-14
§ 35.18  COMPENSATION OF ELECTION OFFICIALS; EXPENSES.
   (A)   Each Ballot Commissioner shall be allowed and paid a sum, to be fixed
by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from time to time for
each day he or she shall serve as such, but in no case shall a Ballot
Commissioner receive allowance for more than ten days services in any one
election. The sum to be allowed and Ballot Commissioners is herewith set at an
amount set by Council from time to time.
   (B)   Each Commissioner of Election and poll clerk shall be allowed and paid
a sum, to be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from
time to time, for one day’s service for attending the school of instruction for
election officials. The sum to be allowed and paid Commissioners of Election
and poll clerks for attending the school of instruction is herewith set at an
amount set by Council from time to time.
   (C)   Each Commissioner of Election and poll clerk shall be allowed and paid
a sum, to be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from
time to time, for services at any one election. The sum to be allowed and paid
to Commissioners of Election and poll clerks is herewith set at an amount set
by Council from time to time.
   (D)   Each alternate Commissioner of Election and poll clerk may be paid a
sum, to be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from
time to time, for one day’s service for attending the school of instruction for
election officials. The sum to be allowed and paid alternate Commissioners of
Election and poll clerk is herewith set at an amount set by Council from time
to time.
   (E)   The Commissioners of Elections or poll clerks obtaining and delivering
the election supplies and returning them are to be paid an additional sum, to
be fixed by the Council, not to exceed an amount set by Council from time to
time. The additional sum to be paid is herewith set at an amount set by Council
from time to time. In addition, the Commissioner of Elections or poll clerk is
to be paid mileage up to the rate of reimbursement authorized by the travel
management rule of the Department of Administration for each mile necessarily
traveled in the performance of his or her services.
   (F)   Each emergency Ballot Commissioner shall be allowed and paid a sum, to
be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from time to
time, for one day’s service for attending the school of instruction for
election officials. The sum to be allowed and paid to emergency Ballot
Commissioners for attending the school of instruction is herewith set at an
amount set by Council from time to time.
   (G)   Each emergency Ballot Commissioner shall be allowed and paid a sum, to
be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from time to
time, for each day he or she shall serve as such. The sum to be allowed and
paid to emergency Ballot Commissioners is herewith set at an amount set by
Council from time to time.
   (H)   Each emergency Ballot Commissioner obtaining and delivering the
election supplies and returning them are to be paid an additional sum, to be
fixed by the Council, not to exceed an amount set by Council from time to time.
The additional sum to be paid is herewith set at an amount set by Council from
time to time. In addition, the Commissioner of Elections or poll clerk is to be
paid mileage up to the rate of reimbursement authorized by the travel
management rule of the Department of Administration for each mile necessarily
traveled in the performance of his or her services.
   (I)   The compensation of election officers, the cost of printing ballots
and all other expenses incurred in holding and making the return of elections
shall be audited by the Council and paid out of the city treasury.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1980; Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006; Ord. 164, passed 2-21-2013)
§ 35.19  ELECTRONIC VOTING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The Council adopts for use in all city elections the electronic voting
system which has been adopted for use by the County Commission upon such terms
and conditions as may be agreed upon between the County Commission and the
city.
   (B)   The provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 3-4A-1 et seq., relating to electronic
voting systems, shall, insofar as applicable, apply to city elections.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1980; Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.20  TIE VOTES.
   Whenever two or more persons receive an equal number of votes for Mayor or
Council member, such tie shall be decided by ballot of the Council in existence
at the time the election is held.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1980; Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Charter reference:
   Determination of tie votes, see Char. §
12
Statutory reference:
   Tie votes, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-15
§ 35.21  CONTESTED ELECTIONS.
   All contested elections shall be heard and determined by the Council in
existence at the time the election is held, and the contest shall be made and
conducted as provided for by state statutes for county and district offices.
The Council, by its proceedings in such cases, shall, as nearly as is
practicable, conform to similar proceedings of the County Commission in such
cases.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1980; Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Charter reference:
   Determination of contested elections, see Char. §
13
Statutory reference:
   Contested elections, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-17
§ 35.22  ABSENTEE VOTING.
   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3, Art. 3, Voting by absentees, so for as
applicable and except where clearly not adaptable, shall apply to all city
elections.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1980; Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 3-3-13
§ 35.23  EARLY VOTING.
   (A)   The voting period for early in-person voting is to be conducted during
regular business hours beginning on the thirteenth day before the election, and
continuing through the third day before the election. Additionally, early in-
person voting is to be available from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays
during the early voting period.
   (B)   The Clerk’s office shall be open on the last two Saturdays before the
election from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006; Ord. 163, passed 2-7-2013)
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 3-3-1
§ 35.24  VACANCIES.
   (A)   When a vacancy occurs in a municipal elective office, the governing
body shall fill the vacancy by appointment until the next election.
   (B)   If the vacancy creates an unexpired term which is to appear on the
ballot, it is to be treated as a separate office.
   (C)   A vacancy occurs when a resignation is accepted by the governing body,
except that a member’s resignation will not be effective if it deprives the
governing body of a quorum.
   (D)   After a resignation is accepted, the governing body shall give notice
of its intention to fill the vacancy by appointment at a regular or special
meeting.
   (E)   When a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, or the Mayor is unable
to perform the duties due to absence or illness, the City Clerk performs the
chief executive duties of Mayor until the Mayor can resume the duties or a new
Mayor is appointed by the governing body and qualified.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
Charter reference:
   Authority for the City Clerk to temporarily exercise the chief executive
powers of the Mayor, see Char. §
21
   Governing body’s ability to fill vacancies, see Char. §
9
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancies, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
§ 35.25  PUBLICATION OF BALLOT.
   A sample ballot shall be published as a Class I-O legal advertisement in a
qualified newspaper between 20 to 26 days before the election. A second
publication, again as a Class I-O legal advertisement, shall be published on
the last day the qualified newspaper is published before the election.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.26  CAMPAIGN FINANCE.
   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3, as they relate to campaign finance, so
far as applicable and except where clearly not adaptable, shall apply to all
city elections.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
§ 35.27  CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Nullification of former ordinances. These revisions to the city code
are prospective and supersede and eviscerate all prior election ordinances that
are inconsistent with the foregoing revisions.
   (B)   Severability. It shall be considered that it is the legislative
intent, in the enactment of any ordinance, that if any part of the chapter is
held unconstitutional, the remaining parts shall remain in force. Should any
provision of this chapter be determined to be invalid by a court or other
tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such section shall be deemed to be
severable, and all other code provisions shall be in full force and effect.
   (C)   Inconsistency. If any provision of this chapter is found to be
inconsistent with the West Virginia Code governing elections, or the Code of
State Regulations governing elections, as promulgated by the West Virginia
Secretary of State, then the State Code, or Code of State Regulations
promulgated by the West Virginia Secretary of State shall control, and any such
inconsistent provisions shall be deemed invalid.
(Ord. 043, passed 9-21-2006)
CHAPTER 36:  TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Costs for collecting delinquent amounts due municipality
Publication or Disclosure of Delinquent Fee Information
   
36.15   Purpose and intent
   
36.16   Publication procedures
   
36.17   Effect of irregularity as to delinquent loans
   
36.18   Effect on other collection methods
Public Utility Service Tax
   
36.30   Definitions
   
36.31   Imposed; amount
   
36.32   Collection; time of payment; accounting; reports
   
36.33   Maintenance and inspection of records
   
36.34   Exemptions
   
36.35   Liability; enforcement authority
   
36.36   Enforcement provisions
   
36.37   Notice to utilities
Hotel/Motel Tax
   
36.50   Imposition of tax
   
36.51   Tax on consumer
   
36.52   Rate
   
36.53   Definitions
   
36.54   Payment
   
36.55   Governmental exemptions
   
36.56   Credit transactions
   
36.57   Bankruptcy
   
36.58   Liability
   
36.59   Remittance to city
   
36.60   Records
   
36.61   Corporate ownership
   
36.62   Disposition of proceeds
 
   
36.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to levy and collect an excise tax on the privilege of
purchasing, using or consuming public utility services and tangible personal
property from  public utilities and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5a
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01  COSTS FOR COLLECTING DELINQUENT AMOUNTS DUE MUNICIPALITY.
   If any person responsible for paying or remitting any municipal tax, fee or
other charge fails to timely pay and remit amounts due the municipality, such
person shall be liable and shall pay to the municipality all reasonable costs
and amounts incurred by the municipality in collecting the delinquent amounts.
The municipal official responsible for collecting the tax, fee or charge is
authorized to collect such costs and amounts in the same manner as the tax, fee
or charge. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, reasonable costs
and amounts for which a delinquent person shall be liable include, but are not
limited to, filing and recording fees, release fees, court costs, bad check
charges, postage, copy charges, court reporter charges, search costs and
similar items incurred by the municipality reasonably attributable to the
delinquency as determined by the responsible municipal official. (Alternative:
the responsible municipal official may waive collection of all or any party of
such costs for good cause shown.)
(Ord. 065, passed 10-18-2007)  Penalty, see §
36.99
PUBLICATION OR DISCLOSURE OF DELINQUENT FEE INFORMATION
§ 36.15  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Treasurer of the city collects fees. It is a goal of the office of the
Treasurer to achieve the effective collection of current and delinquent fees
while providing quality customer service. This policy provides procedures for
collecting delinquent municipal fee accounts by publishing or disclosing
delinquent account information to aid in the collection of fees enacted by city
ordinance, authorized by W.Va. Code § 8-13-13 and any other operative laws of
the state.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
§ 36.16  PUBLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Treasurer of the city may, from time to time in his or her
discretion, prepare one or more lists of those certain service fee accounts for
the previous period(s) which are reflected as delinquent in the city’s records
and to be included for publication, which list shall be published as a Class I
legal advertisement in compliance with W.Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq., and the
publication area for such publication shall be the county.
   (B)   The delinquent account information published or disclosed pursuant to
this policy may show the name of any person(s) associated with the delinquent
account, including business name and owners thereof (if applicable), address
of, and the amount or amounts due from each delinquent account in the aggregate
or by period. The published list shall display the applicable period(s) to
which the delinquency relates. The list may be presented in any sequence,
format or grouping the Treasurer may determine and may omit accounts with de
minimus delinquencies.
   (C)   The Treasurer, after ascertaining which accounts are delinquent,
shall, at least ten days prior to publication or release of a list, send notice
to the last known name and address on record with the city associated with the
account. The notice shall identify the delinquent account and/or responsible
person(s) of last record, the applicable period(s) covered, aggregate amount
due and the procedures for settling the account. Any account that is delinquent
may be removed from the delinquent list prior to publication or release by
paying the city the full amount of fees and all related costs owed by such
account before the list is delivered for publication or release.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a regular fee billing
statement showing that an account is more than 60 days overdue shall satisfy
the notice requirement of this division (C).
   (D)   The Treasurer, prior to the delivering a delinquent list to the
newspaper or otherwise releasing such list, shall review the same and be
satisfied that the list is correct.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
§ 36.17  EFFECT OF IRREGULARITY AS TO DELINQUENT LOANS.
   No irregularity, error, omission or mistake in respect to anything provided
by this policy to be done concerning the delinquent lists shall invalidate any
fee administered by the city. No irregularity, error, omission or mistake shall
invalidate any collection or enforcement procedures used by the city with
respect to any delinquent account. Nor shall any person be allowed to enjoin or
otherwise question the validity of any subsequent step in the collection and
enforcement procedures by reason of any irregularity, error, omission or
mistake. Any action by the Treasurer in good faith reliance on this policy
shall relieve the Treasurer and the city from any claim by any person aggrieved
by any publication or disclosure hereunder. The Treasurer may, without any
investigation or inquiry, rely upon the city’s existing and future regular
procedures and systems, including computerized collection systems, in
determining the name(s), amounts, periods and nature of purported delinquent
accounts for purposes of this policy.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
§ 36.18  EFFECT ON OTHER COLLECTION METHODS.
   The promulgation of this policy does not in any way limit the city from
utilizing other methods of collection, including without limitation,
administrative or judicial actions, liens, boot/tow orders, cease and desist
orders, payment plans, collection agencies and credit bureaus and all other
methods permitted by law.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE TAX
§ 36.30  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE. Any service or tangible personal property purchased
within this city from a seller, as hereinafter in this section defined, namely:
telephone service; electric service; gas service, including bottled or liquid
gas, if the seller thereof is classified as a public utility subject to the
jurisdiction of the State Public Service Commission; water service and sanitary
sewer service if purchased, used or consumed within the corporate limits of
this city.
   PURCHASER. Any person who purchases, uses or consumes a public utility
service.
   SELLER. Any person, whether a public service corporation, a municipality or
private corporation, classified as a public utility and subject to the
jurisdiction of the State Public Service Commission, who sells, furnishes or
supplies a public utility service.
   USER. The owner or tenant of private residential property or the owner or
tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes, and every
combination thereof, of every kind.
(1991 Code, § 15-1)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.31  IMPOSED; AMOUNT.
   There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of a public utility
service an excise tax upon the privilege of purchasing, using or consuming,
within the corporate limits of the city, such public utility service. Such tax
shall be in the amount of 2% of the charge, exclusive of any federal or state
tax thereon imposed upon the purchaser, made by the seller against the
purchaser with respect to each public utility service, which tax, in every
case, shall be collected by the seller and paid by the purchaser upon the
amount of each periodic statement rendered such purchaser by the seller, and
shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller at the time the purchase price or
such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the
purchaser and the seller. The tax imposed and levied by this subchapter is in
addition to all other taxes imposed and levied by this city. In the event the
amount of the charge for any single public utility service exceeds an amount
set by Council from time to time in any given calendar month to any single
purchaser, no tax shall be imposed for such additional purchase, use or
consumption in excess of an amount set by Council from time to time. In the
event more than one public utility shall furnish the identical public utility
service to the same purchaser, the purchaser shall be entitled to group such
services as a single public utility service in calculating the amount of the
charges in any calendar month for such public utility service.
(1991 Code, § 15-2)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.32  COLLECTION; TIME OF PAYMENT; ACCOUNTING; REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax-collecting medium
or agency for the city, to collect from each purchaser for the use of the city
the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price
charged for its public utility service, and the amount of tax actually
collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the
city, and each seller shall remit the amount of tax shown by such report to
have been collected by the city on or before the last day of the second
calendar month following the month in which collected, as well as the name and
address of any purchaser who has failed or refused to pay the tax so imposed
and levied. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the City
Collector and Treasurer.
(1991 Code, § 15-3)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.33  MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   Every seller shall maintain complete records showing all purchases of public
utility service within the corporate limits of the city, which records shall
show the charge made against each purchaser, the dates such public utility
service was furnished, the date of payment therefor and the amount of tax
imposed hereunder, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the
duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized
agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make, at the
expense of the city, such transcripts thereof during such times as they may
desire.
(1991 Code, § 15-4)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.34  EXEMPTIONS.
   The tax hereby imposed and levied shall not apply to the following
transactions, which transactions are hereby exempted from such tax:
   (A)   Purchases of public utility service for resale;
   (B)   Purchases of public utility service by the United States of America,
the state and the political subdivisions, municipalities, boards, commissions,
authorities and public corporations thereof;
   (C)   Purchases of tangible personal property, such as appliances, as
distinguished from the public service supplied;
   (D)   Charges for telephone services which are paid by the insertion of
coins into coin-operated telephones and specific charges or tolls for telephone
calls to points outside the corporate limits of the city; and
   (E)   Nonrecurring charges incidental to the furnishing of public utility
service.
(1991 Code, § 15-5)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.35  LIABILITY; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be no liability upon the seller for erroneously
collecting the tax hereby imposed and levied or for erroneously failing to bill
for such tax as a result of a good-faith mistake on the part of the seller.
      (2)   When any purchaser contends that such tax is not owed by such
purchaser on the ground that the public utility service was not purchased, used
or consumed within the corporate limits of the city, the seller shall refer the
question to the City Collector and Treasurer, and such seller shall thereafter
collect or refrain from collecting such tax from such purchaser for such public
utility service, as instructed, in writing, by such city officer.
      (3)   Any claim for refunds of any such tax shall be presented to the
city and not to the seller.
   (B)   The City Collector and Treasurer shall have the authority to
promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 15-6)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.36  ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
   Any amount of tax due and unpaid under this subchapter shall be a debt due
the city. Such debt shall be a personal obligation of the purchaser, which
shall be enforceable as provided by W.Va. Code § 8-13-15, or in any other
manner provided by law for compelling the payment of taxes due municipalities.
(1991 Code, § 15-7)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)  Penalty, see §
36.99
§ 36.37  NOTICE TO UTILITIES.
   The tax hereby imposed and levied shall not be effective until the city
gives 60 days’ written notice by certified mail of the effective date of this
chapter to any public utility doing business within the city, which is required
to collect the tax imposed and levied hereby.
(1991 Code, § 15-8)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to levy and collect an excise tax on the privilege of
purchasing, using or consuming public utility services and tangible personal
property from public utilities and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5a
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
§ 36.50  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed a tax upon the occupancy of hotel rooms located
within the city including, but not limited to, hotels owned by the state or any
political subdivision of the state.
(Ord. 097-01, passed 2-4-1997; Ord. 064, passed 10-18-2007; Ord. 180, passed 9-
4-2014)
§ 36.51  TAX ON CONSUMER.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be a tax upon the consumer and
shall be collected by the hotel operator as a part of the consideration paid
for the occupancy of a hotel room; provided, that the tax shall not be imposed
on any consumer occupying a hotel room for 30 or more consecutive days.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014; Ord. 247, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 36.52  RATE.
   The rate of tax imposed by this subchapter shall be 6% of the consideration
paid for the use or occupancy of the hotel room. The consideration paid for the
use or occupancy of the hotel room shall not include the amount of tax imposed
on the transaction under W.Va. Code §§ 11-15-1 et seq., or charges for meals,
valet service, room service, telephone service or other charges or
consideration not paid for the use or occupancy of a hotel room.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.53  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSIDERATION PAID or CONSIDERATION. The amount received in money, credits,
property or other consideration for or in exchange for the right to occupy a
hotel room as herein defined.
   CONSUMER. A person who pays the consideration for the use or occupancy of a
hotel room. The term CONSUMER shall not be construed to mean the government of
the United States of America, its agencies or instrumentalities, or the
government of the state or political subdivisions thereof.
   HOTEL. Any facility, building or buildings, publicly or privately owned
(including a facility located in a state, county or municipal park), in which
the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term
shall include, but not be limited to, boarding houses, hotels, motels, inns,
courts, condominiums, lodges, cabins and tourist homes. The term HOTEL shall
include state, county and city parks offering accommodations as herein set
forth. The term HOTEL shall not be construed to mean any hospital, sanitarium,
extended care facility, nursing home or university or college housing unit, or
any facility providing fewer than three rooms in private homes, not exceeding a
total of ten days in a calendar year, nor any tent, trailer or camper
campsites; provided, that where a university or college housing unit provides
sleeping accommodations for the general nonstudent public for a consideration,
the term HOTEL shall, if otherwise applicable, apply to such accommodations for
the purposes of this tax.
   HOTEL OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of a hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, trustee in
possession, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, executor or in any other capacity.
Where the HOTEL OPERATOR performs his or her functions through a managing agent
of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also
be deemed a HOTEL OPERATOR for the purposes of this subchapter and shall have
the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   HOTEL ROOM.
      (1)   Any room or suite of rooms or other facility affording sleeping
accommodations to the general public and situated within a hotel.
      (2)   The term HOTEL ROOM does not include:
         (a)   A banquet room, meeting room or any other room not primarily
used for, or in conjunction with, sleeping accommodations; or
         (b)   Sleeping accommodations rented on a month-to-month basis or
other rental arrangement for 30 days or longer at the inception at a boarding
house, condominium, cabin, tourist home, apartment or home; and
         (c)   Sleeping accommodations rented by a hotel operator to those
persons directly employed by the hotel operator for the purposes of performing
duties in support of the operation of the hotel or related operations.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
syndicate, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, receiver,
corporation, guardian, trust, business trust, trustee, committee, estate,
executor, administrator of any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   STATE PARK. Any state-owned facility which is part of this state’s park and
recreation system established pursuant to this code. For purposes of this
subchapter, any recreational facility otherwise qualifying as a hotel and
situated within a STATE PARK shall be deemed to be solely within the county in
which the building or buildings comprising said facility are physically
situated, notwithstanding the fact that the STATE PARK within which said
facility is located may lie within the jurisdiction of more than one county.
   TAX, TAXES or THIS TAX. The hotel occupancy tax authorized by this
subchapter.
   TAXPAYER. Any person liable for the tax authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 097-01, passed 2-4-1997; Ord. 064, passed 10-18-2007; Ord. 180, passed 9-
4-2014; Ord. 247, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 36.54  PAYMENT.
   (A)   The consumer shall pay to the hotel operator the amount of tax imposed
by this subchapter, which tax shall be added to and shall constitute a part of
the consideration paid for the use and occupancy of the hotel room, and which
tax shall be collectible as such by the hotel operator who shall account for,
and remit to the city, all taxes paid by consumers. The hotel operator shall
separately state the tax authorized by this subchapter on all bills, invoices,
accounts, books of account and records relating to consideration paid for
occupancy or use of a hotel room. The hotel operator may commingle taxes
collected hereunder with the proceeds of the rental of hotel accommodations.
All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be
deemed to be held in trust by the hotel until the same shall have been remitted
to the city as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A hotel or hotel operator shall not represent to the public in any
manner, directly or indirectly, that it will absorb all or any part of the tax
or that the tax is not to be considered an element in the price to be collected
from the consumer.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.55  GOVERNMENTAL EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Hotel room occupancy billed directly to the federal government shall
be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for a federal government
employee for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this tax.
   (B)   Hotel room occupancy billed directly to this state or its political
subdivisions shall be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for by an
employee of this state for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this
tax.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.56  CREDIT TRANSACTIONS.
   A hotel operator doing business wholly or partially on a credit basis shall
require the consumer to pay the full amount of tax due upon a credit sale at
the time such sale is made or within 30 days thereafter.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.57  BANKRUPTCY.
   In the distribution, voluntary or compulsory, in receivership, bankruptcy or
otherwise, of the property or estate of any person, all taxes due and unpaid
authorized under this subchapter shall be paid from the first money available
for distribution in priority to all claims and liens except taxes and debts due
to the United States which under federal law are given priority over the debts
and liens created by this subchapter for this tax and taxes and debts due to
the state. Any person charged with the administration or distribution of any
such property or estate who shall violate the provisions of this section shall
be personally liable for any taxes accrued and unpaid which are chargeable
against the person whose property or estate is in administration or
distribution.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.58  LIABILITY.
   If any hotel operator fails to collect the tax authorized by this subchapter
and levied pursuant to this subchapter or shall fail to properly remit such tax
to the taxing authority, he or she shall be personally liable for such amount
as he or she failed to collect or remit; provided, that such hotel operator
shall not be held liable for failure to collect such tax if the hotel operator
can by good and substantial evidence prove the refusal of the purchaser to pay
this tax despite the diligent effort in good faith of the hotel operator to
collect the tax.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)  Penalty, see §
36.99
§ 36.59  REMITTANCE TO CITY.
   (A)   A profit may not accrue to any person as a result of the collection of
the tax authorized under this subchapter. Notwithstanding that the total amount
of taxes collected by a hotel operator may be in excess of the amount for which
a consumer would be liable by the application of the levy imposed under this
subchapter for the occupancy of a hotel room or rooms, the total amount of all
taxes collected by any hotel operator shall be remitted to the city as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be due and payable
in monthly installments on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month
next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued; provided, that for credit
sales in which the tax authorized by this subchapter is not collected by the
hotel operator at the time of such sales, such tax shall not, for purposes of
this subchapter, be regarded as having accrued until the date on which it is
either received by the hotel operator or upon the expiration of the 30-day
payment period set forth in this subchapter. The hotel operator shall, on or
before the fifteenth day of each month, prepare and deliver to the city a
return for the preceding month, in the form prescribed by the city. Each return
shall be signed by the hotel operator or his or her duly authorized agent.
      (2)   For the first month that the tax is delinquent, there shall be
assessed by the Treasurer a penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax due for the
delinquent period. No payment for a subsequent period shall be collected until
all prior delinquent taxes have been paid in full with all penalties assessed
thereto.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.60  RECORDS.
   Each hotel operator shall keep complete and accurate records of taxable
sales and of charges, together with a record of the tax collected thereon, and
shall keep all invoices and other pertinent documents in such form as the city
may require. Such records and other documents shall be preserved for a period
of not less than three years, unless the city shall consent in writing to their
destruction within that period or shall require that they be kept for a longer
period.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.61  CORPORATE OWNERSHIP.
   If the taxpayer is an association or corporation, the officers thereof
actually participating in the management or operation of the association or
corporation shall be personally liable, jointly and severally, for any default
on the part of the association or corporation; and payment of tax, fines,
additions to tax or penalties which may be imposed by this subchapter, may be
enforced against such officers as against the association or corporation which
they represent.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.62  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Application of proceeds. The net proceeds of the tax collected and
remitted to the city pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into the
general revenue fund of the city and after appropriation thereof, shall be
expended only as provided in division (B).
   (B)   Required expenditures. At least 50% of the net revenue receivable
during the fiscal year by the city pursuant to this subchapter shall be
expended in the following manner for the promotion of conventions and tourism:
      (1)   If a convention and visitor’s bureau is located within the city,
county or region, the city shall appropriate the percentage required by this
division (B) to that bureau. If a convention and visitor’s bureau is not
located within the city, county or region, then the percentage appropriation
required by this division (B)(1) shall be appropriated as follows:
         (a)   Any hotel located within the city, county or region may apply to
the city for an appropriation to such hotel of a portion of the tax authorized
by this subchapter and collected by such hotel and remitted to the city, for
uses directly related to the promotion of tourism and travel, including
advertising, salaries, travel, office expenses, publications and similar
expenses. The portion of such tax allocable to such hotel shall not exceed 75%
of that portion of such tax collected and remitted by such hotel which is
required to be expended pursuant to this division (B); provided, that prior to
appropriating any moneys to such hotel the city shall require the submission
of, and give approval to, a budget setting forth the proposed uses of such
moneys; and
         (b)   If there is more than one convention and visitor’s bureau
located within the municipality, county or region, the Council may allocate the
tax authorized by this subchapter to one or more of such bureaus in such
portion as the Council in its sole discretion determines.
      (2)   The balance of net revenue required to be expended by this division
(B) shall be appropriated to the regional travel council serving the area in
which the city is located.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any purchaser failing or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed and
levied and any seller or purchaser violating any of the provisions of §§
36.30 through
36.37 or any lawful rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined an amount set by Council from time to time. The
failure or refusal to pay the tax for public utility service purchased, used or
consumed during different statement periods shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses.
(1991 Code, § 15-7)
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse to
collect or to pay the tax or to willfully refuse to make the return required to
be made by §§
36.50 through
36.62; or to willfully make any false or fraudulent return or false statement
in any return with the intent to default the city, or to willfully evade the
payment of the tax, or any part thereof; or for any person to willfully aid or
abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax, or any part
thereof; or for any officer, partner or principal of any corporation or
association to willfully make or willfully permit to be made for such
corporation or association any false return, or any false statement in any
return authorized by §§
36.50 through
36.62, with the intent to evade the payment of this tax.
      (2)   Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of §§
36.50 through
36.62 shall for the first offense be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time
or imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisoned. For each offense after the first offense, such person shall be
guilty of a felony, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount set
by Council from time to time, or imprisoned in the penitentiary not less than
one nor more than three years, or in the discretion of the court be confined in
the county jail not more than one year, or both fined and imprisoned.
      (3)   Every prosecution for any offense arising under §§
36.50 through
36.62 shall be commenced within three years after the offense was committed,
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary.
      (4)   Proceedings against any person under this section shall be
initiated in the county of this state wherein such person resides if any
element of the offense occurs in such county of residence, or if no element of
the offense occurs in such county of residence, then in the county where the
offense was committed.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         EVADE. To willfully and fraudulently commit any act with the intent of
depriving the state of payment of any tax which there is a known legal duty to
pay.
         FRAUD. Any false representation or concealment as to any material fact
made by any person with the knowledge that it is not true and correct, with the
intention that such representation or concealment be relied upon by the state.
         WILLFULLY. The intentional violation of a known legal duty to perform
any act, required to be performed by any provision of §§
36.50 through
36.62, in respect of which the violation occurs; provided, that the mere
failure to perform any act shall not be a willful violation under §§
36.50 through
36.62. A willful violation of §§
36.50 through
36.62 requires that the defendant have had knowledge of or notice of a duty to
perform such act, and that the defendant, with knowledge of or notice of such
duty, intentionally failed to perform such act.
(Ord. passed 5-3-1971; Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
CHAPTER 37:  MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Created; presiding judge
   
37.02   Judge; oath of office; bond
   
37.03   Municipal Court Clerk serving as Municipal Court Judge
   
37.04   Judge; powers and duties generally
   
37.05   Docket; allocation of fees, fines and costs
   
37.06   Record of traffic cases; Traffic Violations Bureau
   
37.07   Appeals; minimum fine
   
37.08   Enforcement and collection of fines, costs and fees
   
37.09   Costs; generally
   
37.10   Municipal Court technology and maintenance fee
   
37.11   Costs; arrest fee; police pension fee
   
37.12   Additional Court costs upon certain convictions
Deferred Payment of Fines and Costs
   
37.25   When permitted
   
37.26   Determination of ability to pay; questionnaire
   
37.27   Payment of fine as condition to probation or suspension of sentence
   
37.28   Good behavior as condition to deferred payment
   
37.29   Procedure upon default in payment
   
37.30   Reimbursement for costs of incarceration
   
37.31   Teen Court fee
   
37.32   Reinstatement fee for driver’s license
 
   
37.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   For state law providing that, notwithstanding any Charter provision to the
contrary, any municipality  may provide by ordinance for the creation and
maintenance of a  municipal court and the like, and to authorize such court and
the judge thereof to exercise such jurisdiction, judicial powers and duties as
set forth in W.Va. Code § 8-10-1 and similar or related provisions contained in
its municipal charter, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01  CREATED; PRESIDING JUDGE.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Municipal Court of the city, which shall
be presided over by the Municipal Court Judge or Judges.
   (B)   The Council shall appoint a qualified person or persons to the office
of Municipal Court Judge, to serve in such office at the pleasure of the
Council. In the event that the Council shall appoint more than one person to
act as Municipal Court Judge, it shall appoint one of such persons to act as
Chief Judge.
(1991 Code, § 11-1)  (Ord. passed 1-6-1983)
§ 37.02  JUDGE; OATH OF OFFICE; BOND.
   No person shall exercise any power or perform any duty as Municipal Court
Judge until he or she has qualified for such office by taking the oath of
office and by giving the bond required by W.Va. Code § 8-10-1, and by giving
such other faithful performance and true accounting bond as may be required by
the Council under which he or she shall be responsible for all city funds
coming into his or her hands by virtue of his or her office.
(1991 Code, § 11-2)
§ 37.03  MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK SERVING AS MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE.
   In the absence of or in the case of the inability of the Municipal Court
Judge to perform his or her duties, the Municipal Court Clerk may act as
Municipal Court Judge if the Municipal Court Clerk has complied with the
requirements set forth in W.Va. Code § 8-10-2(b) and (c), as are also required
to be complied with by the Municipal Court Judge. The record of the compliance
by the Municipal Court Clerk shall be kept as an official record of the
Municipal Court.
(Ord. 238, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 37.04  JUDGE; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Municipal Court Judge shall be a conservator of the peace within the
city and, insofar as any ordinance of the city is concerned, shall have and
exercise all such powers and duties in criminal cases as a Magistrate may
lawfully exercise under the statutes of the state; and he or she shall also be,
ex officio, a Magistrate within the city and shall, within the city, have and
exercise all the powers relating to crime and perform all duties fixed by law
upon a Magistrate; except, that he or she shall have no jurisdiction over civil
cases. The Municipal Court Judge shall have such further powers and perform
such other duties as may be, from time to time, prescribed or conferred by any
law of the state or by ordinance of the city, as well as the judicial powers
conferred upon the Mayor by the City Charter, insofar as such Charter
provisions are not in conflict with the State Constitution or any state statute
which takes precedence over the City Charter.
(1991 Code, § 11-3)
Charter reference:
   Judicial powers of the Mayor, see Char. §
20, and cross references thereunder to the State Constitution, Art. 8, §§ 11,
15 and, see also, Char. §
28, subsecs. (43), (76)
§ 37.05  DOCKET; ALLOCATION OF FEES, FINES AND COSTS.
   There shall be a docket of the Municipal Court, and it shall be the duty of
the Municipal Court Judge to docket fully thereon all cases in the Court, and
to show thereon all fees, fines and costs adjudged and collected. The Municipal
Court Judge shall, at least once a month, make a written report to the City
Collector and Treasurer, showing all receipts for the previous month, and shall
deliver and pay over to the City Collector and Treasurer all money so received
and to which the city is entitled.
(1991 Code, § 11-4)
Charter reference:
   Maintenance of and entries to be made in the Mayor’s docket; and signature
on and preservation of records of cases in the Mayor’s Court, see Char. §
29
§ 37.06  RECORD OF TRAFFIC CASES; TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   The Municipal Court Judge shall keep or cause to be kept a record of every
traffic complaint and other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or
presented to the Municipal Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau, if and when
he or she shall establish such bureau, and shall keep a record of every
official action by the Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau in reference
thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture
resulting from every traffic complaint deposited with or presented to the Court
or Traffic Violations Bureau.
(1991 Code, § 11-5)
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 17C-19-8
§ 37.07  APPEALS; MINIMUM FINE.
   (A)   Every person sentenced by the Municipal Court Judge to imprisonment or
to the payment of a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time shall be
allowed an appeal to the Circuit Court of the county; the procedure upon appeal
from the Municipal Court shall be the same as that for an appeal from a
Magistrate’s Court.
   (B)   In no case shall a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time
be imposed if a defendant, his or her agent or attorney objects thereto.
(1991 Code, § 11-6)
§ 37.08  ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION OF FINES, COSTS AND FEES.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of §§
37.25 through
37.32, upon failure to pay any fine or costs adjudged against him or her, a
defendant may be confined to the city or county jail until such fine and costs
are paid, but not exceeding 30 days.
   (B)   In addition to the power of imposing imprisonment for nonpayment of
fines as above set forth, the Municipal Court Judge shall have the same
authority and power in collection of fines, fees and costs as are given to a
Magistrate under the laws of the state.
(1991 Code, § 11-7)  (Ord. passed 11-2-1967)
§ 37.09  COSTS; GENERALLY.
   The city shall be entitled to and the Municipal Court Judge may tax, in all
cases appearing before him or her involving violations of city ordinances, the
same costs, fees and allowances and in the same amounts as a Magistrate may
tax.
(1991 Code, § 11-8)  (Ord. passed 11-2-1967)
§ 37.10  MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY AND MAINTENANCE FEE.
   The Court shall assess a mandatory fee an amount set by Council from time to
time upon each and every defendant found guilty or pleading nolo contendere
regarding a misdemeanor violation, including traffic violations and moving
violations, but excluding municipal parking ordinance violations. The
municipality shall use the money raised by this fee to not only fund the
current technological costs of its Municipal Court, but also, to update the
Municipal Court’s technology as needed.
(Ord. 244, passed 9-21-2017)
§ 37.11  COSTS; ARREST FEE; POLICE PENSION FEE.
   There shall be taxed as part of the costs, whenever there is a conviction
for violation of the city laws or ordinances, an arrest fee of an amount set by
Council from time to time and a police pension fee of an amount set by Council
from time to time. The arrest fee shall be paid into the general funds of the
city and the pension fee shall be paid into the Police Officer’s Pension and
Relief Fund.
(1991 Code, § 11-9)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest fee, payable into the Police Officer’s Pension and Relief Fund, see
W.Va. Code § 8-22-20
§ 37.12  ADDITIONAL COURT COSTS UPON CERTAIN CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1 and 8-11-1a, there
is hereby imposed, in addition to any other costs which may lawfully be
imposed, an additional cost of an amount set by Council from time to time upon
the conviction for violation of a municipal ordinance, except that such
additional cost shall not be assessed for a traffic offense that is not a
moving violation or an offense for which the ordinance does not provide for a
period of incarceration. Of the imposed amount set by Council from time to
time, as an additional cost, an amount set by Council from time to time shall
be an administrative cost to be retained by the city.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court, or such person designated to receive
fines and costs, shall at the end of each month pay into the regional jail and
prison development fund in the state treasury an amount set by Council from
time to time of the costs collected in each proceeding except for traffic
offenses that are not moving violations: provided, that in a case where a
defendant has failed to pay all costs assessed against him or her, no payment
shall be made to the Regional Jail and Prison Development Fund unless and until
the defendant has paid all costs which, when paid, are available for the sum
and benefit of the city.
(1991 Code, § 11-9.1)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1987)
DEFERRED PAYMENT OF FINES AND COSTS
§ 37.25  WHEN PERMITTED.
   Whenever a person is convicted in the Municipal Court of a violation of this
code or other ordinance or any rule, regulation, notice or order promulgated
pursuant to the authority thereof and such person is sentenced to pay a fine or
costs, and it shall appear to the Court, on its own motion or on motion of the
defendant, that such defendant is unable to pay such fine or costs forthwith,
the Court may order the defendant to pay such fine or costs in installments or
upon such other terms and conditions or within such period of time as may
enable the defendant to pay such fine or costs.
(1991 Code, § 11-10)
§ 37.26  DETERMINATION OF ABILITY TO PAY; QUESTIONNAIRE.
   (A)   In determining whether a defendant is unable to pay a fine or costs
forthwith, the Court may require such defendant to file a petition, under oath,
with the Court, upon a form provided by the Court, setting forth the financial
condition of the defendant.
   (B)   Such form shall be a questionnaire and shall include, but shall not be
limited to:
      (1)   The name and residence of the defendant and his or her occupation,
if any;
      (2)   His or her family status and the number of persons dependent upon
him or her;
      (3)   His or her monthly income;
      (4)   Whether his or her dependents are employed and, if so, their
approximate monthly income;
      (5)   His or her banking accounts, if any;
      (6)   Real estate owned by the defendant or any interest he or she may
have in real estate;
      (7)   Income produced therefrom;
      (8)   Any independent income accruing to the defendant; tangible and
intangible personal property owned by the defendant or in which he or she may
have an interest;
      (9)   A statement listing the approximate indebtedness of the defendant
to other persons; and
      (10)   (a)   1.   The payment plan of the defendant, should the Court
exercise its discretion in permitting the payment of such fine or costs in
installments or other conditions to be fixed by the Court; and
            2.   At the end of such form, there shall be printed in bold face
type, in a distinctive color, the following:
 
THIS STATEMENT IS MADE UNDER OATH. ANY FALSE STATEMENT OF A MATERIAL FACT TO
ANY QUESTION CONTAINED HEREIN SHALL CONSTITUTE FALSE SWEARING AND SHALL BE AN
OFFENSE AGAINST THIS SECTION. THE MAXIMUM PENALTY IS $100 FINE OR THIRTY DAYS
IN JAIL, OR BOTH.
 
         (b)   A copy of the petition shall be retained by the defendant.
   (C)   (1)   If the defendant is unable to read or write, the Court, or the
Clerk, may assist the defendant in completing the petition and require him or
her to affix his or her mark thereto.
      (2)   The consequences of the making of a false statement shall be
explained to such defendant.
(1991 Code, § 11-11)  Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.27  PAYMENT OF FINE AS CONDITION TO PROBATION OR SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE.
   If a defendant is sentenced to pay a fine or costs and payment of the fine
or costs is ordered to be made on an installment basis or on other conditions
under the provisions of §
37.25, and if the defendant is also placed on probation or imposition of the
execution of sentence is suspended, the Court may make payment of the fine a
condition to probation or suspension of sentence.
(1991 Code, § 11-12)
§ 37.28  GOOD BEHAVIOR AS CONDITION TO DEFERRED PAYMENT.
   If a defendant is permitted to pay a fine and/or costs on an installment
basis or under such other conditions as the Court shall fix under the
provisions of §
37.25, the Court may require, as a condition, that the defendant be of peaceful
and good behavior until the fine and/or costs are paid.
(1991 Code, § 11-13)
§ 37.29  PROCEDURE UPON DEFAULT IN PAYMENT.
   When any person sentenced to pay a fine or costs defaults in the payment of
any such fine or costs or any installment thereof, the Court may issue a
summons for such person to appear before the Court for a hearing on the
question of whether such person’s failure to pay any installment was
attributable to intentional refusal to comply with the prior order of the Court
or to lack of a good-faith effort to comply therewith. The Court may, after
such hearing, order that the person in default be allowed additional time for
payment, may reduce or remit the amount of the fine or costs or the unpaid
portion thereof in whole or in part or, upon a finding that the default was
intentional or due to the lack of a good-faith effort to comply with the prior
order of the Court, may order such person confined for a period of up to 30
days, as the Court, at its discretion, shall determine.
(1991 Code, § 11-14)
§ 37.30  REIMBURSEMENT FOR COSTS OF INCARCERATION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision to the code to the contrary and in
addition to any fine, cost assessment or fee authorized or required to be
imposed upon a person by virtue of his or her conviction of a criminal
provision of this code, or a lawfully enacted ordinance of a political
subdivision of this state, a person so convicted and incarcerated in a regional
jail by virtue of said conviction may be assessed the costs of up to 30 days of
his or her incarceration.
   (B)   Prior to any person being required to pay the cost of his or her
incarceration pursuant to the provisions of division (A) above, a hearing shall
be held before the sentencing Court to determine his or her ability to pay. The
Court may not sentence a defendant to pay his or her costs of incarceration
unless he or she is or in the foreseeable future will be able to pay them. In
determining the amount and method of payment of costs, the Court shall take
account of the financial resources of the defendant and the nature of the
burden that payment of costs will impose.
   (C)   A defendant who has been sentenced to pay costs and who is not in
willful default in the payment of the costs may at any time petition the
sentencing Court for remission of the payment of costs or of any unpaid portion
of the costs. If it appears to the satisfaction of the Court that payment of
the amount due will impose manifest hardship on the defendant or the
defendant’s family or dependents, the Court may excuse payment of all or part
of the amount due in costs, or modify the method of payment.
(Ord. O-44, passed 6-1-2006)
§ 37.31  TEEN COURT FEE.
   The Court shall assess a mandatory fee upon each and every defendant found
guilty or pleading nolo contendere to a misdemeanor violation, including
traffic violations and moving violations, and all city ordinances, but
excluding municipal parking ordinance violations. The County Teen Court Program
shall be financed with the foregoing fee.
(Ord. 074, passed 4-3-2008)
§ 37.32  REINSTATEMENT FEE FOR DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   A fee of an amount set by Council from time to time is hereby imposed
upon any person whose driver’s license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle
in this state is reinstated after having been suspended for any of the
following:
      (1)   Failure to timely pay costs, tines, forfeitures or penalties
imposed by the Municipal Court;
      (2)   Default on a payment plan for such Court costs, lines, forfeitures
or penalties; or
      (3)   Failure to appear or otherwise respond in Court when charged with a
municipal violation, all as provided for by the West Virginia Code.
   (B)   The fee imposed by this section shall be paid at the time the person’s
driver’s license or privilege to drive is reinstated by the State Division of
Motor Vehicles. Such fee is imposed to defer the cost to the city associated
with administrative expenses related to the suspension and reinstatement.
(Ord. 109, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 37.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any defendant who shall knowingly make a false statement of a material
fact to any question contained in the questionnaire authorized by §
37.26 shall be guilty of false swearing under §
37.26 and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 or 30
days imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment.
(1991 Code, § 11-11)
TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE
CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Service to be provided by city; exceptions
   
50.02   Department of sanitation; rules and regulations
   
50.03   Provision of trash receptacles
   
50.04   Placement and removal of receptacles and garbage or refuse
   
50.05   Rates for city service; designated
   
50.06   Rates for city service; authority of Director of Public Works
   
50.07   Rates for city service; consequences of nonpayment
   
50.08   Private disposition
   
50.09   Landfill usage
   
50.10   Disposal of trash
   
50.11   Prohibition of illegal dumping
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of the Council to prohibit the accumulation and require the
disposal of garbage and refuse, and to provide for the elimination of public
health and safety hazards and to abate nuisances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(10),
(23)
§ 50.01  SERVICE TO BE PROVIDED BY CITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall engage in the business of collecting and disposing garbage
or refuse, or shall collect or dispose of garbage or refuse within the city
limits except the city; provided, that farmers and other persons who desire to
collect garbage for the feeding of hogs or other animals and fowl may, upon
application to the Mayor, be authorized to do so, under such regulations as the
Mayor may prescribe; but such farmers and other persons shall make no charge
nor receive any compensation whatever for garbage service to or from any
person.
(1991 Code, § 9-6)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950; Ord. passed 12-5-1968)  Penalty,
see §
50.99
§ 50.02  DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   There shall be a Department of Sanitation under the supervision and
direction of the Director of Public Works. The Department of Sanitation, with
the approval of the Council, shall be adequately equipped and supplied with
personnel and equipment to properly and satisfactorily carry out the essential
public service of collecting, removing and disposing of refuse produced in the
households and places of business of the citizens of the city. The Mayor or
other duly authorized officer, with the approval of the Council, shall have the
authority to prescribe, publish, promulgate and enforce any and all reasonable
rules and regulations deemed by him or her necessary or proper, consistent with
state law, this code and other ordinances, to carry out the objects and
purposes thereof and for the safety and health of the citizens of the city with
respect to the collection, removal and disposal of refuse as herein defined;
and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
such rules and regulations as approved by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 9-7)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03  PROVISION OF TRASH RECEPTACLES.
   Every person in the city who produces or accumulates garbage shall have it
removed in the manner prescribed by this chapter and shall provide a suitable
garbage can or receptacle, to be approved by the Director of Public Works, in
which such garbage shall be deposited as it, from time to time, is made or
accumulates, and a separate receptacle in which shall be deposited all
crockery, glass, glass bottles, tin cans and other similar articles which are
subject to being collected.
(1991 Code, § 9-8)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 50.04  PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF RECEPTACLES AND GARBAGE OR REFUSE.
   All receptacles and/or garbage or refuse to be hauled in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be placed in a spot accessible to the
Sanitation Department not more than 24 hours previous to 6:00 a.m. on the day
of collection. No receptacles and/or garbage or refuse shall be allowed to
stand or remain on any of the sidewalks, streets or alleys of the city for more
than 24 hours after such collection has been made by the Sanitation Department.
(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-2014)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05  RATES FOR CITY SERVICE; DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The Council shall, from time to time, establish the charges that will
be imposed for garbage and refuse collection services. A current list of such
charges shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be
available for public inspection during normal city office hours.
   (B)   At no time, however, shall rates which are disclosed to be producing
less revenue than is required to meet all obligations and costs involved in
rendering such service be continued.
(1991 Code, § 9-9)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1992; Ord. O-008, passed 1-15-2004; Ord.
113, passed 6-3-2010; Ord. 169, passed 7-18-2013; Ord. 200, passed 9-24-2015)
§ 50.06  RATES FOR CITY SERVICE; AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized and empowered to prescribe
rates for the removal and disposal of other refuse materials not expressly
mentioned in §
50.05.
   (B)   If the number of times for the weekly collection of garbage set out in
that section shall prove burdensome and a good service can be given by
collections a lesser number of times weekly, the Director may, at his or her
discretion, modify §
50.05 accordingly in such cases.
(1991 Code, § 9-10)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 50.07  RATES FOR CITY SERVICE; CONSEQUENCES OF NONPAYMENT.
   Upon the failure of any person receiving such service to pay therefor when
due, the city may discontinue such service after appropriate notice.
(1991 Code, § 9-11)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 50.08  PRIVATE DISPOSITION.
   Private scavengers, pushcart operators and private garbage collectors are
hereby prohibited from engaging in the business of transporting or disposing of
raw or prepared garbage and refuse containing organic wastes, putrid matter and
wastes or excreta subject to putrification.
(1991 Code, § 9-12)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09  LANDFILL USAGE.
   (A)   The schedule of fees charged for landfill usage shall be an amount set
by Council from time to time.
   (B)   A finance charge in the amount as set by Council from time to time on
the past due balance will be imposed on all accounts not paid within 60 days of
the billing date.
   (C)   The city landfill closed on September 2015.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1992)
§ 50.10  DISPOSAL OF TRASH.
   A person shall not place trash in trash receptacle belonging to another
private individual, corporation, partnership, proprietorship or association
without that person’s or entity’s prior consent.
(Ord. passed 4-16-1992)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.11  PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DUMPING.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ILLEGAL DUMPING.
         (a)   The disposal of trash or refuse generated outside the city
limits by nonresidents of the city or persons or entities who do not pay city
sanitation fees into city maintained trash receptacles.
         (b)   ILLEGAL DUMPING shall also be defined as disposal of trash or
refuse generated outside the city limits of the city into city maintained trash
receptacles by persons or entities who do not pay city sanitation fees, but who
use city trash receptacles with the permission of those friends, family
members, employers, or others who do pay city sanitation fees.
   (B)   Enforcement. Enforcement of the prohibition on illegal dumping shall
be assumed by the Police Department and Municipal Court of the city.
Enforcement of penalties and collection of fines shall be conducted pursuant to
Chapter 37 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. O-009, passed 1-22-2004)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
50.10 shall be subject to a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time
plus court costs.
   (C)   Any person or entity found guilty of illegal dumping in violation of §
50.11 in the Municipal Court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense against
the city, and shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 4-16-1992; Ord. O-009, passed 1-22-2004)
CHAPTER 51:  WATER
Section
General Provision
   
51.01   Furnishing water in competition with city; compliance with regulations
and the like
   
51.02   Water Committee; composition; appointments
   
51.03   Applications and permits to use water
   
51.04   Prohibited uses in case of scarcity
   
51.05   Use of supply; supplying others
   
51.06   Drinking fountains and fixtures exposed to general use
   
51.07   Use of water meters; minimum charge
   
51.08   Duties of City Clerk; record
   
51.09   Unauthorized use of supply
   
51.10   Service pipes from mains to curb
   
51.11   Fixtures and service pipes from building to curb
   
51.12   Damage to system; misuse of materials; trespassing
   
51.13   Liability
   
51.14   Noncompliance where two families are supplied from same service pipe
   
51.15   Reports to Water Department
   
51.16   Special valve where boiler is supplied from mains
   
51.17   Cutting off water; notification, reimbursement procedure
Rates, Charges, Billings and Related Provisions
   
51.30   Estimates and rates in certain cases
   
51.31   Rates
   
51.32   Tapping fees
Backflow and Cross-Connections
   
51.45   Purpose
   
51.46   Authority
   
51.47   Responsibility
   
51.48   Definitions
   
51.49   Administration
   
51.50   Requirements
   
51.51   Degree of hazard
   
51.52   Existing in-use backflow prevention devices
   
51.53   Periodic testing
   
51.54   Records
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to erect, authorize and prohibit the erection of
waterworks for public service and to maintain waterworks, reservoirs and the
like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (56)
Cross-reference:
   Changing, diverting or obstructing streams, sewers, drains and the like, see
§
130.021
   Contaminating watercourses, wells, drains and the like, see §
130.021
   Contamination of water supply by garbage, refuse and the like, see §
91.023
   Grades and elevations generally, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
   Sewers and sewage generally, see
Ch. 52
   Stagnant water generally, see §
91.006
GENERAL PROVISION
§ 51.01  FURNISHING WATER IN COMPETITION WITH CITY; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS
AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish water in competition with the
city; provided, that any person may furnish water for his or her own use. It
shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the mains or service pipes
of the city without first complying with the rules, regulations and schedules
of water rates set forth in this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 20-1)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.02  WATER COMMITTEE; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.
   The care and maintenance of the waterworks established by the city shall be
entrusted to the Water Committee, which shall be made up of three members of
the Council, to be appointed biannually at the organizational meeting of the
Council.
(1991 Code, § 20-2)
§ 51.03  APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS TO USE WATER.
   (A)   All applications for the introduction or supply of water to any
premises, or for the extension of any pipe conveying water must be made, in
writing, by the owner of the premises or his or her authorized agent, to the
City Clerk, on blanks kept for the purpose. Such application shall state fully
and without reserve or concealment the use to which the water is to be applied
and the place where the mains or pipes are to be tapped.
   (B)   No permit to use water shall be granted except to the property owner
or his or her agent, and he or she shall be responsible for compliance with the
established rules and regulations governing the supply and introduction of
water and the rates thereof.
(1991 Code, § 20-3)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04  PROHIBITED USES IN CASE OF SCARCITY.
   The Council shall have the right, in the case of scarcity of water, to order
the discontinuance of the use of all street sprinklers, fountains and motors
during the term of such scarcity, and the Committee shall be the judge of any
such scarcity.
(1991 Code, § 20-4)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05  USE OF SUPPLY; SUPPLYING OTHERS.
   No person supplied with water shall be permitted to use the water for any
other purpose than that stated in the application or agreement; nor shall any
person supply water in any way to any other person without a written permit
from the Water Committee, nor shall he or she permit others to use his or her
hose or other attachments, nor leave them exposed to use by others.
(1991 Code, § 20-5)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06  DRINKING FOUNTAINS AND FIXTURES EXPOSED TO GENERAL USE.
   No hydrants or other fixtures, except public drinking fountains, shall be
placed within the limits of any street, unless such hydrant or other fixture is
securely closed and protected against general use. No drinking fountains
erected for public use shall have openings by which they can be used as a
source of domestic supply.
(1991 Code, § 20-6)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07  USE OF WATER METERS; MINIMUM CHARGE.
   (A)   (1)   The Council reserves the right to set meters and charge meter
rates, whenever there is any doubt as to the quantity of water used or wasted.
      (2)   Customers shall have the right, at their option, to put in meters
and pay meter rates; provided, that the kind of meters shall be designated by
the Council or the Water Committee.
      (3)   Whenever meters are used, they shall be placed by the city plumbers
under the direction of the Water Committee, and the cost of the meter and the
cost of placing such meter shall be paid by the city.
      (4)   The city officers shall have access to the meters at all reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection and care.
   (B)   Where meters are placed on the premises of any user of water, they
shall be read quarterly, and collections made as from other users.
(1991 Code, § 20-7)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08  DUTIES OF CITY CLERK; RECORD.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep all such records and make all such reports
as may be required by the rules and regulations of the State Public Service
Commission, or which may be required by the Council, by resolution.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall make out at the beginning of each quarter all
water rents and charges and place them in the hands of the City Collector and
Treasurer, and keep a record thereof in a well-bound book to be known and
designated as the “Water Record”.
(1991 Code, § 20-8)
§ 51.09  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SUPPLY.
   The introduction of service pipes for the supply of water into any premises
shall be under the direct supervision of the Water Committee or its authorized
agent.
(1991 Code, § 20-9)  (Ord. 111, passed 4-1-2010)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10  SERVICE PIPES FROM MAINS TO CURB.
   (A)   The kind, size and strength of service pipe to be used and the depth
to which such pipe shall be laid to the curb shall be determined by the Water
Committee or its authorized agents.
   (B)   The city shall bear all the expense for the laying and keeping in
repair of the service pipe from the water main to the curb.
(1991 Code, § 20-10)
§ 51.11  FIXTURES AND SERVICE PIPES FROM BUILDING TO CURB.
   All persons taking water must keep their service pipes and fixtures
connected therewith in good repair and protected from frost at their own
expense.
(1991 Code, § 20-11)
§ 51.12  DAMAGE TO SYSTEM; MISUSE OF MATERIALS; TRESPASSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest or destroy the
waterworks, reservoir, pipes, branches, fittings, faucets, fire plugs, hydrants
or any part thereof or any property or building belonging or appertaining
thereto. Any person having the authority to use or open the fire plugs for any
other purpose other than in case of fire shall do so under the supervision of
the city plumbers or some other person authorized by law to open or use the
plugs; and it shall be the duty of all officers of the Council or the members
thereof or their authorized agents to apprehend every offender or trespasser on
the works or property and take him or her before the Mayor, to answer for such
offense. Any person using the fire plugs, hose or other such material shall pay
the City Collector and Treasurer for the use thereof and other expenses
attending such use, and shall also be liable for any damage done thereto.
(1991 Code, § 20-12)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.13  LIABILITY.
   It is expressly stipulated by the city and the consumers of water from the
waterworks that no claim shall be made against the city by reason of the
breaking of any pipe or cock or for any failure of the supply of water, and all
contracts made shall be subject to this condition.
(1991 Code, § 20-13)
§ 51.14  NONCOMPLIANCE WHERE TWO FAMILIES ARE SUPPLIED FROM SAME SERVICE PIPE.
   In case two or more families are supplied with water from the same service
pipe, if either of the parties fails to pay the water rent when due, or fails
to comply with any rule of the Water Committee or of the waterworks, the city
shall turn off the water from such pipes until the rent is paid or the rule is
strictly complied with or both.
(1991 Code, § 20-14)
§ 51.15  REPORTS TO WATER DEPARTMENT.
   The Water Department shall inspect and make out, on or before the first
meeting in July and January of each year, a complete report of all water
connections, accounts and discharges and submit such report to the Water
Committee for examination. The Water Committee shall correct any errors therein
and pass the report to the Treasurer. The report shall be presented to the
Council for action and after action by the Council, shall be filed with the
City Collector and Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the city plumber to
report all violations of the rules and regulations to the Water Committee and
the Committee shall see that all the aforesaid rules and regulations are
enforced.
(1991 Code, § 20-15)
§ 51.16  SPECIAL VALVE WHERE BOILER IS SUPPLIED FROM MAINS.
   In all cases in which boilers are supplied directly from the water mains, a
suitable valve or vacuum must be attached to prevent damage from collapsing
when the water is shut off from the street mains. Check valves shall not be
permitted.
(1991 Code, § 20-16)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.17  CUTTING OFF WATER; NOTIFICATION, REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every property owner to whose property
water is furnished by the city to notify the City Clerk, in writing, at any
time he or she desires water rent to cease; and no exoneration for water rent
shall be made to any person until such notice in writing is received by the
Clerk, and in no case for less than 30 days.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of such notice by the City Clerk, he or she shall
immediately notify the Water Department, whose duty it shall be to turn off the
water to such premises, and the water shall not be turned on again until notice
is received from the property owner.
      (3)   In no case shall any person, except the city plumber or other
person employed by the city for that purpose, turn such water off or on.
   (B)   If the water rent covering the time when water is shut off has not
been paid, the City Clerk shall notify the City Collector and Treasurer, who
shall deduct the amount of such rent from the respective rent; but if the rent
has been paid, the City Clerk shall draw an order reimbursing the party for the
time such water is turned off, which order shall be signed as are other city
orders by the Mayor, if he or she is satisfied that it is correct.
(1991 Code, § 20-17)  Penalty, see §
51.99
RATES, CHARGES, BILLINGS AND RELATED PROVISIONS
§ 51.30  ESTIMATES AND RATES IN CERTAIN CASES.
   Water supplied to any place for which the system of measurement is not
provided by this chapter shall be estimated by the Water Department subject to
the approval of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 20-18)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to lay and collect charges for services rendered by
municipal waterworks to those served both within and without the city, see
W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(32)
§ 51.31  RATES.
   The rates charged for the use of water from the city mains shall be such as
are approved by the Council and the Public Service Commission and on file in
the City Clerk’s office.
(1991 Code, § 20-19)  (Ord. passed 1-2-1992; Ord. passed 7-16-1992; Ord. passed
3-18-1993; Ord. 063, passed 9-6-2007; Ord. 119, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 132,
passed 11-3-2011; Ord. 154, passed 6-21-2012; Ord. 197, passed 7-2-2015)
§ 51.32  TAPPING FEES.
   Tapping fees shall be fixed by the Council and a schedule filed with the
City Clerk.
(1991 Code, § 20-20)
BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 51.45  PURPOSE.
   (A)   To protect the public water system served by the city from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customer’s
internal distribution water system(s), such contaminants or pollutants that
could backflow due to the back-pressure or back-siphonage into the public water
system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination and/or control of cross-connections and
backflow conditions, actual or potential, within a customer’s internal
distribution water system(s), non-potable systems, plumbing fixture and
processes; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection and backflow prevention control which will effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the public and/or customer’s water system(s) from
cross-connections and backflow conditions.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.46  AUTHORITY.
   By the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et
seq. and 1996 amendment, and W.Va. Code Ch. 16, Art. 1 and Public Health Laws,
State Bureau of Public Health 64 CSR 3-1.1 et seq., the water purveyor has the
primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources, or any
other substances, from entering the potable water system.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.47  RESPONSIBILITY.
   The water purveyor shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the
backflow from back-pressure or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants
through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the water
purveyor, an approved backflow preventer assembly is required at the water
service connection to any customer’s premises, the water purveyor, or his or
her delegated agent, shall give notice in writing to said customer to install
an approved backflow preventer assembly at each service connection to his or
her premises. The customer shall, within 90 days, install such approved
assembly, or assemblies, at his or her own expense, and failure or refusal, or
inability on the part of the customer to install said assembly or assemblies
within 90 days, shall constitute a grounds for discontinuing water service to
the premises until such assembly or assemblies have been properly installed.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.48  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Accepted by the water purveyor as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in the State Department of Health and Human
Resources regulation, or as suitable for the proposed purpose.
   ASSEMBLY. A backflow preventer usually consisting of a combination of
approved check valve components and additional instrumentation including
approved shutoff valves and test cocks.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply or water source, on or available,
to a customer’s premises other than the water purveyor’s approved public water
system.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of water flow or introduction of other
liquids, mixtures or substances, caused by a pressure differential in the
distribution pipes of a potable water system.
   BACKFLOW CONDITION(S). Any set of circumstances, actual or potential, that
could be construed to create a cross-connection allowing for backflow of a
contaminant or pollutant to enter a potable water system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or assembly, or means designed to prevent
backflow in a potable water system. Most commonly categorized as air gap,
atmospheric vacuum breaker, barometric loop, double check with intermediate
atmospheric vent, double check valve assembly, hose bibb vacuum breaker,
pressure breaker, reduced pressure principle assembly and residential dual
check.
      (1)   AIR GAP. A physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow
between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any
other system. Physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of
the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch.
      (2)   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER. A device which prevents backflow by
creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or sub-
atmospheric pressure in a water system.
      (3)   BAROMETRIC LOOP. A fabricated piping arrangement rising at least 35
feet at its topmost point above the highest fixture it supplies. It is utilized
in water supply systems to protect against back-siphonage.
      (4)   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two independently
operating spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on
each side of the check valves, and properly located test cocks for the testing
of each check valve.
      (5)   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT. A device
having two spring loaded check valves separated by an atmospheric vent chamber.
      (6)   HOSE BIBB VACUUM BREAKER. A device attached to a hose bibb and
which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker.
      (7)   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly containing an independently
operated spring loaded check valve and an independently operated spring loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly
includes tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the valves and
properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and air valve.
      (8)   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An assembly
consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with an
automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check
valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves plus
properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief
valve.
      (9)   RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK. A device consisting of two spring loaded,
independently operating check valves. Generally employed immediately downstream
of the water meter to act as a fixture isolation device.
   BACKPRESSURE. A condition in which the customer’s system pressure is greater
than the water purveyor’s system pressure.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the primary source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure or negative
pressure in the potable water system.
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system that serves at least 25
residents year round or that has 15 service connections serving year round
residents.
   CONTAINMENT (EXTERNAL PROTECTION). A method of backflow prevention which
requires a backflow preventer assembly be installed after the meter and prior
to any water service entrance.
   CONTAMINANT. A substance that will impair the qualify of potable water to a
degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to
poisoning or the spread of disease.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any actual or potential, direct or indirect, connection
between the public water system and an unapproved water supply or other source
of contamination or pollution.
   CUSTOMER. A billing unit or service connection to which drinking water is
believed by a public water system. A CUSTOMER may also be identified as an
owner.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. The degree of hazard is the potential risk to health and
the potential adverse effects upon the public water system based on the
probability of backflow occurring and the type or nature of the contaminant. A
HEALTH HAZARD is any condition, device or practice which creates or may create
a danger to health and well being of the water consumer. A SEVERE HEALTH HAZARD
is any health hazard (contaminant) that could be expected to result in
significant morbidity or death. A NON-HEALTH HAZARD (POLLUTANT) is any
condition that could degrade the quality or adversely affect the public water
system.
   DEVICE. A single body backflow preventer with one or two check valves that
cannot be tested and does not have shut-off valves or test cocks.
   FIXTURE ISOLATION (INTERNAL ISOLATION). A method of backflow prevention
where a backflow preventer is located to control a cross-connection or
potential source of contamination at an in-plant piece of equipment or process
location other than at a water service entrance.
   OWNER. Any person who has legal title to, or license to operate, or resides
in a property or facility which is supplied drinking water from a public water
system. May also be referred to as a CUSTOMER.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation,
political subdivision, agency of the state, agency or instrumentality of the
United States, or any other legal entity.
   POLLUTANT. A foreign substance, if permitted to enter the public water
system, will degrade potable water quality so as to constitute a moderate
hazard, or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create
an actual hazard to the public health, but which docs adversely and
unreasonably affect (appearance or color, odor, taste and the like) the water
for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is safe for human consumption as described by the
State Bureau for Public Health.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Includes the works, auxiliaries, for the collection,
treatment, storage and distribution of drinking water from the source of supply
to a customer’s premises. May also be known as a WATER PURVEYOR.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The Municipal Water Department, Water Board, Public Service
District or other administrative authority invested with the authority and
responsibility for a public water system.
   WATER SERVICE ENTRANCE. The point in the customer’s water system beyond the
sanitary control of the public water system (water purveyor), generally
considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and always before any
unprotected branch water line.
   WEST VIRGINIA BUREAU FOR PUBLIC HEALTH (WVBPH). The State of West Virginia
Bureau for Public Health.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.49  ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The water purveyor will establish, operate and promote a cross-
connection and backflow prevention control program, to include the keeping of
necessary records, which fulfills the requirements of the WVBPH Cross-
Connections and Backflow Prevention Regulations.
   (B)   The owner shall allow his or her property to be inspected for possible
cross-connections and backflow conditions, and shall follow the provisions of
the water purveyor’s program and the WVBPH Cross-Connections and Backflow
Prevention Regulations where a cross-connection is permitted.
   (C)   If the water purveyor requires that the public water system be
protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible for the installation
and maintenance of the required backflow preventer assembly(blies) and for
water quality beyond the outlet end of the containment assembly(blies) and
could utilize fixture isolation protection for that purpose, The owner may also
seek local public health officials, or personnel from the water purveyor, or
their designated representatives, or certified/licensed private sector
personnel to assist him or her in the survey of their facility(ties) and to
assist him or her in the selection of proper containment assemblies and/or
fixture isolation devices, and the proper installation of these assemblies/
devices.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.50  REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Water purveyor.
      (1)   On new installations, the water purveyor will provide an on-site
evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of
backflow preventer assembly(blies), if any, that will be required based on
actual or potential cross-connections and the degree of health hazards.
      (2)   For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the water
purveyor will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises for
actual and potential cross-connections and backflow conditions and inform the
owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of
achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made.
Ordinarily, 90 days will be allowed. However, this time period may be shortened
depending upon the degree of hazard involved and the history of the device(s)/
assembly(blies) already in place.
      (3)   The water purveyor will not allow any actual or potential cross-
connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved air gap or backflow
preventer assembly(blies) and which must be regularly tested or inspected to
ensure satisfactory operation,
      (4)   The water purveyor shall inform the owner by letter of any failure
to comply prior to a re-inspection. The water purveyor will allow an additional
15 days for the correction(s). In the event the owner fails to comply with the
necessary correction(s) by the time of a second re-inspection, the water
purveyor will inform the owner by letter, that the water service to the owner’s
premises will be terminated within a period not to exceed five days. In the
event that the owner informs the water purveyor of extenuating circumstances as
to why the correction(s) has not been made, a time extension may be granted by
the water purveyor, but in no case will exceed an additional 30 days.
      (5)   If the water purveyor determines at any time that a serious threat
to the public health exists, water service will be terminated immediately.
      (6)   The water purveyor will conduct initial and follow-up inspections
to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards. The main focus will
be on high hazard industries and commercial premises.
      (7)   The water purveyor must report any backflow incident(s) occurring
in the public water system as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after
the incident to the WVBPH.
   (B)   Owner.
      (1)   The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all actual or potential cross-connections and/or backflow conditions on his or
her premises.
      (2)   The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the water
purveyor, shall at his or her expense, install, maintain and test, or have
tested, any and all backflow preventer assemblies on his or her premises.
      (3)   The owner shall correct within 30 days any malfunction of an air
gap or backflow preventer assembly(blies) which is revealed by periodic
inspection or testing. This may also involve the removal and/or replacement of
the backflow preventer assembly(blies).
      (4)   The owner shall inform the water purveyor of any proposed or
modified cross-connections and also any existing cross-connections of which the
owner is aware, but have not been found by the water purveyor.
      (5)   The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
assembly unless there is a backflow preventer assembly of the same type on the
bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the assembly
(blies) must supply additional assemblies necessary to allow testing to take
place.
      (6)   The owner shall install only backflow preventer assemblies approved
by the water purveyor or the WVBPH.
      (7)   The owner shall install backflow preventer assemblies in a manner
approved by the water purveyor and general industry standards.
      (8)   Any owner having a private well or other auxiliary water source
must have be approval of the water purveyor and the WVBPH if the well or source
is cross-connected to the water purveyor’s system. Permission to cross-connect
may be denied. The owner may be required to install a backflow preventer
assembly at the service entrance if a private water source is maintained, even
if it is not cross-connected to the water purveyor’s system.
      (9)   In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide portable water
for domestic purposes which is on the water purveyor’s side of a backflow
preventer assembly, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer assembly
installed.
      (10)   The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
service, permits, periodic assembly testing, retesting in the case that a
backflow preventer assembly fails to operate correctly, and follow-up re-
inspections for noncompliance with water purveyor or WVBPH requirements.
      (11)   The owner must maintain for a minimum of three years records of
installation and removal, all testing, repair and maintenance for all
assemblies/devices in the owner’s water distribution system(s).
      (12)   The owner will report any backflow incident(s) occurring in their
facility(ties)/building(s) as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after
the incident to the water purveyor and to the WVBPH. Also, the owner must
maintain for a minimum of three years all records and reports of all backflow
incidents occurring in their facility(ties)/building(s). These records and
reports are to be made available to the water purveyor and/or WVBPH upon
request.
      (13)   The city strongly recommends that the owner install vacuum
breakers on all hose-bib faucets (i.e., garden hose or outdoor faucets) that do
not have an anti-siphon unit or are not anti-siphon protected.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.51  DEGREE OF HAZARD.
   (A)   The water purveyor recognizes the threat to the public water system
arising from cross-connections and backflow conditions.
   (B)   All threats will be classified by degree of hazard which will
determine the requirements for the installation of approved backflow preventer
assemblies.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.52  EXISTING IN-USE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   Any existing backflow preventer assembly shall be allowed by the water
purveyor to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to
supersede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer assembly, or
there is an unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard
has increased, as in the case of a residential installation converting to a
business establishment, any existing backflow preventer assemblies must be
upgraded to a reduced pressure principle assembly, or a reduced pressure
principle assembly must be installed in the event that no backflow preventer
assembly is present.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.53  PERIODIC TESTING.
   (A)   Backflow preventer assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least
annually.
   (B)   Periodic testing shall be performed by a WVBPH certified tester. This
testing will be done at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   Any backflow preventer assembly which fails during a periodic test
will be repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of
the repair, the assembly will be retested at the owner’s expense to ensure
correct operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue
unprotected if the backflow preventer assembly fails the periodic test and
cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not
more than 30 days after the test date may be established. The owner is
responsible for the costs of all testing, repair service, replacement parts or
a replacement assembly. Parallel installation of two assemblies is an effective
means of the owner ensuring uninterrupted water service during testing or
repair of one of the assemblies and is strongly recommended when the owner
desires such continuity.
   (D)   Backflow preventer assemblies will be tested more frequently than
specified in division (A) above in cases where there is a history of test
failures and the water purveyor feels that due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests will be
born by the owner.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.54  RECORDS.
   (A)   The water purveyor will initiate and maintain (update) the following:
      (1)   Master files on customer evaluations and/or inspections of cross-
connections and backflow conditions;
      (2)   Master files on all customer backflow preventer assemblies;
      (3)   Master files on customer backflow preventer tests, repairs and
replacements. Records for replaced backflow preventer shall be maintained for a
period of one year after the date of removal from service;
      (4)   Records and reports of any backflow incident(s) occurring in the
public or consumer water systems shall be maintained for at least three years
after the date of the incident; and
      (5)   Copies of any of the above and other records and/or reports
supplied to the WVBPH. This material shall be maintained for at least three
years after submission.
   (B)   Upon request, the water purveyor will submit records of inspection and
noncompliance, surveys, tests results and/or corrective actions, and backflow
incident reports to the State Bureau for Public Health.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   For any violation of §
51.07, a penalty of an amount set by Council from time to time shall be
imposed, the amount paid forfeited and the supply of water cut off until the
fine is paid.
(1991 Code, § 20-7)
   (C)   Any person, not authorized by the Committee, who shall be found
tapping the water mains or turning on the water in violation of §
51.09, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time, and the
introduction of the water shall not be allowed until the fine is paid.
(1991 Code, § 20-9)
   (D)   Any person violating §
51.17 shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time and may be
imprisoned in the city jail not exceeding 30 days.
(1991 Code, § 20-17)
(Ord. 111, passed 4-1-2010)
CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS AND SEWAGE
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Unsanitary discharges
   
52.03   Private sewage disposal systems
   
52.04   Building sewer permits
   
52.05   Prohibited discharges
   
52.06   Tampering with equipment
   
52.07   Authorized employees permitted to enter premises
   
52.08   Rates; schedule
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to construct sewers within or without the corporate
limits, in such manner as the Council may deem proper and the like; and
authority to levy special assessments for sewer construction and the like, see
Char. §
28, subsec. (68)
   Authority of Council to prevent injury or annoyance to the public or
individuals by anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome, see Char. §
28, subsec. (24)
   Authority of Council to regulate and require drainage of lots by means of
sewers, see Char. §
28, subsec. (11)
   Authority of Council to require owners of property adjoining street in which
a sewer is located to connect such property to the sewer, at property owner’s
expense and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (69)
Cross-reference:
   Garbage, refuse and weeds generally, see
Ch. 50
   Grades and elevations generally, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
   Obstructing, changing or diverting streams, sewers, drains and the like, see
§
130.021
   Water generally, see
Ch. 51
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to establish and maintain a sewer system and sewage
treatment and disposal system and to acquire property necessary therefor, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(32), (33), 8-18-1, 16-13-1
   Authority of city to levy assessments for sewer improvements, and to
regulate sewer connections, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-18-1 et seq.
   Authority of city to make low cost improvements, including construction,
repairing and the like, storm, sanitary and combined sewers, see W.Va. Code §§
8-17-1 et seq.
   Authority of city to require certain properties to be connected to public
sewer, see W.Va. Code § 8-18-22
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of city for purposes of this chapter, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(43) and 8-12-19
   Municipal sewage works and sanitary districts, see W.Va. Code §§ 16-13-1 et
seq.
§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20º C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial prepared cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society and
corporation.
   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle, greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface 
and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residents, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes  more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STORM DRAIN (STORM SEWER).  A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
water.
   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Operations Manager for the city.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)
§ 52.02  UNSANITARY DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any part under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Except a hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley, or rights-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is
within 100 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
52.02(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Operations
Manager. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications,
and other information as are deemed necessary by the Operations Manager. A
permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application
is filed according to the current fee schedule approved by the Sanitary Board.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Operations Manager. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Operations Manager when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48
hours of the receipt of notice by the Operations Manager.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department
of Public Health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 14,400 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
52.02(D) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04  BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Operations Manager.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service; and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgement of the Operations; Manager. A permit and inspection
fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and fee for an
industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed according to the current fee schedule approved by the
Sanitary Board.
   (C)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard, or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Operations Manager, to meet
all requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No permit shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice
No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Operations Manager before installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Operations Manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Operations Manager or his or her representative.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Operations Manager. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the
Operations Manager, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the reeling waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to
cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the pubic
sewer;
      (3)    Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; or
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No permit shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Operations Manager that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Operations Manager will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities, in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The
substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid vapor having a temperature higher than one 150º F. (65º
C.);
      (2)   Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F. and 150º F. (0º C.
and 65º C.);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Operations Manager;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Operations Manager for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Operations Manager as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Operations Manager in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
SLUGS as defined in this chapter.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters; or
      (11)   Any waters or wastes having a five-day BOD greater than 300 parts
per million by weight; containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids; or having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the
average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the
Operations Manager. Where necessary in the opinion of the Operations Manager,
the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per
million by weight;  reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by
weight; or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Operations Manager and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in division (D) of this section, and which in
the judgement of the Operations Manager, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the Operations Manager
may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Requite control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provision
of division (J) of this section.
      (2)   If the Operations Manager permits the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Operations Manager, and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Operations Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Operations Manager and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective.
   (H)   When required by the Operations Manager, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Operations Manager. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or
her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
   (I)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a 24 hours composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD
and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.
   (J)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the
industrial concern.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06  TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
section shall be subject to immediate arrest under criminal charges.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07  AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)   The Operations Manager and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Operations
Manager or his or her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) of this section, the Operations Manager or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as
required in §
52.05(H) of this chapter.
   (C)   The Operations Manager and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08  RATES; SCHEDULE.
   The rates and charges for sewage and sewage disposal service provided by it
to customers throughout the territory served, are hereby fixed and determined
by the Council pursuant to the sewer tariff, P.S.C. No. 12 and as set forth in
schedules of rates on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(1991 Code, § 16-6)  (Ord. passed 7-28-1949; Ord. passed 10-5-1953; Ord. passed
8-5-1954; Ord. passed 9-18-1958; Ord. passed 3-17-1966; Ord. passed 3-15-1984;
Ord. passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 022, passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 057, passed 10-19-2006;
Ord. 155, passed 6-21-2012; Ord. 257, passed 11-1-2018; Ord. 266, passed 11-21-
2019)
Statutory reference:
   Authority and duty of Council to establish and maintain just and equitable
rates or charges for use of and services rendered by municipal sewage works and
the like, see W.Va. Code § 16-13-16
   City itself being subject to same charges and rates as established for other
customers, see W.Va. Code § 16-13-17
§ 52.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
§
52.04 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100 for
each violation. Each 24-hour period, in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city
by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019)
TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
72.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES
      
73.   BICYCLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Adoption by Reference of State Motor Vehicle Laws
   
70.01   Adoption of state law
Parties, Procedure Upon Arrest and Reports in Criminal Cases
   
70.15   Parties to a crime
   
70.16   Offenses by persons owning or controlling vehicles
   
70.17   When person arrested must be taken immediately before a justice of the
peace or court
   
70.18   When person arrested to be given five days’ notice to appear in court
   
70.19   Procedure prescribed by article not exclusive
   
70.20   Form for and records of books of traffic citations
   
70.21   Disposition and records of traffic citations
   
70.22   Record of traffic cases
   
70.23   Guaranteed arrest bond certificates as cash bail
Municipal Traffic School
   
70.35   Findings of the Council
   
70.36   Establishment and name
   
70.37   Powers and authorities of the Municipal Traffic School
   
70.38   Facilities for conducting Municipal Traffic School
   
70.39   Municipal Court Clerk
   
70.40   Course enrollment fees
   
70.41   Times for course offering
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to regulate the use of highways and bridges and the
rate of speed or travel thereon and the like, and to prevent injury to highways
from overloaded or improperly loaded vehicles, see Char. §
28, subsec. (10)
Cross-reference:
   Parking Authority, see §§
33.110 through
33.116
   Recording of traffic cases, see §
37.06
   Riding upon fire apparatus, see §
92.039
   Traffic Violations Bureau, see §
37.06
   Trains exceeding speed limits, see §
130.020
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the use of the city’s streets, roads and
ways, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-2, 8-12-5(4)
   Authority to adopt traffic regulations not inconsistent with state law, see
W.Va. Code §§ 17C-2-7, 17C-2-8, 17C-6-3, 17C-8-5
   Motor vehicles registration, certificate of title and the like, see W.Va.
Code §§ 17A-1-1 et seq.
   Operators’ and chauffeurs’ licenses, see W.Va. Code §§ 17B-1-1 et seq.
   State inspection of vehicles, see W.Va. Code §§ 17C-16-1 et seq.
   State Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Law, see W.Va. Code §§ 17D-1-1 et
seq.
   Traffic regulations and laws of the road, see W.Va. Code §§ 17C-1-1 et seq.
ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS
§ 70.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code to the
same extent as if the same were copied verbatim herein all provisions of W.Va.
Code Ch. 17, Ch. 17A, Ch. 17B, Ch. 17C and Ch. 17D, as amended or as may
hereafter be amended by the legislature of the state, to the extent that the
same may be made legally applicable within the corporate limits of the city. In
case of conflict between the provisions of the adopted portions of the code of
the state and the provisions of this Traffic Code, the provisions of the former
shall be binding and controlling and the provisions of this Traffic Code shall
be considered modified and amended to include the conflicting state code
provisions. Any violations of the West Virginia Code provisions, which are not
specifically made violations of this Traffic Code, may be pleaded in warrants
as violations of this Traffic Code under this section.
(1991 Code, § 19-152)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979; Ord. passed 3-6-1986)
PARTIES, PROCEDURE UPON ARREST AND REPORTS IN CRIMINAL CASES
§ 70.15  PARTIES TO A CRIME.
   Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or
knowingly aids or abets in the commission of, any act declared herein to be a
crime, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or
as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every
person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes,
coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this
Traffic Code is likewise guilty of such offense.
(1991 Code, § 19-143)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16  OFFENSES BY PERSONS OWNING OR CONTROLLING VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for the owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise
directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a highway in any manner contrary to law.
(1991 Code, § 19-144)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17  WHEN PERSON ARRESTED MUST BE TAKEN IMMEDIATELY BEFORE A JUSTICE OF THE
PEACE OR COURT.
   Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this Traffic Code
punishable as a misdemeanor, the arrested person shall be immediately taken
before a Magistrate within the county or before the Municipal Court and who has
jurisdiction of such offense and is nearest or most accessible with reference
to the time and place where said arrest is made, in any of the following cases:
   (A)   When a person arrested demands an immediate appearance before such
Magistrate or court;
   (B)   When the person is arrested upon a charge of driving while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs; and
   (C)   In any other event when the person arrested refuses to give his or her
written promise to appear in court as hereinafter provided.
(1991 Code, § 19-145)
§ 70.18  WHEN PERSON ARRESTED TO BE GIVEN FIVE DAYS’ NOTICE TO APPEAR IN COURT.
   (A)   Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of this Traffic Code
punishable as a misdemeanor, and such person is not immediately taken before
the Municipal Court of the city as hereinbefore required, the arresting officer
shall prepare written notice to appear in court containing the name and address
of such person, the license number of his or her vehicle, if any, the offense
charged, and the time and place when and where such person shall appear in
court.
   (B)   The time specified in said notice to appear must be at least five days
after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing.
   (C)   The place specified in said notice to appear must be before the
Municipal Court of the city.
   (D)   (1)   The arrested person, in order to secure release, as provided in
this section, must accept a copy of the written notice prepared by the
arresting officer.
      (2)   The officer shall deliver a copy of the notice to the person
promising to appear.
   (E)   Thereupon, said officer shall forthwith release the person arrested
from custody.
(1991 Code, § 19-146)
§ 70.19  PROCEDURE PRESCRIBED BY ARTICLE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The following provisions of this subchapter shall govern all police officers
in making arrests without a warrant for violations of this Traffic Code, but
the procedure prescribed herein shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other
method prescribed by law for the arrest and prosecution of a person for an
offense of like grade.
(1991 Code, § 19-147)
§ 70.20  FORM FOR AND RECORDS OF BOOKS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   (A)   Every traffic-enforcement agency in this state shall provide in
appropriate form traffic citations containing notices to appear which shall be
issued in books with citations, in quadruplicate and meeting the requirements
of this subchapter.
   (B)   The chief administrative officer of every such traffic-enforcement
agency shall be responsible for the issuance of such books and shall maintain a
record of every such book and each citation contained therein issued to
individual members of the traffic-enforcement agency and shall require and
retain a receipt for every book so issued.
(1991 Code, § 19-148)
§ 70.21  DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   (A)   Every traffic-enforcement officer upon issuing a traffic citation to
an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or
of any traffic ordinance of any city or town shall deposit the original or a
copy of such traffic citation with the Municipal Court of the city.
   (B)   Upon the deposit of the original or a copy of such traffic citation
with the Municipal Court of the city as aforesaid, said original or copy of
such traffic citation may be disposed of only by trial in said Court or other
official action by a Judge of said Court, including forfeiture of the bail by
the person to whom such traffic citation has been issued by the traffic-
enforcement officer.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any traffic-
enforcement officer or other officer or public employee to dispose of a traffic
citation or copies thereof or of the record of the issuance of the same in a
manner other than as required herein.
   (D)   The chief administrative officer of every traffic-enforcement agency
shall require the return to him or her of a copy of every traffic citation
issued by an officer under his or her supervision to an alleged violator of any
traffic law or ordinance and of all copies of every traffic citation which has
been spoiled or upon which any entry has been made and not issued to an alleged
violator.
   (E)   Such chief administrative officer shall also maintain or cause to be
maintained in connection with every traffic citation issued by an officer under
his or her supervision a record of the disposition of the charge by the court
in which the original or copy of the traffic citation was deposited.
(1991 Code, § 19-149)
§ 70.22  RECORD OF TRAFFIC CASES.
   The Municipal Court of the city shall keep or cause to be kept a record of
every traffic complaint or other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or
presented to said Court, and shall keep a record of every official action by
said court in reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of
every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal and the amount of
fine or forfeiture resulting from every said traffic complaint deposited with
or presented to said court.
(1991 Code, § 19-150)
§ 70.23  GUARANTEED ARREST BOND CERTIFICATES AS CASH BAIL.
   (A)   Any guaranteed arrest bond certificate of any surety company licensed
to do business by the Insurance Commissioner, shall, when presented by the
person whose signature appears thereon, be accepted in lieu of cash bail in an
amount set by Council from time to time, as a bail bond, to guarantee the
appearance of such person in the Municipal Court of the city at such time as
may be required by the court when such person is arrested for violation of any
motor vehicle law of the state or traffic ordinance of any municipality in the
state (except for the offenses of reckless driving, driving while intoxicated
or for any felony) committed prior to the date of expiration shown on such
guaranteed arrest bond certificate; provided, that any such guaranteed arrest
bond certificate so presented as a bail bond in any court in the state shall be
subject to the same forfeiture and enforcement provisions as any other bail
bond.
   (B)   The term GUARANTEED ARREST BOND CERTIFICATE, as used herein, means any
printed card or other certificate issued by an automobile club or association
to any of its members, which said card  or certificate is signed by such member
and contains a printed statement that such automobile club or association and a
surety company guarantee the appearance of the person whose signature appears
on the card or certificate and that they will in the event of failure of said
person to appear in court at the time of trial, pay any fine or forfeiture
imposed on such person in an amount set by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 19-151)
MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC SCHOOL
§ 70.35  FINDINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   The Council of the city hereby makes the following findings.
   (A)   There exists within the city, various problems resulting from the
improper use and operation of motor vehicles which seem to increasingly result
in the commission of offenses, sometimes popularly referred to as “moving”
violations, and all being violations of the statutes of the state and/or the
traffic ordinances of the city.
   (B)   An appropriate manner of:
      (1)   Addressing the problems associated with the improper use and
operation of motor vehicles; and
      (2)   Reducing the commission of “moving” violations by operators of
motor vehicles within the corporate limits of the city, is through additional
education of operators of motor vehicles in safe driving practices.
   (C)   An efficient, reasonable and proper manner of providing the additional
education to operators of motor vehicles would be through the city’s
establishment of a Municipal Traffic School.
   (D)   Any and all persons possessing a valid motor vehicle operator’s
license shall be deemed to be eligible for enrollment and participation in the
Municipal Traffic School.
   (E)   In certain instances, the operators of motor vehicles who are charged
with certain “moving” violations of the city’s traffic ordinances but only in
the sound discretion and with the prior and express approval of the city’s
Municipal Court Judge, may be afforded an opportunity before any formal and
final adjudication of such charged, “moving” traffic violations, to enroll in
the City’s Municipal Traffic School, and upon full and successful completion
thereof, to have one charged, but non-adjudicated “moving” traffic violation
dismissed without the transmittal by city authorities of any notice respecting
the violation to the Division of Motor Vehicles of the West Virginia Department
of Transportation; provided, that no more than one such traffic violation shall
be eligible for dismissal in the event that multiple violations are committed
within any 12-month period, all in lieu of any further judicial proceedings
thereon.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (E) above, that certain
offenses, being more particularly:
      (1)   Driving under the influence of alcohol or other controlled
substance;
      (2)   Reckless driving;
      (3)   Any school zone offense;
      (4)   Vehicular homicide; or
      (5)   Any offense involving an accident wherein any property is damaged
or any person is injured, then the enrollment in and successful completion of
the Municipal Traffic School course shall not under any circumstances result in
the dismissal of such pending traffic violation.
   (G)   Further notwithstanding the provisions of division (E) above, that any
person who either at the time of the commission of any offense which may be
subject to dismissal as a consequence of the operator’s successful completion
of the aforesaid course, or who otherwise at the time of application for
enrollment in the said course is shown according to the records maintained by
the Division of Motor Vehicles of the state’s Department of Transportation as
having then currently accrued more than six points upon the operator’s driving
records, then there shall be no dismissal of any pending traffic violation as
charged against the motor vehicle operator.
   (H)   The discretion hereby vested with the city’s Municipal Court Judge is
intended by the Council to be at all times exercised in a nonarbitrary and
nondiscriminatory manner in compliance with the statutory provisions of W.Va.
Code § 8-11-2, as amended, and in no event shall the herein vested discretion
be deemed to invalidate the provisions of this subchapter.
   (I)   Except as otherwise expressly limited or prohibited herein, the Judge
of the city’s Municipal Court may establish such other administrative
procedures, rules and/or regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this subchapter, which the Municipal Court Judge may deem to be necessary,
however, prior to effectuation, any such administrative procedures, rules and/
or regulations shall be reduced to written form and further shall be subject to
the approval by motion of the Council, and following the Council’s approval of
any such administrative procedures, rules and/or regulations, the same shall be
included within the minutes of the Council meeting during which any
administrative procedures, rules and/or regulations are approved.
   (J)   The Municipal Court of the city shall collect all fees and costs as
are referenced in division (C) above, and as such collection is required by any
provision of the State Code. Furthermore, the Municipal Court shall conform its
prejudgment alternative disposition procedures with the statutory provisions of
W.Va. Code § 8-11-5.
   (K)   Attendance of the Municipal Traffic School of the city for purposes of
obtaining prejudgment alternative disposition of any traffic offense, shall not
be available to any person arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol
or drugs or any other offense for which a mandatory period of confinement in
jail is required. Notwithstanding the immediately foregoing litigation, any
person arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs or any
other offense for which a mandatory period of confinement in jail is required,
who requests to attend the Municipal Traffic School of the city, may
nevertheless enroll in, and attend the Municipal Traffic School; however, such
enrollment and attendance shall not in any event be deemed to constitute any
prejudgment alternative disposition to the offense charged.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.36  ESTABLISHMENT AND NAME.
   (A)   Established. There is now hereby created and established the Municipal
Traffic School of the city, which shall be instructed by the certified members
of the Police Department, and as said members are designated by the city’s
Police Chief.
   (B)   Course enrollment fee. The enrollment fee for attendance of the
Municipal Traffic School of the city is hereby established in the amount of
$100. All Municipal Traffic School course fees collected by the City Treasurer
shall be deposited into the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.37  POWERS AND AUTHORITIES OF THE MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC SCHOOL.
   (A)   To offer a course of awareness and instruction in a classroom setting,
which advocates the safe operation of motor vehicles;
   (B)   To enroll in the Municipal Traffic School any person possessing a
valid motor vehicle operator’s license, who makes proper, written application
for enrollment in the same;
   (C)   To certify in writing upon the request of the Municipal Court Judge,
or any other person whomsoever, the successful completion or alternatively, the
failure to successfully complete, the Municipal Traffic School course by any
motor vehicle operator/enrollee thereof; and
   (D)   To facilitate the Municipal Court Clerk’s collection of the
appropriate administrative fee for enrollment from all course enrollees, the
initial course enrollment fee being hereby established in the amount of $100.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.38  FACILITIES FOR CONDUCTING MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC SCHOOL.
   The Council of the city shall provide suitable facilities to the Municipal
Traffic School for purposes of conducting the course described herein. The
Municipal Court Clerk shall at all times have available for distribution at
City Hall, a sufficient number of applications for enrollment in the Municipal
Traffic School course.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.39  MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK.
   The Municipal Court Clerk of the city, or designee(s) thereof, shall serve
as the Municipal Traffic School Clerk. It shall be the responsibility of the
Municipal Traffic School clerk to provide any required clerical assistance to
the Municipal Traffic School, and further to maintain and preserve any and all
enrollee applications, course attendance records, certificates of successful
completion and any and all other records relevant to the Municipal Traffic
School.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.40  COURSE ENROLLMENT FEES.
   All Municipal Traffic School course fees which are collected by the
Municipal Court Clerk shall be deposited into the General Fund of the city by
the Treasurer.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.41  TIMES FOR COURSE OFFERING.
   The Municipal Traffic School course shall be offered through the Police
Department on a quarterly basis, i.e., every three months, however, depending
upon the quantity of course applicants, the course may be offered on a more
frequent basis.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the
provisions of this Traffic Code.
      (2)   Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of
the provisions of this Traffic Code for which another penalty is not provided
shall for a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine an amount set by
Council from time to time or by imprisonment for not more than ten days; for a
second such conviction within one year thereafter, such person shall be
punished by a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time or by
imprisonment for not more than 20 days or by both such fine and imprisonment;
upon a third or subsequent conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine
of an amount set by Council from time to time or by imprisonment for not more
than six months or both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Any person in violation of the provisions of this Traffic Code; or any
person who has been assessed fines pursuant to violations of this Traffic Code,
who has not paid the fine or fines assessed within 30 days of the assessment,
may be subject to a civil or criminal action in the Municipal Court of the
city, or in any court of competent jurisdiction within the United States.
(1991 Code, § 19-142)  (Ord. 015, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 021, passed 11-4-2004)
CHAPTER 71:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Condition of vehicle while parked
   
71.02   Restricted areas generally
   
71.03   Parking trucks and commercial vehicles in residential districts
   
71.04   Prohibited uses
   
71.05   Right-of-way at parking areas
   
71.06   Violation of parking time limit
   
71.07   Clearing of streets and parking areas
   
71.08   Responsibility of registered owner
   
71.09   Collisions while parking
Metered Parking
   
71.20   Compliance with instructions on meters
   
71.21   Additional zones
   
71.22   Parking spaces; positions of parked vehicles; movement of vehicles
   
71.23   Position and indications of parking meters
   
71.24   Operation of meters; time limits; exceptions
   
71.25   Extension of parking time
   
71.26   Permitting vehicle to remain parked when meter shows overtime
   
71.27   Use of slugs and the like in meters
   
71.28   Willful damage or injury to meters; liability
   
71.29   Parking of bicycles in metered spaces
   
71.30   Exemptions
   
71.31   Regulation of parking other than by meters
Stopping, Standing and Parking
   
71.45   Outside of business or residence districts
   
71.46   Skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades and similar devices
   
71.47   Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicles
   
71.48   Prohibited in specified places
   
71.49   Right and left parallel parking; angle parking; highway signs
restricting parking and the like
   
71.50   Privileges for disabled; qualification; application; violation;
revocation
   
71.51   Signs on workers and church buses; when lawful for such buses to stop
on highways and streets
 
   
71.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01  CONDITION OF VEHICLE WHILE PARKED.
   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand unattended on any street without first effectively setting the
brakes and stopping the motor of the vehicle and, when standing upon any grade,
the front wheels of such vehicle shall be turned toward the curb or side of the
street.
(1991 Code, § 19-9)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02  RESTRICTED AREAS GENERALLY.
   When signs with appropriate markings are in place giving notice that
stopping, standing or parking is restricted or prohibited in a given location,
no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except in compliance with the
directions of such signs or markings.
(1991 Code, § 19-10)  (Ord. O-010, passed 2-6-2004)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03  PARKING TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No commercial vehicle or motor truck larger than half-ton capacity shall be
parked or left standing on any street or alley located in a residential
district, as designated by the zoning ordinance, as codified in
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances, for more than five hours at any time,
except when actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise; provided,
that trucks belonging to or operated by the occupant of a business premises
located in a residential district shall be permitted to stand in front of
business premises actually occupied by him or her; and provided further, that
any tradesperson or mechanic, while actually engaged in work on premises
located in a residential district, shall be permitted to have any truck owned
or operated by him or her stand in front of such premises.
(1991 Code, § 19-12)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1959)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04  PROHIBITED USES.
   No person shall stand or park or permit the standing or parking of a vehicle
upon any street or public place for the principal purpose of displaying it for
sale; for the primary purpose of advertising; for the purpose of utilizing the
street or public place for storage or warehousing; or for washing, greasing or
repairing such vehicle; except, that temporary emergency repairs to permit
removal of the vehicle may be made on a public street or public place.
(1991 Code, § 19-13)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PARKING AREAS.
   All moving vehicles passing a space lawfully available for the parking of
vehicles shall have the right-of-way over parked vehicles; provided, that when
a vehicle is being moved into or from a parking space and is actually in
motion, operators of passing vehicles shall be alert to the movement of such
other vehicle and shall use reasonable diligence to prevent accidents.
(1991 Code, § 19-14)
§ 71.06  VIOLATION OF PARKING TIME LIMIT.
   Vehicles which remain standing or parked continuously upon any street for 72
hours or more shall be subject to removal by order of the Mayor and stored, at
owner’s cost and expense and at the owner’s risk, upon city premises or, at the
option of the Mayor, in public storage premises, if such storage is obtained at
reasonable cost.
(1991 Code, § 19-15)  (Ord. 190, passed 3-19-2015)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07  CLEARING OF STREETS AND PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   The Mayor may require that parking sections on any of the streets of
the city may be cleared temporarily for the purpose of cleaning or any other
public purpose, and may cause notices to be given by posting, by barriers or
otherwise; and any person neglecting or refusing to move his or her vehicle as
required by such notice shall be guilty of an offense under this chapter,
subject to ticketing and fines, and such vehicle shall be subject to removal as
provided by §
71.06.
   (B)   Any person who has been assessed tickets or fines under this section,
who have not paid such tickets or fines within 30 days of issuance, shall be
subject to prosecution in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state.
(1991 Code, § 19-16)  (Ord. 096-06, passed 4-16-1996; Ord. 019, passed 7-15-
2004)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08  RESPONSIBILITY OF REGISTERED OWNER.
   No person shall allow any vehicle registered in his or her name to stand or
be parked in any street, alley or public place in the city in violation of any
of the laws or ordinances of the city regulating the standing or parking of
vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-17)  Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 17C-19-2
§ 71.09  COLLISIONS WHILE PARKING.
   Care shall be taken by all persons parking vehicles to avoid injury to any
other parked vehicles and, in all cases of collision or other injury with or to
another vehicle, caused by the parking of any vehicle, the operator of the
moving vehicle shall be, prima facie, responsible unless the vehicle which is
already parked is parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter. In all
cases where any vehicle shall strike another vehicle in the process of parking,
irrespective of whether such striking shall be in the presence or absence of
the owner of the vehicle so struck, it shall be the duty of the operator of the
moving vehicle to report the fact to the police authorities or to the Mayor.
Any operator of such moving vehicle who drives away from the scene of such
collision without reporting the collision as aforesaid shall be deemed guilty
of an offense under this chapter, irrespective of whether the accident was the
fault of such operator.
(1991 Code, § 19-18)  Penalty, see §
71.99
METERED PARKING
§ 71.20  COMPLIANCE WITH INSTRUCTIONS ON METERS.
   At any place within the city where a parking meter is now or shall hereafter
be installed and in place, pursuant to the authority of the Council, the
instructions printed on the legend attached to the meter shall be complied with
by each person using the parking space appurtenant to such meter.
(1991 Code, § 19-19)  Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to maintain and operate municipal parking facilities,
including parking lots, curb-line parking, meters and the like, see W.Va. Code
§§ 8-16-1, 8-16-2
§ 71.21  ADDITIONAL ZONES.
   (A)   Establishment by Mayor. Pursuant to resolution hereafter adopted by
the Council, declaring that traffic conditions justify and required additional
parking zones, the Mayor is hereby authorized to establish additional parking
meter zones and positions upon the streets of the city, and to cause such to be
marked, designated and controlled as specified by this subchapter for the
parking of vehicles.
   (B)   Contracts for obtaining meters. Upon adoption by the Council of a
resolution establishing additional parking meter zones, as provided by division
(A) above, the Mayor is directed and empowered to enter into negotiations for
the making of a contract to acquire and install suitable parking meters for the
purpose of carrying such resolution into effect; and when the terms, provisions
and conditions of such contract shall be found by the Mayor to be suitable, he
or she shall submit the contract to the Council and the Council shall have the
sole right of authorizing the making of such contract; provided, that no
contract shall be negotiated or entered into for the purposes aforesaid save
and except upon the condition that the payment of the cost, including the cost
of the installation of such parking meters, shall be derived wholly from the
revenue and funds obtained from the operation of such parking meters, and no
debt shall be imposed upon the city for the cost of such meters and the
installation thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-20)
§ 71.22  PARKING SPACES; POSITIONS OF PARKED VEHICLES; MOVEMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   In each parking meter zone a parking space of approximately 20 feet in
length shall be marked on the street or curb adjacent to the meter and parallel
with the curb; except, that where angle parking is required, such parking space
shall be marked on the street at an angle of 45 degrees, and the width of such
space shall be approximately ten feet.
   (B)   Vehicles parked parallel to the curb shall have both front and rear
wheels nearest the curb placed within one foot thereof, and the front wheels of
vehicles parked diagonally shall be placed in contact with the curb.
   (C)   Vehicles parked in parallel positions shall be so placed that the
center of the forward half of the vehicle, as nearly as is practicable, shall
be opposite the parking meter. Vehicles parked in diagonal positions shall be
so placed that the foremost part of the vehicle shall be opposite to and fully
in clearance of the meter.
   (D)   Parking movements shall be in the normal direction of traffic
movement.
(1991 Code, § 19-21)
§ 71.23  POSITION AND INDICATIONS OF PARKING METERS.
   Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones in the parking
positions indicated, as closely adjacent to the curb as is practicable without
exposing the meters to danger of injury by vehicles and without interfering
with the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians. Each parking meter shall be
so set as to show or display, by some appropriate device, that the respective
allotted parking position is or is not legally in use; and each such meter
shall be provided with an appropriate designation to indicate the legal parking
time established by this chapter; and the operation of such meters shall
indicate, by proper device and characters, the duration of legal parking in
such position and the expiration of such period and the period of illegal or
overtime parking.
(1991 Code, § 19-22)
§ 71.24  OPERATION OF METERS; TIME LIMITS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Duty of driver; limited exception for commercial vehicles; general
exception on Sunday and holidays; exception for vehicles with parking permits.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park a vehicle in a
parking position indicated by a meter unless a coin of the United States of the
denomination indicated on the meter for the time for which parking is desired
is deposited immediately in the parking meter at such position; and failure to
make such deposit shall constitute a violation of this section; provided, that
commercial vehicles may load and unload in such parking space as provided by
division (C) below; and provided, further, that vehicles may park in such
parking spaces on Sundays and other holidays an provided by division (E) below;
and provided, further that vehicles may park in such parking spaces upon the
prominent display of a valid city metered parking permit.
   (B)   Indication of parking time; overtime parking. Upon depositing such
coin, such driver shall place the parking meter in operation in accordance with
the directions contained thereon, and each parking position may be lawfully
occupied by such vehicle for the parking time prescribed for such parking
position. If the vehicle shall remain in such parking position beyond the
permitted parking time limit, the parking meter shall, by its dial or
appropriate device, indicate illegal parking and thereafter such vehicle shall
be held to be parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and
such overtime or illegal parking shall be a violation of this section.
   (C)   Loading or unloading trucks or commercial vehicles. No truck or
commercial vehicle shall be parked at any time in any metered parking position,
unless such parking is solely for the purpose of immediately loading or
unloading such vehicle, and only for such purposes shall such a vehicle occupy
a metered parking position without deposit of a five-cent coin.
   (D)   Time limits. Subject to the provisions for deposit of a coin, as
specified by division (A) above, the permitted parking time in any metered
parking position shall be limited to the period shown on the dial face of that
particular meter, and such time limit shall apply between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays; and, on Fridays
such time limit shall apply between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (E)   Sundays and holidays. The time limit for parking vehicles shall not
apply on Sunday or on any legal holiday which is generally observed by business
places located within the parking zone areas, nor to the days devoted to any
city-wide events or celebrations announced by the Mayor; and during such
excluded days vehicles may be parked in metered positions without the deposit
of a coin in the parking meter.
   (F)   Free parking. There shall be free parking for vehicles in non-
restrictive areas from December 1 of each year through January 1 of each
following year.
(1991 Code, § 19-23)  (Ord. passed 4-5-1956; Ord. passed 4-6-1961; Ord. passed
9-7-1995; Ord. 96-01, passed 1-18-1996)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.25  EXTENSION OF PARKING TIME.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin for the purpose of
increasing or extending the parking time for any vehicle beyond the limit
indicated on the parking meter at the parking position of such vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-24)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.26  PERMITTING VEHICLE TO REMAIN PARKED WHEN METER SHOWS OVERTIME.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in a metered parking position while the
parking meter at such parking position displays a signal indicating that such
parking position has already been occupied beyond the period of legal parking
time permitted for such parking position.
(1991 Code, § 19-25)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.27  USE OF SLUGS AND THE LIKE IN METERS.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section to
deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or any
other metal article or object as a substitute for a lawful coin of the United
States.
(1991 Code, § 19-26)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.28  WILLFUL DAMAGE OR INJURY TO METERS; LIABILITY.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person
willfully to deface, tamper with, damage, open or break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under this subchapter, and the
unauthorized removal of any parking meter or of money therefrom shall also
constitute a violation of this section. In addition, any person who shall
willfully or negligently and without authority of law, deface, tamper with,
damage, open or break, impair the usefulness of or remove any parking meter
installed under this subchapter shall be liable to the city or to the owner of
the meter for the actual damage done, for which the city shall have a right of
action in its name for its own benefit or for the benefit of the owner of the
meters.
(1991 Code, § 19-27)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.29  PARKING OF BICYCLES IN METERED SPACES.
   No bicycle shall be parked at any time in any metered parking position, with
or without the deposit of a coin of the United States in the parking meter; and
any such parking of a bicycle shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section.
(1991 Code, § 19-28)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.30  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-29)
§ 71.31  REGULATION OF PARKING OTHER THAN BY METERS.
   Full power and authority is reserved to the Council to designate, from time
to time, in the interest of the general public welfare, parking positions
within any parking meter zone, the use of which positions may be limited or
regulated otherwise than by parking meters; provided, that such parking
positions be appropriately marked and designated as the Council shall require.
(1991 Code, § 19-30)
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 71.45  OUTSIDE OF BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, no
person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the highway when it is
practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said
highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a
standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a
clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200
feet in each direction upon such highway.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a highway in such
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position.
(1991 Code, § 19-125)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.46  SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLERBLADES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall ride or propel skateboards, in-line skates, roller
skates or motorized scooters in those districts of the city which are
designated as commercial or industrial zones on the city’s official zoning map.
   (B)   No person shall ride or propel skateboards, in-line skates or roller
skates except in a prudent and careful manner. Operation of such devices in a
PRUDENT AND CAREFUL MANNER is such operation which will result in efficient
control of such devices so that they be utilized with reasonable regard to the
safety of the operator and the safety of the persons or property of other
persons.
   (C)   (1)   When any person is arrested or charged with a violation of this
section, the skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates or motorized scooter of
that person shall be seized by the arresting or charging officer.
      (2)   Upon conviction for a first or second offense and payment of the
applicable fine, or upon any acquittal, such skateboard, in-line skates, roller
skates or motorized scooter shall be returned to the offender.
      (3)   Upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, such skateboard,
in-line skates, roller skates or motorized scooter shall be forfeited to the
city.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, it shall not be
an offense for any person to ride or propel skateboards, in-line skates, or
roller skates, upon any private property or sidewalk located outside the said
commercial and industrial zones of the city; provided, however, that such
activity may take place only with the permission of the resident or owner of
such private property or, in the case of a sidewalk, the residents or owners of
private property abutting such sidewalk. This provision shall also apply to
motorized scooters with the exception that motorized scooters shall be
prohibited from being ridden upon any sidewalk within the city.
   (E)   It shall also be deemed a violation of this section for any person to
ride a motorized scooter upon any street or roadway within the city.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who is
physically challenged and must use a motorized scooter to aid in ambulation,
and not for recreational purposes.
(Ord. O97-06, passed 12-4-1997; Ord. O99-09, passed 6-17-1999; Ord. 018, passed
6-17-2004)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.47  OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of any of the foregoing provisions of this subchapter such officer is
hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person
in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-
traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge
or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(1991 Code, § 19-126)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.48  PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs  or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of said entrance (when properly signposted);
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within 20 feet of any mail receptacle served regularly by a
carrier using a motor vehicle for daily deliveries, if such parking interferes
with or causes delay in the carrier’s schedule;
      (16)   Upon any controlled-access highway; and
      (17)   At any place on any highway where the safety and convenience of
the traveling public is thereby endangered.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(1991 Code, § 19-127)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.49  RIGHT AND LEFT PARALLEL PARKING; ANGLE PARKING; HIGHWAY SIGNS
RESTRICTING PARKING AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb.
   (B)   Local authorities may by ordinance permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 18 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (C)   Local authorities may by ordinance permit angle parking on any
roadway, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or
state highway unless the State Road Commission has determined by resolution or
order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
   (D)   The State Road Commission with respect to highways under its
jurisdiction may place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles on any highway where in its opinion, as evidenced by
resolution or order entered in its minutes, such stopping, standing or parking
is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic
thereon. Such signs shall be official signs and no person shall stop, stand or
park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.
(1991 Code, § 19-128)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.50  PRIVILEGES FOR DISABLED; QUALIFICATION; APPLICATION; VIOLATION;
REVOCATION.
   (A)   A physically disabled person who displays upon a motor vehicle
stopped, left standing either attended or unattended, or parked by him or her,
or a vehicle under his or her direction and for his or her use, a
distinguishing insignia provided for in this section may exercise the stopping,
standing or parking privileges provided in this section. The distinguishing
insignia shall be displayed on the motor vehicle in the manner prescribed by
the Commissioner.
   (B)   A person desiring to have a distinguishing insignia issued to him or
her under this section shall submit to the Commissioner:
      (1)   An application therefor on a form prescribed and furnished by the
Commissioner;
      (2)   A certificate issued by a person licensed to practice medicine in
this state stating that the applicant is physically disabled within the meaning
of this section; and
      (3)   A fee of an amount set by Council from time to time.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the application, the physician’s certificate and the
registration fee if the Commissioner finds that the applicant qualifies for the
stopping, standing or parking privileges provided for in this section, the
Commissioner may issue to such applicant either, as the case may warrant:
      (1)   A temporary insignia to be used by persons who are temporarily
disabled, such insignia to be valid for such period of time as the
aforementioned physician determines the applicant will be disabled; or
      (2)   A permanent insignia to be used by persons who are certified as
permanently disabled by the aforementioned physician.
   (D)   (1)   The two types of insignia shall be identical in size and form
while being clearly distinguishable by color and lettering from each other for
identification purposes. The Commissioner shall adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations in accordance with W.Va. Code Ch. 29a, as needed to administer the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   Free stopping, standing or parking places marked “reserved for
disabled persons” shall be designated in close proximity to all state, county
and municipal buildings or other public facilities. Such places shall be
reserved solely for physically disabled persons during the hours that such
buildings are open for business.
      (3)   In this section PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON means any person who has
sustained a permanent disability rendering it difficult and burdensome for such
person to walk, or any person who is similarly disabled for a temporary period
of time.
(1991 Code, § 19-129)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.51  SIGNS ON WORKERS AND CHURCH BUSES; WHEN LAWFUL FOR SUCH BUSES TO STOP
ON HIGHWAYS AND STREETS.
   Any bus used primarily for the transportation of workers only and any bus
operated by a church may bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible
sign, either painted or affixed on the body of the bus proper, or attached
securely to the bus, containing the words, “workers’ bus” or “church bus”,
respectively, in letters not less than eight inches in height. Any bus used
primarily for the transportation of workers only and any bus operated by a
church and bearing signs in that manner may lawfully stop upon the paved
portion of any highway or street where there is no loading zone or pull-off
adjacent to the highway or street to load or discharge persons; provided, that
such bus shall be equipped with warning lamps permitted under W.Va. Code § 17C-
15-19(d) and shall use such warning lamps when stopped on the highway or
decreasing speed in order to stop, in order to warn the operators of other
vehicles of a possible traffic hazard.
(1991 Code, § 19-130)
§ 71.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is provided, or aiding, abetting or assisting in any such
violation shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set by Council from time
to time for each offense.
      (2)   For a second or further violation, the person convicted may also be
sentenced to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(1991 Code, § 19-31)
   (B)   Any person violating §
71.27 shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time or imprisoned for not more than 30 days or shall be both so fined and
imprisoned.
(1991 Code, § 19-26)
   (C)   Any person violating §
71.28 shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or shall be both so fined and
imprisoned.
(1991 Code, § 19-27)
   (D)   Any person who violates §
71.46 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an
amount set by Council from time to time.
   (E)   (1)   Any person who is not disabled permanently or temporarily and
who applies for the stopping, standing or parking privileges provided for in §
71.50, or any person who upon having been granted such privileges wrongfully
uses or abuses them or any person who falsely certifies that a person is
disabled permanently or temporarily in order that such person may be granted
such privileges shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof,
in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur or have imposed
upon him or her by law, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time, or imprisoned in the county jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisoned.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall recall and destroy any distinguishing
insignia that was issued under improper circumstance.
(1991 Code, § 19-129)
   (F)   Parking tickets.
 
Violation of Penalties Rates
Blocking driveway                  An amount set by Council from time to time
Double parking                     An amount set by Council from time to time
Handicapped                        An amount set by Council from time to time
Improper parking                   An amount set by Council from time to time
Overtime parking at meter          An amount set by Council from time to time
Overtime parking limited time zone An amount set by Council from time to time
Parking at fire hydrant            An amount set by Council from time to time
Parking in prohibited zone         An amount set by Council from time to time
Parking on yellow line             An amount set by Council from time to time
Parking too far from curb (12 in.) An amount set by Council from time to time
School zone                        An amount set by Council from time to time
Stopping wrong side of street      An amount set by Council from time to time
Storage on street                  An amount set by Council from time to time
Street sweeper zone                An amount set by Council from time to time
Other                              An amount set by Council from time to time
 
(Ord. 98-06, passed - -; Ord. O97-06, passed 12-4-1997; Ord. O99-09, passed 6-
17-1999; Ord. 018, passed 6-17-2004)
CHAPTER 72:  OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Vehicles on sidewalks; generally
   
72.002   Vehicles on sidewalks; at gasoline service stations
   
72.003   Vehicles to stop before crossing sidewalk or entering street
   
72.004   Backing over streets, alleys and intersections
   
72.005   Backing wagons or trucks into curbs; double parking
   
72.006   Speed limit zones
   
72.007   U-turns
   
72.008   Definitions
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
72.020   Applicability to vehicles upon streets and highways; exceptions
   
72.021   Obedience; required
   
72.022   Obedience; public officers and employees; inapplicable to persons
engaged in highway surface work
   
72.023   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
72.024   Applicability to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
72.025   No interference with rights of owners of real property
Traffic, Signs, Signals and Markings
   
72.040   Obedience to traffic-control devices and instructions; official signs
to be in proper position and the like
   
72.041   Obedience to traffic-control devices and instructions; at site of
street or highway construction or maintenance
   
72.042   Traffic-control signal legend
   
72.043   Pedestrian walks and wait signals
   
72.044   Flashing signals
   
72.045   Display of unauthorized devices, signs and the like; such devices and
the like declared nuisance and subject to removal
   
72.046   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs
or signals
Serious Traffic Offenses
   
72.060   Driving under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or
drugs; penalties
   
72.061   Definition of phrase “in the city”; phrases synonymous with driving
under the influence of alcohol; validation of warrants
   
72.062   Reckless driving
Speed Restrictions
   
72.075   Speed limitations generally
   
72.076   Minimum speed regulations
   
72.077   Special speed limitations; vehicles not designed for carrying
passengers and equipped with pneumatic tires
   
72.078   Special speed limitations; all other vehicles
   
72.079   Charging violations; rule in civil actions
   
72.080   Prima facie evidence of speed by devices employing microwaves; placing
of signs relative to radar
   
72.081   Racing on streets and highways
Driving on Right Side of Roadway, Passing and the Like
   
72.095   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
72.096   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
72.097   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; passing
on the left generally
   
72.098   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; when
overtaking on the right is permitted
   
72.099   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions;
limitations on overtaking on the left
   
72.100   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; further
limitations on driving to left of center of roadway
   
72.101   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; no-
passing zones
   
72.102   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.103   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
   
72.104   Following too closely
   
72.105   Driving on divided highways
   
72.106   Controlled-access roadway
Turning and Starting
   
72.120   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
72.121   Right turns
   
72.122   Left turns on two-way roadways
   
72.123   Left turns on other than two-way roadways
   
72.124   Turning on curve or crest of grade prohibited
   
72.125   Starting parked, and the like, vehicle
   
72.126   Opening and closing of vehicle doors
   
72.127   Turning movements and required signals
   
72.128   Signals to be given by hand and arm or signal device
   
72.129   Method of giving hand-and-arm signals
Right-of-Way
   
72.140   Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
   
72.141   Vehicle turning left at intersection
   
72.142   Vehicle entering through highway or stop intersections
   
72.143   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
   
72.144   Operation of vehicles and streetcars on approach of authorized
emergency vehicles
Miscellaneous Rules
   
72.155   Unattended motor vehicle
   
72.156   Limitations on backing
   
72.157   Obstruction to driver’s view or driving mechanism
   
72.158   Passengers in seat with operator
   
72.159   Passengers on running board
   
72.160   Driving on mountain highways
   
72.161   Coasting prohibited
   
72.162   Following fire apparatus
   
72.163   Crossing fire hose
   
72.164   Putting glass and the like on highway
   
72.165   Vehicles parked on private property
   
72.166   Driving without inspection certificate or license
   
72.167   Prohibition against skidding, spinning of wheels and excessive noise
Special Stops Required
   
72.180   Railroad crossings; generally
   
72.181   Railroad crossings; all vehicles must stop at certain crossings
   
72.182   Railroad crossings; certain vehicles must stop at all crossings
   
72.183   Railroad crossings; moving heavy equipment
   
72.184   Vehicles must stop at through highways; erection of signs
   
72.185   Stopping before emerging from alley or private driveway
   
72.186   Overtaking and passing school bus; highways with separate roadways
Accidents
   
72.200   Accidents involving death or personal injuries
   
72.201   Accidents involving damage to vehicle
   
72.202   Duty to give information and render aid
   
72.203   Duty upon striking unattended vehicle
   
72.204   Duty upon striking fixtures upon highway
   
72.205   Immediate report to Police Department
   
72.206   Written reports; required
   
72.207   Written reports; when driver unable to report
   
72.208   Garages to report accidents and bullet damage
   
72.209   Accident reports to be confidential
   
72.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the standing and parking of vehicles on
streets under city’s jurisdiction, see W.Va. Code § 17C-2-8(a)(1)
   Authority of city to regulate the use of streets, crosswalks and public
places belonging to city, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(4)
   State motor vehicle law relating to stopping, standing and parking, see
W.Va. Code §§ 17C-13-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001  VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS; GENERALLY.
   No vehicle shall be driven on or across any sidewalk or any part of the
street between the curb and the property line. In those streets where there is
no regular curb, the curb shall be construed as the ditch or gutter bordering
each side of the street, except at a public or permitted private driveway or
entrance to private premises.
(1991 Code, § 19-1)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.002  VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS; AT GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.
   (A)   All persons driving motor vehicles over any gasoline service station
driveway across any sidewalk shall use extraordinary care and caution to
prevent injury to pedestrians on the sidewalks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle from
one street to another across the sidewalks at any corner gasoline service
station or garage unless entering for or leaving after the transaction of
business thereat or unless the vehicle shall be stopped on such premises after
entering from one street and before leaving over the sidewalk of another
street.
(1991 Code, § 19-2)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.003  VEHICLES TO STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK OR ENTERING STREET.
   Vehicles emerging from an alley, private driveway or building shall be
stopped immediately before crossing the sidewalk or the sidewalk area extended
across an alley and, upon entering the street or public roadway, the emerging
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the street
or public roadway about to be entered.
(1991 Code, § 19-4)  Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-12-6
§ 72.004  BACKING OVER STREETS, ALLEYS AND INTERSECTIONS.
   No vehicle shall be backed into any street or alley intersection or over or
upon a sidewalk, nor shall any vehicle be backed at any time or place upon any
street or alley, unless such movement can be made in safety and without
endangering other users of the street or alley.
(1991 Code, § 19-5)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.005  BACKING WAGONS OR TRUCKS INTO CURBS; DOUBLE PARKING.
   No wagons, drays or other vehicles shall be backed into the curb on any of
the streets of the city, except for the purpose of loading or unloading and
then only where the load is of such character and weight as to necessitate the
loading or unloading thereof upon the vehicle placed in such position. In the
event of necessity to load or unload by backing the vehicle to the curb, such
vehicle shall not be permitted to stand in such position except during the
actual time necessary to load or unload; and if such necessary time will exceed
15 minutes, special permission shall be obtained from the Chief of Police
before the vehicle is backed into such position. All such vehicles shall be
moved to a position parallel with the curb as soon as is reasonably possible;
and in all cases where the wagon or other vehicle is drawn by horses or tractor
and is backed into the curb as herein provided, the horses or tractor shall be
turned so as to face parallel with moving traffic. Wherever alleys are
available, all loading and unloading must be on the alley and not by parking on
or using a street for such purpose. It shall be unlawful, at all times and
places, to park any truck or commercial vehicle in the manner known as “double
parking”.
(1991 Code, § 19-6)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.006  SPEED LIMIT ZONES.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are placed, erected or installed
pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 17C-6-2, 17C-6-3, 17C-6-3a or 17C-
6-5, giving notice of a maximum or minimum speed limit, no driver of a vehicle
shall drive in excess of such maximum speed or more slowly than such minimum
speed permits.
(1991 Code, § 19-7)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.007  U-TURNS.
   No vehicle shall make a U-turn at any place on any paved street in the city.
(1991 Code, § 19-8)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.008  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, duly
chartered rescue squad, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency
vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are
designated or authorized by the Commissioner or the chief of police of an
incorporated city, and such privately owned ambulances and emergency vehicles
as are designated by the Commissioner.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in
diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than seven passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street or roadway.
   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; and any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosive and which contains
any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F, or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any
load thereon.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict; and
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   METAL TIRE. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the highway is
wholly or partly of metal or other hard nonresilient material.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a
motor which produces not to exceed five horsepower, and every bicycle with
motor attached.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the OWNER for the purpose of this chapter.
   PARK. When prohibited, the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PNEUMATIC TIRE. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support
the load.
   POLE TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes, trusses or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests  for violations of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
      (1)   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
      (2)   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Real estate in private ownership without regard
to the manner in which it is used.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the highway.
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadways separately but not to all such ROADWAYS
collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school.
   SCHOOL GROUNDS. The land on which a school is built together with such other
land used by students for play, recreation or athletic events while attending
school.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a police
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SOLID TIRE. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
   STOP. When required, the complete cessation from movement.
   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, any stopping or standing of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop before
entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in
this chapter.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body
or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1991 Code, § 19-62)
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 72.020  APPLICABILITY TO VEHICLES UPON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter relating to the operation of vehicles
refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and highways
except:
   (A)   Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given
section; and
   (B)   The provisions of §§
70.15 through
70.23,
72.040 through
72.046,
72.060 through
72.062,
72.075 through
72.081,
72.095 through
72.106,
72.120 through
72.129,
72.140 through
71.144 and
72.155 through
72.167 shall apply upon streets and highways.
(1991 Code, § 19-63)
§ 72.021  OBEDIENCE; REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this subchapter with
respect to particular offenses, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do any
act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-64)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.022  OBEDIENCE; PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; INAPPLICABLE TO PERSONS
ENGAGED IN HIGHWAY SURFACE WORK.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district
or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this
chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this subchapter
shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway but shall apply to such
persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
(1991 Code, § 19-65)
§ 72.023  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement of turning in
specified direction.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted flashing lamp as
authorized by W.Va. Code § 17C-15-26, which is visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except
that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be
equipped with or display a warning light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1991 Code, § 19-66)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.024  APPLICABILITY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this subchapter, except those
provisions of this subchapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
(1991 Code, § 19-67)
§ 72.025  NO INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF REAL PROPERTY.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as matter of right from prohibiting such use, or from
requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in
this subchapter, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such
owner.
(1991 Code, § 19-68)
TRAFFIC, SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
§ 72.040  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND INSTRUCTIONS; OFFICIAL SIGNS
TO BE IN PROPER POSITION AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle and the motorman of any streetcar shall obey
the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this subchapter.
   (B)   No provision of this subchapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
(1991 Code, § 19-69)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.041  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND INSTRUCTIONS; AT SITE OF
STREET OR HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the traffic-control instructions of
persons authorized by the State Road Commissioner or by proper local
authorities to operate traffic-control devices, act as flaggers or operate
follow-vehicles at or near the site of street or highway construction or
maintenance work, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
in this subchapter. Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 19-70)  Penalty, see §
72.999
Editor’s note:
   For transfer of duties of State Road Commissioner to Department of Highways,
see W.Va. Code § 17-2A-1.
§ 72.042  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the
words “go”, “caution” or “stop”, or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be
used and said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green alone or “go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under
W.Va. Code § 17C-12-2, may proceed straight through or turn right or left
unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent
crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone or “caution” when shown following the green or “go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or “stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone except as provided in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) below.
      (2)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection, may
cautiously make a right turn but such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic
proceeding as directed by the signal at said intersection, except that local
authorities in their respective jurisdictions may by ordinance prohibit any
such right turn against a red or “stop” signal at any intersection within such
jurisdiction, which ordinance shall be effective when a sign is erected at such
intersection giving notice thereof.
      (3)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection on a
one-way street which intersects another one-way street on which traffic moves
to the left, may cautiously make a left turn into said one-way street but such
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other vehicular traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at said
intersection, except that local authorities in their respective jurisdictions
may by ordinance prohibit any such left turn against a red or “stop” signal at
any intersection within such jurisdiction, which ordinance shall be effective
when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
      (4)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (E)   Traffic-control signal located in a place other than an intersection.
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a
place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be
applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (F)   Streetcars. The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the above signals
as applicable to vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-71)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.043  PEDESTRIAN WALKS AND WAIT SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Wait” are in place such signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction
of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her
crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while
the wait signal is showing.
(1991 Code, § 19-72)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.044  FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(1991 Code, § 19-73)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.045  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED DEVICES, SIGNS AND THE LIKE; SUCH DEVICES AND
THE LIKE DECLARED NUISANCE AND SUBJECT TO REMOVAL.
   (A)   (1)   No local authority or person shall place, maintain or display
upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized traffic-control device or
traffic-control signal, or any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic-control device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
      (2)   This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highway of signs giving useful directional information and
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (B)   Every such prohibited device, signal, sign or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the State Road Commissioner or other
authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove
the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1991 Code, § 19-74)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.046  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS
OR SIGNALS.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-75)  Penalty, see §
72.999
SERIOUS TRAFFIC OFFENSES
§ 72.060  DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES OR
DRUGS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this city while he or she is:
         (a)   Under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Under the influence of any other drug; or
         (d)   Under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug.
      (2)   Any person who, being an habitual user of narcotic drugs or
amphetamine or any derivative thereof, drives a vehicle in this city, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who:
      (1)   Knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this city by
any other person who is:
         (a)   Under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Under the influence of any other drug; or
         (d)   Under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug.
      (2)   Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person who:
      (1)   Knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this city by
any other person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or amphetamine or
any derivative thereof:
      (2)   Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   The fact that any person charged with a violation of divisions (A) or
(B) above, or any person permitted to drive as described under division (C)
above, is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, a controlled substance
or a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating
divisions (A), (B) or (C) above.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the term CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE shall have
the meaning ascribed to it in W.Va. Code Ch. 60-A (§§ 60-A-1-1 et seq.).
   (F)   The sentences provided herein upon conviction for a violation of this
section are mandatory and shall not be subject to suspension or probation.
   (G)   The re-enactment of this section shall not in any way add to or
subtract from the elements of the offenses set forth herein and earlier defined
in the prior enactment of this section.
(1991 Code, § 19-76)  (Ord. passed 9-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 17C-5-2(e),
17C-5-2(f), 17C-5-2(g), 17C-5-2(k), 17C-5-2(1), 17C-5-2(m)
§ 72.061  DEFINITION OF PHRASE “IN THE CITY”; PHRASES SYNONYMOUS WITH DRIVING
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL; VALIDATION OF WARRANTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      IN THE CITY. For purposes of this city, including, but not limited to,
publicly maintained streets and highways, and subdivision streets or other
areas not publicly maintained but nonetheless open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   (B)   When used in this code, the terms or phrases, “driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor”, “driving or operating a motor vehicle while
intoxicated”, “for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor
to drive any vehicle” or any similar term or phrase shall be construed to mean
and be synonymous with the term or phrase “while under the influence of
alcohol... drives a vehicle” as the latter term or phrase is used in §
72.060.
   (C)   From and after the effective date of this section, a warrant which
charges or alleges an offense prohibited by the provisions of §
72.060, and which warrant uses any of the terms or phrases set forth in
division (B) above shall not thereby be fatally defective if such warrant
otherwise informs the person so accused of the charges against him or her.
(1991 Code, § 19-77)  (Ord. passed 3-17-1983; Ord. passed 9-15-1983)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-5-2a
§ 72.062  RECKLESS DRIVING.
   (A)   Any person who drives any vehicle upon any street or highway, or upon
any residential street, or in any parking area, or upon the ways of any state
institution, or upon the property of the County Board of Education, or upon any
property within the state park and public recreation system established by the
Director of the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to W.Va. Code § 20-4-
3, or upon any property within the city park and recreation system in willful
or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless
driving.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to those areas
which have been temporarily closed for racing sport events or which may be set
aside by the Director of the Department of Natural Resources within the state
park and recreation system for exclusive use by motorcycles or other
recreational vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-78)  (Ord. passed 9-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-5-3
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 72.075  SPEED LIMITATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual
and potential hazards, then existing. In every event speed shall be so
controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the highways in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
   (B)   (1)   Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with division (A) above the speed of any vehicle not in excess of
the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized
shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this
section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be unlawful:
         (a)   Fifteen mph when passing a school building or school grounds
abutting on a road, street or highway during school recess or while children
are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours. Such speed
restriction shall not apply to vehicles traveling on a controlled access
highway which is separated from the school or school grounds by a fence or
barrier approved by the State Road Commissioner;
         (b)   Twenty-five mph in any business or residence district; and
         (c)   Fifty-five mph on open country highways, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter.
      (2)   The speed set forth in this section may be altered as authorized in
W.Va. Code §§ 17C-6-2 and 17C-6-3.
   (C)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of
division (A) above, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and
crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow
or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians
or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
   (D)   The speed limit on controlled-access highways and interstate highways,
where no special hazard exists that requires a lower speed, shall in no event
be lower than 55 mph and the speed limit specified in division (B) above shall
not apply.
(1991 Code, § 19-79)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.076  MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Commissioner or local authorities within their respective
jurisdiction determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation
that slow speeds on any part of the highway consistently impede the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic, the Commissioner or such local authority may
determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a
vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
(1991 Code, § 19-80)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.077  SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS; VEHICLES NOT DESIGNED FOR CARRYING
PASSENGERS AND EQUIPPED WITH PNEUMATIC TIRES.
   Subject to all other speed restrictions of this subchapter, no person shall
drive a vehicle not designed for carrying passengers and equipped with
pneumatic tires at a speed in excess of:
   (A)   Twenty mph in any business district;
   (B)   Twenty-five mph in any residence district;
   (C)   Forty mph on open country highway; and
   (D)   Trucks licensed at 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less shall be
permitted the same speed as passenger cars.
(1991 Code, § 19-81)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.078  SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS; ALL OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with other than pneumatic
tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten mph.
   (B)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure,
when such structure is signposted as provided in this section.
   (C)   The State Road Commission upon request from any local authority shall,
or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if it shall thereupon
find that such structure cannot with safety to itself withstand vehicles
traveling at the speed otherwise permissible under this chapter, the Commission
shall determine and declare the maximum speed of vehicles which such structure
can withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum
speed to be erected and maintained at a distance of 100 feet before each end of
such structure.
   (D)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section,
proof of said determination of the maximum speed by said Commission and the
existence of said signs shall constitute conclusive evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
(1991 Code, § 19-82)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.079  CHARGING VIOLATIONS; RULE IN CIVIL ACTIONS.
   (A)   In every charge of violation of any speed regulations in this
subchapter the complaint, and also the summons or notice to appear, shall
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, also the
speed applicable within the district or at the location and in the event charge
shall also be made of violation of any other provision of this subchapter, the
complaint and the summons or notice to appear shall also specify such other
offense alleged to have been committed.
   (B)   The provision of this subchapter declaring speed limitations shall not
be construed to relieve the plaintiff in any civil action from the burden of
proving negligence on the part of the defendant as the proximate cause of an
accident.
(1991 Code, § 19-83)
§ 72.080  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF SPEED BY DEVICES EMPLOYING MICROWAVES;
PLACING OF SIGNS RELATIVE TO RADAR.
   (A)   The speed of a motor vehicle may be proved by evidence obtained by use
of any device designed to measure and indicate or record the speed of a moving
object by means of microwaves, when such evidence is obtained by members of the
Department of Public Safety, by police officers of incorporated municipalities
in classes one, two and three, as defined in W.Va. Code § 8-1-3, and by the
Sheriff and his or her deputies of the several counties of the state. The
evidence so obtained shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of
such vehicle.
   (B)   In order to inform and educate the public generally that speed of
motor vehicles operating within the state is being tested by radar mechanisms,
the State Road Commission shall locate and place suitable and informative
stationary and movable signs at strategic points on and along highways in each
county of the state giving notice to the public that such radar mechanisms are
in use.
(1991 Code, § 19-84)
§ 72.081  RACING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or aid or abet by
serving as lookout or timer or in any other capacity whatever, any speed race,
as defined herein, on any public street or highway in this state.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SPEED RACE.
         (a)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration
competition with another motor vehicle or motor vehicles;
         (b)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration
competition against time; or
         (c)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed competition with
another motor vehicle or motor vehicles where the speed exceeds the lawful
speed limit.
(1991 Code, § 19-85)  Penalty, see §
72.999
DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, PASSING AND THE LIKE
§ 72.095  DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(1991 Code, § 19-86)
§ 72.096  PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one half
of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(1991 Code, § 19-87)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.097  OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; PASSING
ON THE LEFT GENERALLY.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to these limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall give an audible signal and pass to the left thereof at a
safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-88)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.098  OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; WHEN
OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; or
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-89)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.099  OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS;
LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway
before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction.
(1991 Code, § 19-90)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.100  OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; FURTHER
LIMITATIONS ON DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing; and
      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
   (B)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-91)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.101  OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; NO-
PASSING ZONES.
   The State Road Commission is hereby authorized to determine those portions
of any highway where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the
roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings
on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when such signs
or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person
every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-92)
§ 72.102  ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   The State Road Commission may designate any highway or any separate
roadway under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof.
   (B)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (C)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(1991 Code, § 19-93)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.103  DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not
be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic
within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center
lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction
the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(1991 Code, § 19-94)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.104  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor truck,
registered for a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds, bus, special mobile
equipment or any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle operating upon any
roadway outside of a business or residence district, to follow within 200 feet
of another motor truck, bus, special mobile equipment or any motor vehicle
drawing another vehicle.
      (2)   This provision shall not be construed to:
         (a)   Prevent overtaking and passing;
         (b)   Apply upon any lane specially designated for the use of motor
trucks or combinations of vehicles, or within any section of a roadway posted
or marked as a “no-passing zone”;
         (c)   Apply to any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the
United States or of this state; and
         (d)   Apply to funeral processions.
   (C)   (1)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a
business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing
other vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each
such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to
enter and occupy such space without danger.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to:
         (a)   Funeral processions; or
         (b)   Any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the United
States or of this state.
(1991 Code, § 19-95)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.105  DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover
or intersection established by public authority.
(1991 Code, § 19-95.1)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.106  CONTROLLED-ACCESS ROADWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(1991 Code, § 19-96)  Penalty, see §
72.999
TURNING AND STARTING
§ 72.120  REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
provided in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-97)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.121  RIGHT TURNS.
   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-98)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.122  LEFT TURNS ON TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on
each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway
being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion
of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
(1991 Code, § 19-99)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.123  LEFT TURNS ON OTHER THAN TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or
more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle
and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave
the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
(1991 Code, § 19-100)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.124  TURNING ON CURVE OR CREST OF GRADE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon
any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(1991 Code, § 19-101)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.125  STARTING PARKED, AND THE LIKE, VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(1991 Code, § 19-102)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.126  OPENING AND CLOSING OF VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load and unload passengers.
(Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 120, passed 10-21-2010)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.127  TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the
vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in §§
72.121 to
72.123, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn
a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be
affected by such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
(1991 Code, § 19-103)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.128  SIGNALS TO BE GIVEN BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means
of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device,
but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that hand-and-arm signal would
not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then said signals
must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device.
(1991 Code, § 19-104)
§ 72.129  METHOD OF GIVING HAND-AND-ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(1991 Code, § 19-105)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.140  VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway.
   (B)   When two vehicles enter an intersection from a different highway at
approximately the same time the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A) and (B) above are
modified at through highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-106)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.141  VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this subchapter, may make such left turn and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicles making the left turn.
(1991 Code, § 19-107)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.142  VEHICLE ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY OR STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by W.Va. Code § 17C-12-
5, at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through highways
or which are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop
sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one
or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through highway and shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are
within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but may then proceed.
(1991 Code, § 19-108)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.143  VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on
said highway.
(1991 Code, § 19-109)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.144  OPERATION OF VEHICLES AND STREETCARS ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED
EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one flashing lighted lamp of a color authorized by W.Va.
Code § 17C-15-26, which is visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle other than a police vehicle
when operated as an authorized emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell:
      (1)   The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer; and
      (2)   Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, as above
stated, the motorman of every streetcar shall immediately stop such car clear
of any intersection and keep it in such position until the authorized emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(1991 Code, § 19-110)  Penalty, see §
72.999
MISCELLANEOUS RULES
§ 72.155  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(1991 Code, § 19-131)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.156  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver  of a  vehicle shall  not  back the same unless  such  movement 
can be  made  with reasonable safety and without interfering with other
traffic.
(1991 Code, § 19-132)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.157  OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in such position as
to interfere with the driver’s or motorman’s view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his or her control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or
streetcar.
(1991 Code, § 19-133)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.158  PASSENGERS IN SEAT WITH OPERATOR.
   No more than three persons including the operator shall ride or be permitted
by such operator to ride in the seat with the operator of any motor vehicle
while said motor vehicle is being operated on the streets or highways of this
state; provided, however, that the limitation of this section shall not apply
to a truck cab or truck crew compartment properly designed for the occupancy of
four persons including the operator, and so designated on the registration card
by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-134)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.159  PASSENGERS ON RUNNING BOARD.
   No passenger shall ride nor shall the operator permit any passenger to ride
on the running boards of any motor vehicle while such vehicle is being operated
on the streets or highways of this state.
(1991 Code, § 19-135)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.160  DRIVING ON MOUNTAIN HIGHWAYS.
   The driver of a motor vehicle traveling through defiles or canyons or on
mountain highways shall hold such motor vehicle under control and as near the
right-hand edge of the highway as reasonably possible and, upon approaching any
curve where the view is obstructed within a distance of 200 feet along the
highway, shall give audible warning with the horn of such motor vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-136)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.161  COASTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral.
   (B)   The driver of a commercial motor vehicle when traveling upon a down
grade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged.
(1991 Code, § 19-137)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.162  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1991 Code, § 19-138)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.163  CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No streetcar or vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or streetcar track,
to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire
Department official in command.
(1991 Code, § 19-139)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.164  PUTTING GLASS AND THE LIKE ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle upon such highway.
   (B)   Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same
or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from
such vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-140)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.165  VEHICLES PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to stop, park or leave
standing unattended any vehicle on a private road or driveway or on private
property without having express or implied permission from the owner, tenant or
lessee of such land. The owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or
driveway or private property may move, or have moved, any vehicle stopped,
parked or left standing unattended on his or her private road, driveway or
private property as above prohibited without any liability for the cost of
moving any vehicle, nor shall he or she be liable to the owner of the vehicle
for any damage done to such vehicle in moving it, unless the owner, tenant or
lessee of such private road or driveway or private property was negligent in
removing or authorizing the removal of the vehicle. The owner of such vehicle
shall be responsible to the persons removing such vehicle for paying all
removal costs. Any person who removes any vehicle under the provisions of this
section shall notify the Department of Public Safety of such action, and, if
such vehicle is removed within a municipality, shall, in addition notify the
Police Department of such municipality.
(1991 Code, § 19-141)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.166  DRIVING WITHOUT INSPECTION CERTIFICATE OR LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator, or both owner and
operator, of any vehicle required to be inspected under W.Va. Code § 17C-16-2
(a) to operate, or permit to be operated, such vehicle on any street or highway
without having displayed thereon a current and valid certificate of inspection
and approval or fail to produce same upon demand of any police officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except those expressly exempted
under W.Va. Code § 17B-2-2, to drive any motor vehicle upon any street or
highway unless such person has a valid license as an operator or chauffeur
under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 17.
(1991 Code, § 19-141.1)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.167  PROHIBITION AGAINST SKIDDING, SPINNING OF WHEELS AND EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to operate such
vehicle on or off a roadway, on public or private property, in such a manner as
to cause the skidding of such vehicle, the spinning of such vehicle’s wheels,
or the creation of excessive noise (including, but not limited to, noise
generated by a vehicle’s radio or other sound system).
(Ord. 097-08, passed 8-7-1997)  Penalty, see §
72.999
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 72.180  RAILROAD CROSSINGS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from
the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do
so safely.
      (2)   The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagger gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; or
         (d)   Any approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(1991 Code, § 19-153)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.181  RAILROAD CROSSINGS; ALL VEHICLES MUST STOP AT CERTAIN CROSSINGS.
   The Council, with the approval of the Department of Highways, is hereby
authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of
railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop signs are erected the
driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from
the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due
care.
(1991 Code, § 19-154)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.182  RAILROAD CROSSINGS; CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of
any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive
substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, or of any
vehicle owned by an employer which, in carrying on such employer’s business or
in carrying employees to and from work, is carrying more than six employees of
such employer, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad,
shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail or such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in
both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals
indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall
not proceed until he or she can do so safely. After stopping as required herein
and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so the driver of any such vehicle
shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity
for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not
shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
   (B)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a
traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
   (C)   This section shall not apply at street railway grade crossings within
a business or residence district.
(1991 Code, § 19-155)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.183  RAILROAD CROSSINGS; MOVING HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of ten or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than one-half inch per foot of the distance between any two adjacent
axles, or in any event of less than nine inches, measured above the level
surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing
without first complying with this section.
   (B)   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent
of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide
proper protection at such crossing.
   (C)   Before making any such crossing the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than 15 feet nor
more than 50 feet from the nearest rail or such railroad and while so stopped
shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching
train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed
until the crossing can be made safely.
   (D)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagger or otherwise of the immediate approach of
a railroad train or car. If a flagger is provided by the railroad, movement
over the crossing shall be under his or her direction.
(1991 Code, § 19-156)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.184  VEHICLES MUST STOP AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The Council, with reference to highways under its jurisdiction, may 
designate through highways and erect stop signs at specified entrances thereto
or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection and erect like signs
at one or more entrances to such intersection.
   (B)   Every such sign shall bear the word “Stop” in letters not less than
six inches in height and such sign shall, at nighttime, be rendered luminous by
steady or flashing internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on
the face of the sign or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the
sign.
   (C)   Every stop sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest
line of the crosswalk on the near side of the roadway.
   (D)   Every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar
approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting highway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting highway before entering the intersection except when directed to
proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal.
(1991 Code, § 19-157)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.185  STOPPING BEFORE EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from any alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or private driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-158)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.186  OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS; HIGHWAYS WITH SEPARATE ROADWAYS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway upon meeting or
overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the
highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall
stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on
such school bus flashing warning signal lights, as referred to in W.Va. Code §
17C-12-8, and such driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes
motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed, or the visual
signals are not longer actuated.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or
when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a
loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where
pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-159)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
ACCIDENTS
§ 72.200  ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such
accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and
in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she has
fulfilled the requirements of §
72.202. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(1991 Code, § 19-160)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.201  ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but
shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such
accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
72.202. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(1991 Code, § 19-161)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.202  DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall give his or her name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit
his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license to the person struck or the driver
or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render
to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying or the making arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is
apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by
the injured person.
(1991 Code, § 19-162)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.203  DUTY UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the
driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave
in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name
and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking
and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-163)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.204  DUTY UPON STRIKING FIXTURES UPON HIGHWAY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact and of his or her name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon request
and if available, exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license and
shall make report of such accident when and as required in §
72.206.
(1991 Code, § 19-164)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.205  IMMEDIATE REPORT TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication,
whether oral or written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department
if such accident occurs within the city.
(1991 Code, § 19-165)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.206  WRITTEN REPORTS; REQUIRED.
   (A)   The driver, or the attorney or agent of such driver, of a vehicle
involved in an accident occurring on the public streets and highways of the
city resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property
damage to an apparent extent of an amount set by Council from time to time
shall, within five days after such accident, forward to the Police Department a
copy of the written report of such accident required by W.Va. Code § 17C-4-7 to
be forwarded to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   The Police Department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in
an accident of which report must be made as provided in this section to file
supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient in the
opinion of such Department and may require witnesses of accidents to render
reports to the Department.
   (C)   The Police Department shall provide a form for such accident report
and every accident report required under this section shall be made on such
form.
(1991 Code, § 19-166)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.207  WRITTEN REPORTS; WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   (A)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an
immediate report of an accident as required in §
72.205 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be
made such report not made by the driver.
   (B)   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in §
72.206 and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the
vehicle involved in such accident shall, within five days after learning of the
accident, make such report not made by the driver.
(1991 Code, § 19-167)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.208  GARAGES TO REPORT ACCIDENTS AND BULLET DAMAGE.
   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any
motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident of
which report must be made as provided in §
72.206, or struck by any bullet, shall report to the Department within 24 hours
after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration
number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-168)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.209  ACCIDENT REPORTS TO BE CONFIDENTIAL.
   All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages
shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the
confidential use of the Department or other state agencies having use for the
records for accident prevention purposes, or for the administration of the laws
of the state relating to the deposit of security and proof of financial
responsibility by persons driving or the owners of motor vehicles; except, that
the Department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident
when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his or her
presence at such accident. No such report shall be used as evidence in any
trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident; except, that the
Department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has, or claims to have,
made such a report or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a
specified accident report has or has not been made to the Department solely to
prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a
report be made to the Department.
(1991 Code, § 19-169)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 72.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
70.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §
72.060(A), upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail or
city jail for not less than one day nor fined more than an amount set by
Council from time to time.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
72.060(B), upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail or
city jail for not more than six months and shall be fined an amount set by
Council from time to time.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
72.060(C), upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail or
city jail for not more than six months and shall be fined an amount set by
Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 19-76)
   (C)   Every person convicted of reckless driving, in violation of §
72.062, may be punished upon a first conviction by imprisonment for a period of
not less than five days nor more than 90 days, or by a fine of an amount set by
Council from time to time, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and on a
second or subsequent conviction may be punished by imprisonment for not less
than ten days nor more than six months, or by a fine of an amount set by
Council from time to time, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(1991 Code, § 19-78)
   (D)   Any person who fails to abide by §
72.126 shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set by Council from time to time or confined in the county
or regional jail for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. passed 9-15-1983; Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 120, passed 10-21-
2010)
CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Registration and Licensing
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   License; required
   
73.03   License; term
   
73.04   License; effect of loss, sale or destruction of bicycles
   
73.05   Inspections
   
73.06   Removal of serial number or license plate
   
73.07   Bicycle without serial number
   
73.08   Enforcement
   
73.09   Suspension of license; impoundment of bicycle
Bicycles; Operational Requirements
   
73.20   Applicability of traffic laws
   
73.21   Riding on seats; number of passengers
   
73.22   Riding in public parks
   
73.23   Carrying articles
   
73.24   Lamps and other equipment
   
73.25   Mechanical condition
   
73.26   Speed
   
73.27   Trick riding
   
73.28   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.29   Turns; stopping and starting
   
73.30   Emerging from alleys, driveways and garages
   
73.31   Fitness of operator
   
73.32   Parking regulations
   
73.33   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
Operation of Bicycles and Play Vehicles
   
73.45   Obedience to provisions; duty of parents and guardians
   
73.46   Traffic laws applicable to persons riding bicycles
   
73.47   Riding on bicycle seats; carrying more than one person on bicycle
   
73.48   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.49   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.50   Carrying articles
   
73.51   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
All-Terrain Vehicles
   
73.65   Prohibition of operation and use of all-terrain vehicles
 
   
73.99   Penalty
REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
§ 73.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BICYCLE. A vehicle with two tandem wheels, neither of which is less than
16 inches in diameter, with solid or pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or
wheel and a saddle seat and propelled by human power.
      DEALER IN BICYCLES. Any person engaged in the sale of bicycles at retail
or wholesale.
      LICENSE PLATE. A metal plate or a tag or decalcomania issued by the city
for a bicycle, and bearing the license number of such bicycle.
      LICENSES. Any person who procures from the city a license plate for a
bicycle and an accompanying registration card.
      OPERATING. The use, putting into action or causing to function a bicycle
by a person mounted thereon.
      RENTAL AGENCY. Any person engaged in the business of offering for rental
and renting bicycles for hire by the public.
   (B)   In addition to the above definitions, any applicable definitions of
state law of this subchapter shall be deemed to be included herein.
(1991 Code, § 19-32)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.02  LICENSE; REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Application for registration and license for a bicycle shall be
made by the bicycle owner in writing, in duplicate, upon forms furnished by the
Police Department. Such application shall be signed by the owner, provided,
that if the owner is a person under the age of 18 years, such application shall
be signed by the parent or legal guardian of such minor owner.
      (2)   The application shall state:
         (a)   The full name and addresses of the owner and, if the owner is
under the age of 18, shall state the full name and address of the parent or
legal guardian of the owner;
         (b)   The name of the manufacturer;
         (c)   The serial number;
         (d)   Size;
         (e)   Number of speeds (if applicable);
         (f)   Model;
         (g)   Style (boys or girls);
         (h)   Color; and
         (I)   Date ownership acquired.
      (3)   The application for registration and license shall be filed with
the Police Department. At the time of presenting the application the bicycle to
be registered and licensed shall be brought to the Police Department for
inspection and examination. Upon filing such application the applicant shall
pay a license fee of an amount set by Council from time to time.
   (B)   A member of the Police Department shall examine the bicycle and, if
the member finds the mechanical condition thereof such that it can be safely
operated and further finds that the statements made in the application are
true, the member shall mark the application “approved” and attach his or her
signature thereto. One application form so approved shall be kept on file at
the Police Department and the other shall be returned to the applicant and the
duplicate forms so completed and approved shall constitute the registration
card for each bicycle.
   (C)   Following registration, a member of the Police Department shall affix
a license decal upon the bicycle so registered. Such license decal shall
display a license number and “CITY OF ELKINS, WVA”. The license shall be
entered upon the registration card.
(1991 Code, § 19-33)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.03  LICENSE; TERM.
   Each license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be for a period of one
year, to be renewed by owner at the end of 12-month period after issued. The
person in whose name the license is issued is the owner of the licensed
bicycle.
(1991 Code, § 19-34)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.04  LICENSE; EFFECT OF LOSS, SALE OR DESTRUCTION OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   When any bicycle which has been registered and licensed, as herein
provided, is lost, sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of, the owner shall
immediately surrender to the Police Department the registration card issued
therefor, and in the case of sale or other transfer of ownership such
registered owner shall furnish the name and address of the new owner.
   (B)   Immediately upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of a
registered and licensed bicycle, the new owner shall apply to the Police
Department for a new registration and license in the name of the new owner.
Upon filing such an application and the payment of a fee of an amount set forth
by Council from time to time, the new owner shall be issued a registration
card.
   (C)   The number of any license surrendered as provided herein, except where
the bicycle has been sold or ownership otherwise voluntarily transferred by the
owner, shall not be reissued.
(1991 Code, § 19-35)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.05  INSPECTIONS.
   Any member of the Police Department is authorized to inspect any bicycle at
any reasonable time, for the purpose of making a check on the license plate,
license number and serial number, and for the  purpose of determining the
mechanical condition of the bicycle.
(1991 Code, § 19-36)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.06  REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBER OR LICENSE PLATE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number of any bicycle registered
hereunder or to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any decal or registration
card during the time in which the decal or registration card is in force. The
Chief of Police is hereby authorized to stamp legible numbers on the frame of a
bicycle, for identification purposes, upon which no serial number can be found
or upon which the serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification
purposes.
(1991 Code, § 19-37)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07  BICYCLE WITHOUT SERIAL NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the city or any dealer in
bicycles operating in the city to purchase, receive in trade or otherwise
acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the frame has been removed,
destroyed, mutilated or altered, without first reporting such defect to the
Chief of Police.
(1991 Code, § 19-39)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-40)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.09  SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLE.
   The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend for a period of 30 days any
bicycle license for any violation of any provision of this subchapter, or if
any applicable provision of the statutes relating to traffic; and, in addition,
the Chief of Police may impound the bicycle of any such violator for a period
of not less than ten nor more than 90 days.
(1991 Code, § 19-41)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)  Penalty, see §
73.99
BICYCLES; OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 73.20  APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
this chapter, except as to special regulations in this section and except as to
those provisions of this chapter which, by their nature, can have no
application.
(1991 Code, § 19-48)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)
Cross-reference:
   Parking bicycles in metered parking spaces, see §
71.29
   Riding of bicycles on sidewalks, see §
93.004
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-2
§ 73.21  RIDING ON SEATS; NUMBER OF PASSENGERS.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereon.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(1991 Code, § 19-49)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-3
§ 73.22  RIDING IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   Bicycles may be operated on walks in public parks, but in single file only.
Under all circumstances, the rider shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
using the walk, and due and proper care shall, at all times, be exercised by
the rider for pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk, the
speed of a bicycle shall be reduced to a speed which is no greater than is
necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without the rider
dismounting, and shall not be increased until the pedestrian has been passed.
No bicycle shall be operated upon any sidewalk in any other portion of the
city.
(1991 Code, § 19-50)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.23  CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry a package, bundle or article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(1991 Code, § 19-51)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-6
§ 73.24  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at night, shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front, which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the State Department of Motor Vehicles which shall be visible from 50 feet
to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of the lawful upper beams of the
headlamps on motor vehicles. A lamp emitting a red light, visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear, may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet; except, that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(1991 Code, § 19-52)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-7
§ 73.25  MECHANICAL CONDITION.
   No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition
that it can be safely operated.
(1991 Code, § 19-53)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.26  SPEED.
   No bicycle shall be operated, at any time, at a higher speed than is
reasonable or proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable
regard to the safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
(1991 Code, § 19-54)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.27  TRICK RIDING.
   No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of
trick or unsafe riding.
(1991 Code, § 19-55)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.28  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or herself or
the bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-56)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-4
§ 73.29  TURNS; STOPPING AND STARTING.
   (A)   The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn,
shall follow the right-hand edge of the roadway; the operator of a bicycle on a
roadway, when making a left turn, shall approach the point of turning in the
traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway.
   (B)   No operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to
turn without first indicating such movement as provided by state law.
(1991 Code, § 19-57)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.30  EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS AND GARAGES.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or
private sidewalk shall stop the bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or
across a public sidewalk or onto or across a public sidewalk line projected
across an alley, and shall exercise extreme care in making such movements.
(1991 Code, § 19-58)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.31  FITNESS OF OPERATOR.
   No person shall operate a bicycle while under the influence of any
intoxicating liquor or drugs, or while physically or mentally unfit to safely
operate a bicycle.
(1991 Code, § 19-59)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.32  PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Bicycles, when parked in the business district, shall be parked in zones or
places designated and marked for that purpose. It shall be unlawful to park any
bicycle beside buildings so as to interfere with pedestrians or along roadways
where they may interfere with traffic or with persons getting into or out of
motor vehicles. No person other than the owner or operator shall move or in any
manner interfere with any bicycle properly parked; nor shall any person
interfere with or in any manner hinder any person from properly parking a
bicycle; except, that members of the Police and Fire Departments may move or,
when proper, prevent the parking of a bicycle when, in the judgment of the
police officer or firefighter, his or her action is necessary to properly
safeguard persons or property.
(1991 Code, § 19-60)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.33  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as is practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle, or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of a roadway which are set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-61)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)  Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-5
OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
§ 73.45  OBEDIENCE TO PROVISIONS; DUTY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this subchapter.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(1991 Code, § 19-118)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.46  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLICABLE TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this subchapter
and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can
have no application.
(1991 Code, § 19-119)
§ 73.47  RIDING ON BICYCLE SEATS; CARRYING MORE THAN ONE PERSON ON BICYCLE.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(1991 Code, § 19-120)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.48  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any streetcar or vehicle
upon a roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-121)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.49  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the road way as practicable, exercising due core when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
   (D)   Bicycle helmets.
      (1)   Minors, under the age of 16, must wear a helmet while riding a
bicycle on public property.
      (2)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this section.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUTHORIZE. To permit and/or to condone. AUTHORIZATION can be determined
either by commission or omission of actions.
      BICYCLE. Every device which does not have a motor attached and which is
propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem
wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter,
      HELMET. A protective, hard gear, designed for the purpose of protecting
the skull in the event of an accident.
      KNOWINGLY. To have knowledge of or to be aware of actions occurring.
      MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 16. Any minor who has not yet reached the age of
16 years old, until, but not including the day of said minor’s sixteenth
birthday.
      RIDING. Being on the bicycle and pedaling it to move.
(1991 Code, § 19-122)  (Ord. passed 8-18-1994)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.50  CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(1991 Code, § 19-123)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.51  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the Department which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300
feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on
a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(1991 Code, § 19-124)  Penalty, see §
73.99
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 73.65  PROHIBITION OF OPERATION AND USE OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   (A) The riding, operation or other use of all-terrain vehicles for
transportation or recreational purposes, within or upon the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parking lots and other governmentally-owned, leased or controlled
property situated within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, it shall not be
an offense for any person to lawfully ride, operate or otherwise use an all-
terrain vehicle upon any private property located within the corporate limits
of the city.
   (C)   Nothing contained within this section is intended to create, nor shall
be construed as to create or form the basis for, any civil or administrative
liability whatsoever on the part of the city, or any of it officers, employees
or agents, for any injury or damage resulting to any person whomsoever as a
consequence of any action or inaction on the part of the city, relating in any
manner to the enforcement or non-enforcement of this section by the city’s
officers, officials, employees or agents.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. As set forth in W.Va. Code § 17-A-1-1(ii).
(Ord. O2001-03, passed 6-21-2001)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to
time for each offense.
(1991 Code, § 19-42)
   (B)   Any parent or guardian of any minor under the age of 16 who knowingly
allows such minor to ride a bicycle without wearing a helmet, in violation of §
73.49, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 19-122)
   (C)   (1)   Any violation of §
73.65(A) constitutes the commission of a misdemeanor criminal offense, and the
Police Department of the city, or any other officer of any other police agency
exercising proper jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the city, is
hereby authorized and empowered to issue a citation and to charge any person
who commits a violation of said §
73.65(A), jurisdiction thereof being in the Municipal Court of the city.
      (2)   Any person being convicted of a first offense established hereunder
shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time, plus
applicable court costs.
      (3)   Any person convicted of a second offense established hereunder
shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time, plus
applicable court costs.
      (4)   Any person convicted of a third or further offense established
hereunder shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time, plus
applicable court costs.
(Ord. passed 9-4-1986; Ord. passed 8-18-1994; Ord. O2001-03, passed 6-21-2001)
CHAPTER 74:  PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations; powers of local authorities
   
74.02   Pedestrians’ right-of-way in crosswalks
   
74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
74.04   Drivers to exercise due care
   
74.05   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
   
74.06   Pedestrians on roadways
   
74.07   Persons working on streets and highways
§ 74.01  PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; POWERS OF LOCAL
AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at
intersections as provided in §
72.042, unless required by local ordinance to comply strictly with such
signals, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges
and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
   (B)   Local authorities are hereby empowered by ordinance to require that
pedestrians shall strictly comply with the directions of any official traffic-
control signal and may by ordinance prohibit pedestrians from crossing any
roadway in a business district or any designated highways except in a
crosswalk.
(1991 Code, § 19-111)
§ 74.02  PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision
shall not apply under the conditions stated in §
74.03(B).
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-112)
§ 74.03  CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
(1991 Code, § 19-113)
§ 74.04  DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-114)
§ 74.05  PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(1991 Code, § 19-115)
§ 74.06  PEDESTRIANS ON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or
its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
   (C)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-116)
§ 74.07  PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to persons engaged in
maintenance or construction work on a street or highway whenever he or she is
notified of their presence by an official traffic-control device or flaggers.
(1991 Code, § 19-117)
CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop intersections
      
II.   One-way streets
      
III.   Speed limits
      
IV.   Restricted turns
SCHEDULE I.  STOP INTERSECTIONS.
 
Intersection Type of Stop Ord. No. Date Passed
Central Street and Worth Avenue          2-way O2002-03 - -2002
Davis Street and Delaware Avenue         3-way -        7-16-1992
Eighth Street and Gorman Avenue          2-way O2002-04 - -2002
Gorman Avenue and Eighth Street          3-way -        5-16-1991
Kerens Avenue and Second Street          4-way O2000-13 1-4-2001
Lavalette Avenue and Fifteenth Street    4-way -        4-2-1992
Lavalette Avenue and Ward Avenue         4-way -        10-21-1993
Livingston Avenue and Fifteenth Street   2-way -;       1-7-1993;
                                               237      5-18-2017
Orchard Avenue and Pleasant Avenue       4-way 096-09   8-1-1996
Patricia Avenue and Graceland Drive      3-way -        8-17-1995
Second Street and Henry Avenue           4-way O-010    2-6-2004
South Kerens Avenue and Tenth Street     4-way 209      5-5-2016
Sylvester Drive and Robin Hood Lane      3-way O-040    1-19-2006
Taylor Avenue and Fifteenth Street       4-way -        1-7-1993
Thirteenth Street and South Henry Avenue 4-way -        5-16-1991
 
   The traffic signal at the intersection of South Davis Avenue and Thirteenth
Street shall be removed and a stop sign shall be installed on Thirteenth
Street.
(Ord. passed 1-6-1994)  Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II.  ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The vehicular traffic on Fifth Street shall be restricted to one-way
traffic east to west from Davis Avenue and Railroad Avenue only. The flow of
traffic on the remainder of Fifth Street shall remain two- way.
   (B)   Two-way vehicular traffic flow on an unnamed alley between Orchard
Street and State Street shall be changed to one-way in a southerly direction
from the intersection of Orchard Street to State Street with a stop sign
erected at the intersection of said alley and State Street.
(Ord. passed 8-15-1991; Ord. 193, passed 5-7-2015)  Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III.  SPEED LIMITS.
 
Roads and Streets Restricted Area Speed Limit Ord. Date Passed
                          From its intersection with
Barron Avenue             Wilcox Street to its       15mph  O2001-07 10-18-2001
                          intersection with Eleventh
                          Street
Bridgewater Estates                                 15 mph O2000-10 8-3-2000
Glendale Park                                       10 mph 081      - -2008
                          From its intersection with
Gorman Avenue             Eighth Street to its       15mph  O98-05   8-20-1998
                          intersection with Reed
                          Street
Grace Circle (Highland                              15 mph 199      9-3-2015
Meadows)
                          From its intersection with
Lough Street              West Central Street to its 15 mph O98-03   7-2-1998
                          intersection with Yokum
                          Street
Northview Drive (Highland                           15 mph 199      9-3-2015
Meadows)
                          From its intersection with
Pine Street               Pleasant Avenue to its     15 mph O2000-09 8-3-2000
                          intersection with Grant
                          Street
Railroad Avenue           Between First and Fourth   15mph  079      8-21-2008
                          Streets
Riverbend Park                                      10 mph 081      - -2008
                          From its intersection with
                          Lough Street to its
                          intersection with Wilmuth
Yokum Street              Avenue (at which           15 mph O98-03   7-2-1998
                          intersection Wilmuth
                          Avenue is presently an
                          unopened street)
 
Fines For Speeding Violations
Mph in Excess of Speed Limit Fine
0—15An amount set forth by Council from time to time
16—2An amount set forth by Council from time to time
21—2An amount set forth by Council from time to time
26—3An amount set forth by Council from time to time
31—3An amount set forth by Council from time to time
36—4An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
(Ord. passed 11-21-1991)
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV.  RESTRICTED TURNS.
   A left hand turn from Harrison Avenue into the parking lot of the Youth
Health Services building for all south bound traffic is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1995)
CHAPTER 76:  PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking
SCHEDULE I.  PARKING.
 
Road Area Restricted Ord. Date Passed
County    No parking on north side beginning at milepost 0.17 a point at the
Route 9   intersection with Davis and Elkins College Drive, located 0.17 miles east of                       - -
(Sycamore the intersection with U.S. 33 Randolph Avenue, and thence proceeding in an   087                   2008
Street)   easterly direction to milepost 0.24, a point 290 feet east of the
          intersection with Buffalo Street, a total distance of 345 feet
Davis
Avenue
bridge    No parking at any time within 50 feet of each point of entrance upon the     -                     9-20-
over the  approaches                                                                   (1991 Code, § 19-11) 1962
Tygarts
Valley
River
Eleventh  From South Davis Avenue to South Kerens Avenue                               O2000-11              8-17-
Street                                                                                                       2000
Fifth     No parking on south side from Fifth Street’s intersection with Railroad                          12-4-
Street    Avenue to its intersection with that alley running parallel to, and between, O97-11                1997
          Railroad Avenue and Davis Avenue
Gorman    No parking from Reed Street to the former Ninth Street                       -                     7-2-
Avenue                                                                                                       1992
North     No parking on the east side from the junction of North Randolph Avenue with                        11-4-
Randolph  Heavner Avenue and thence running north for a total distance of 686 feet     O99-12                1999
Avenue
         No parking from Stoddard Avenue to Maple View Drive                          O2000-07              7-20-
                                                                                                             2000
Park      2 spaces for public vehicular parking on south side between its intersection O2000-02              2-17-
Street    with Randolph Avenue; maximum parking period of 1 hour                                             2000
Pine      No parking on north side from Pine Street’s intersection with Grant Street O98-02                7-2-
Street    to its intersection with Pleasant Avenue                                                           1998
         No parking on south side for a distance of 200 feet from the intersection of O2000-12              9-7-
          Pine Street with Pleasant Avenue                                                                   2000
Porter
Avenue    No parking within 50 feet of the corner                                      -                     7-16-
and Main                                                                                                     1992
Street
                                                                                                             5-2-
Poston    No parking on north side between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. from   -;                    1991;
Place     Monday through Friday                                                        -                     11-
                                                                                                             21-
                                                                                                             1991
Randolph  No parking on the north side beginning at milepost 9.34, the junction of
Avenue    U.S. 33 and Gay Street; thence along the north side of U.S. 33 a total       O99-11                11-4-
(U.S. 33) distance of 528 feet to milepost 9.44, the junction of U.S. 33 and High                            1999
          Street
          No parking on the south side beginning at milepost 9.36, a point 150 feet
         east of the junction with Gay Street; thence along the south side of U.S. 33 O99-11                11-4-
          a total distance of 390 feet to milepost 9.44, the junction of U.S. 33 and                         1999
          High Street
Route 33- No parking along and along the sides of east of the intersection of U.S.     -                     7-20-
55        Route 219-250-55 and Route 33                                                                      1995
South                                                                                                        2-6-
Davis     No parking on east side between Blaine Avenue and Whiteman Avenue            O-010                 2004
Avenue
U.S.
Route
219-250-  No parking in the sides from Chenoweth Creek Road to the Upper Glenmore Loop                       7-20-
55        Road                                                                         -                     1995
(Beverly
Five-
Lane)
 
   The monthly rental for each leased parking space within the city shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. O03-004, passed 6-17-2003)
TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Keeping of hogs or pigs
   
90.02   Structures, enclosures and the like where animals or fowl are kept
   
90.03   Certain animals running at large
   
90.04   Hitching and the like
   
90.05   Cruelty
   
90.06   Poisoning
   
90.07   Birds and wild fowl
   
90.08   Fighting gamecocks or keeping cockpits
   
90.09   Disposal of dead animals
   
90.10   Staking cows or other animals on streets or property of another
   
90.11   Exhibiting stallion, jack or bull
   
90.12   Slaughtering
   
90.13   Administration and enforcement of chapter; Humane Officer; state law
applicable
   
90.14   Procedure on complaint of an animal that is vicious, dangerous or
infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease
Dogs
   
90.25   Definition
   
90.26   Annual head tax; imposed; duty of keepers to report to County Assessor;
dog tags
   
90.27   Annual head tax; failure to pay
   
90.28   Running at large
   
90.29   Tethering
   
90.30   Barking or howling
Impoundment
   
90.45   Conditions; procedure; alternative procedure
   
90.46   Notice to owners or persons in charge
   
90.47   Redemption; costs
   
90.48   Disposition of unredeemed animals and fowl
   
90.49   Disposition of proceeds of sale
   
90.50   Prosecution of violations
   
90.51   Interference with pound and with release of animals
Waterfowl
   
90.65   Purpose and intent
   
90.66   Definitions
   
90.67   Prohibited acts
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of city to regulate and the like, the keeping of animals and fowl
and the like, see Char. §
28, subsecs. (12), (24), (26), (30) and (39)
Cross-reference:
   Animals on sidewalks, see §
93.004
   Disposition of carcasses generally, see §
91.021
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals and fowl,
see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(26)
   Diseases among domestic animals, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-9-1 et seq.
   General stock law, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-18-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01  KEEPING OF HOGS OR PIGS.
   No person shall keep any hog or pig within the city. This section shall not
apply to hogs or pigs kept at commercial stock yards, to be sold at auction.
(1991 Code, § 4-1)  (Ord. passed 12-1-1949)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02  STRUCTURES, ENCLOSURES AND THE LIKE WHERE ANIMALS OR FOWL ARE KEPT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any poultry
house, cowshed or cattle pen within 20 feet of any street in the city, or to
erect or maintain such house, shed or pen at any place within the city,
although more than 20 feet from any street, if such structure is an annoyance
to any person rightfully using his or her property within the city and in no
event shall any such structure be erected unless the person responsible
therefor has obtained a permit therefor from the Council, and the granting of
such permit shall not deprive the Council of the right to require that the
structure be removed if it proves to be an annoyance to any person rightfully
using his or her own property within the city.
   (B)   (1)   Each stable, shed, pen, coop and other structure, enclosure or
place where any animal or fowl is kept shall be so located and of such
construction as to have sufficient sanitary drainage to keep it dry at all
times.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of each person owning, harboring or keeping
any animal or fowl to maintain such enclosure or other place where such animal
or fowl is kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, free of any
unwholesome or offensive substance, liquid or odor and in such condition as not
to constitute a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 4-2)  Penalty, see §
90.99
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to enact ordinances to prevent injury or annoyance to
the public or individuals from anything offensive or unwholesome, see Char. §
28, subsec. (24)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions of general state law, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(13)
§ 90.03  CERTAIN ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any horse, pony, mule, jack,
jennet, swine, cow, cattle, hog, pig, shoat, goat, livestock, poultry or other
fowl which is within his or her custody or under his or her control to run at
large within the city; and any such animal or fowl found at large within the
city may be taken up and impounded, as provided by this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 4-3)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1972)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04  HITCHING AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall leave any horse or other animal standing without being
securely hitched or fastened, unless left in the custody of some competent
person.
(1991 Code, § 4-4)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05  CRUELTY.
   No person within the city shall cruelly or needlessly beat, torture,
mutilate, kill, overload or overdrive any domestic animal or fowl, nor
willfully deprive any domestic animal or fowl of necessary sustenance or
shelter.
(1991 Code, § 4-5)  Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to enact this section, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(27)
   Malicious killing of, and cruelty to, animals, see W.Va. Code §§ 61-3-27,
61-8-19
§ 90.06  POISONING.
   No poisoned meat nor any poisonous substance shall be cast into any of the
streets, public places, lots or buildings in the city for the purpose of
destroying dogs or other animals.
(1991 Code, § 4-6)  Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Malicious killing of animals by poison or otherwise, see W.Va. Code § 61-3-
27
§ 90.07  BIRDS AND WILD FOWL.
   No person shall, at any time, kill or injure any wild bird of any kind or
injure or destroy the nests or eggs of any wild bird or fowl, except, that
birds of prey, crows and English sparrows may be killed at any time and their
nests and eggs may be destroyed; provided, that if under the law of the state
it is at any time lawful to catch or kill any wild fowl or birds, such birds or
fowl may, during such time, be caught or killed within the city.
(1991 Code, § 4-7)  Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Definitions as to game birds, protected birds and unprotected birds, see
W.Va. Code § 20-1-2
   Hunting and killing of birds generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 20-2-1 et seq.
§ 90.08  FIGHTING GAMECOCKS OR KEEPING COCKPITS.
   No person shall keep any cockpit or cause any gamecocks to fight, or
knowingly permit any such act to be done on his or her premises.
(1991 Code, § 4-8)  Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   For state law prohibiting cockfighting, and penalty for violation, see W.Va.
Code § 61-8-19
§ 90.09  DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   Any person knowing of the existence of or finding the carcass of a dead
animal within the city shall immediately notify the Mayor, Chief of Police or a
police officer thereof and state the location thereof. It shall be the duty of
such officer to immediately notify the owner of such animal, if such owner be
known. If such owner is not known, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police
to burn or remove such carcass beyond the city as soon as is practicable and to
bury it, at least three feet deep, at the expense of the city. If the owner of
such animal is thereafter ascertained, the reasonable expense of the removal
and burial thereof shall be paid by such owner to the City Collector and
Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, where the owner of such
dead animal is known, to make out an itemized statement of the expenses of the
removal and burial of such dead animal and deliver such account to the City
Collector and Treasurer to be collected by him or her as city taxes are
collected. If the owner of such dead animal is not known, the Chief of Police
shall report an itemized account of the expenses of the removal and burial of
such animal to the Council, to be allowed and paid out of the city treasury.
(1991 Code, § 4-9)
§ 90.10  STAKING COWS OR OTHER ANIMALS ON STREETS OR PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stake out any cow or other animal on
the property of another without such property owner’s consent, or upon any
street or public place in the city or upon property belonging to the city and,
in all cases, it shall be unlawful to stake any cow or other animal in any
place when such placement is to the annoyance of another.
(1991 Code, § 4-10)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11  EXHIBITING STALLION, JACK OR BULL.
   No person shall exhibit any stallion, jack or bull upon any street, public
park or in any public square, nor within sight of any residence within the
city.
(1991 Code, § 4-11)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12  SLAUGHTERING.
   No person shall, without the consent of the Council, keep any slaughterhouse
or slaughter any animals within the city.
(1991 Code, § 4-12)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER; HUMANE OFFICER; STATE LAW
APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a City
Humane Officer, who shall be appointed by the Council. For these purposes, the
City Humane Officer shall have and exercise such powers as may be reasonably
necessary, including those specified for humane officers of counties in W.Va.
Code Ch. 7, Art. 10; and all provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 7, Art. 10 which are
applicable to and within the city are hereby adopted.
(1991 Code, § 4-13)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1972)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to prescribe the powers and define the duties and the
like of the officers appointed under corporate authority, see Char. §
28, subsec. (55)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council, by ordinance, to determine and prescribe offices which
are to be filled by appointment, powers and duties and the like, see W.Va. Code
§ 8-5-11
§ 90.14  PROCEDURE ON COMPLAINT OF AN ANIMAL THAT IS VICIOUS, DANGEROUS OR
INFECTED WITH A POTENTIALLY HARMFUL COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   Procedure upon complaint that an animal is vicious, dangerous or infected
with a potentially harmful communicable disease shall be as follows.
   (A)   (1)   Upon complaint to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the city,
that an animal is vicious or dangerous, as defined in division (B) below, or
infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease, it shall be the duty
of the Judge to immediately summon the owner or keeper of the animal to answer
the complaint.
      (2)   In the instance of a complaint of an animal infected with a
potentially harmful communicable disease, the Judge shall immediately notify
the owner or keeper of such allegedly infected animal that such animal is not
allowed to run at large, or to be exposed to any public place whereby the
health of humans or animal may be affected; nor shall such animal be shipped or
removed from the premises of the owner or keeper of such animal except under
the supervision of the Animal Control Officer of the city. The Judge may order
proper testing be completed on the alleged infected animal, by a licensed
veterinarian, to determine if the animal is in fact infected with a potentially
harmful communicable disease.
      (3)   If upon hearing, the Judge finds that such animal is vicious,
dangerous or infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease, he or
she may order a fine or may order the animal a menace to public safety and
order the animal be destroyed to prevent injury and/or death to the public, The
destruction of said animal shall occur immediately, absent a stay of such
destruction pending appeal.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS or VICIOUS. Refers to and includes any animal:
         (a)   With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or other domestic animals; or
         (b)   Which attacks human beings or other domestic animals without
provocation.
   (C)   Upon finding of the Judge of the Municipal Court that an animal is
vicious, dangerous or infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease,
and ordered destroyed, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be liable for
all costs incurred by the city, associated with said owner’s or keeper of the
animal’s prosecution under this section.
   (D)   Upon finding of the Judge of the Municipal Court that an animal is
vicious, dangerous or infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease,
and ordered destroyed, and if the owner or keeper of said animal appeals the
Municipal Court Judges’ ruling, said animal shall be impounded, at the cost and
expense of the animal’s owner or keeper, until such appeal hearing is
concluded.
(Ord. 104, passed 8-6-2009)  Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.25  DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the term DOG shall mean a dog of either
sex, unless otherwise specified.
(1991 Code, § 4-14)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate or prohibit the keeping of dogs, see W.Va.
Code § 8-12-5(26)
   Dogs generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-20-1 et seq.
   Required vaccination of dogs for rabies, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-20A-1 et seq.
§ 90.26  ANNUAL HEAD TAX; IMPOSED; DUTY OF KEEPERS TO REPORT TO COUNTY
ASSESSOR; DOG TAGS.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed an annual head tax of an amount set forth by
Council from time to time on each dog, male or female, within the city, which
tax the County Assessor and his or her deputies, at the time they are making
assessment of the personal property within the county, shall assess and collect
from the owner, keeper or person having in his or her possession or allowing to
remain on any premises under his or her control any dog above the age of six
months. It shall be the duty of each owner, keeper or harborer of any dog above
the age of six months to report such dog to the County Assessor at the time the
annual assessment of personal property is made.
   (B)   At the same time as the head tax is assessed, the Assessor and his or
her deputies shall, on forms prescribed under W.Va. Code § 19-20-4, take down
the age, sex, color, character of hair (long or short) and breed (if known) and
the name and address of the owner, keeper or harborer thereof. When the head
tax is paid, the officer to whom payment is made shall issue a certificate of
registration and a registration tag for such dog. The person reporting such dog
to the County Assessor shall then attach to the collar of each such dog the
proper registration tag and retain within his or her possession the certificate
of registration for each such dog.
   (C)   In addition to the assessment and registration above provided for,
whenever a dog either is acquired or becomes six months of age after the
assessment of the personal property of the owner, keeper or harborer thereof,
the owner, keeper or harborer of such dog shall, within ten days after the
acquisition or maturation, register such dog with the Assessor and pay the head
tax thereon unless the prior owner, keeper or harborer paid the head tax.
   (D)   The annual head tax on dogs imposed under division (A) above shall be
for a fiscal year ending June 30.
   (E)   The Assessor collecting the head tax on dogs shall be allowed a
commission of an amount set forth by Council from time to time upon all such
taxes collected by him or her, and shall turn over to the City Collector and
Treasurer an amount set forth by Council from time to time of the taxes levied
hereunder and collected by him or her.
(1991 Code, § 4-15)  (Ord. passed 9-3-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose head tax on domestic animals, see W.Va. Code §
8-13-10
   Duty of County Assessor to collect municipal head taxes on dogs and turn
over proceeds, less commission, to municipal treasuries, and to issue dog
registration tags and certificates, see W.Va. Code § 19-20-2
   Required anti-rabies vaccination of dogs, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-20A-1 et seq.
§ 90.27  ANNUAL HEAD TAX; FAILURE TO PAY.
   Any person owning, keeping or maintaining a dog within the city limits who
fails to pay a head tax thereon, whether or not the tax is demanded by the
County Assessor, may be arrested and brought before the Municipal Court and
fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time for each dog, which fine
shall be in payment of the head tax for such dog for the fiscal year in which
the fine may be enforced.
(1991 Code, § 4-16)
§ 90.28  RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog within the city shall keep
such dog confined to the premises owned or occupied by him or her and shall not
permit such dog to run at large; provided, that a dog shall not be deemed to be
at large when held on leash by and under the control of a responsible person,
and a currently valid registration tag and currently valid vaccination tag
displayed on the collar of such dog, as provided by W.Va. Code § 19-20A-4.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of a dog to:
      (1)   Knowingly or willfully allow his or her dog to defecate on private
property of other persons without their consent or the consent of persons
having control of the premises; and
      (2)   Knowingly or willfully allow his or her dog to defecate on public
property; except that defecation by a dog on public property shall not
constitute a violation of this section if the owner of the dog immediately
removes the material defecated and disposes of it in a safe and sanitary
manner.
(1991 Code, § 4-17)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1972; Ord. passed 5-5-1994)  Penalty, see
§
90.99
§ 90.29  TETHERING.
   (A)   No person shall tether a dog:
      (1)   When the outside temperature, as measured on site by the Animal
Services Officer, is equal to or greater than 90°F or equal to or less than
20°F;
      (2)   In such a manner as to cause injury, strangulation or entanglement
of the dog on fences, trees or other human-made or natural obstacles;
      (3)   For a continuous period of time, if the dog is under six months of
age; or
      (4)   That is sick or injured.
   (B)   Dogs may be restrained by means of a trolley system, or a tether
attached to a pulley on a cable run, if the following conditions are met.
      (1)   Only a dog may be tethered to each cable run.
      (2)   The tether must be attached to a properly fitting collar or harness
worn by the dog, with enough room between the collar and the dog’s throat
through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are
prohibited for purposes of tethering a dog to a cable run. There must be a
swivel on at least one end of the tether to minimize tangling of the tether
with stoppers on either side of the cable to ensure the dog is not able to
entangle himself or herself.
      (3)   The tether and cable run must be of adequate size and strength to
effectively restrain the dog. The size and weight of the tether must not be
excessive, as determined by the Animal Services Officer, considering the age,
size and health of the dog.
      (4)   The cable run must be at least ten feet in length and mounted at
least four feet and no more than seven feet above ground level, taking into
account uneven ground.
      (5)   The length of the tether from the cable run to the dog’s collar
should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and should allow
continuous access to water and shelter. The trolley system must be of
appropriate configuration to confine the dog to the owner’s property, to
prevent the tether from extending over an object or an edge that could result
in injury or strangulation of the dog, and to prevent the tether from becoming
tangled with other objects or animals. The tether must be long enough for the
animal to move around or be able to urinate or defecate in an area separate
from where it must eat, drink or lie down and allows the animal convenient
access to food, water, dry ground or shelter. No vegetation or obstacles can
restrict the movement of the dog on the tether.
   (C)   (1)   All tethered animals must have a DOG HOUSE which is defined as
any natural or artificial area which provides protection from the direct
sunlight when that sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of a dog tied or
kenneled outside. Metal barrels as well as any uninsulated metal structures are
prohibited for use as a dog house.
      (2)   A dog house shall be a wind-proof and moisture-proof structure and
shall include four walls, a roof, a door flap for winter and a solid floor
raised off the ground, containing a sufficient quantity of suitable dry bedding
material.
      (3)   The containment area of any dog house shall be free of accumulated
debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without coming in
contact with any such waste or debris. A suitable method of draining shall be
provided to eliminate excess water or moisture inside the dog house.
      (4)   (a)   A dog house shall have an entrance large enough to allow
access to the dog, have an area within the dog house to afford the dog the
ability to stand up, turn around and lie down, and be of proportionate size as
to allow the natural body heat of the dog to be retained. Recommended dog house
size specifications are:
 
Depth = dog’s length + 12 inches
Width = dog’s length + 18 inches
Height = dog’s height at the top of its head + 4 inches
 
         (b)   If kenneled, the kennel shall measure a minimum of 100 square
feet per dog enclosure with the dog house specifications listed above.
(Ord. 086, passed 12-4-2008)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.30  BARKING OR HOWLING.
   No person shall keep any barking or howling dog within the city nor permit
any dog owned or controlled by him or her to bark or howl continuously for more
than 15 consecutive minutes.
(1991 Code, § 4-18)  (Ord. passed 11-19-1970)  Penalty, see §
90.99
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 90.45  CONDITIONS; PROCEDURE; ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE.
   Any animal or fowl found at large within the city contrary to any provision
of this chapter shall be considered abandoned and may be taken up by the City
Humane Officer or, upon his or her request, by any city police officer, and
impounded at a place designated for such purpose by the Council or by the
Mayor; provided, that if an animal found at large in violation of this chapter
is rabid, vicious or otherwise constitutes a danger to human life or limb, the
officer may destroy such animal by shooting if it cannot safely be captured and
made secure; and provided further, that when the ownership of such animal or
fowl is known to the officer and the animal or fowl is not rabid or vicious and
does not otherwise constitute a danger to human life or limb, the officer may,
in lieu of impounding such animal or fowl, notify the owner thereof to retrieve
it promptly and confine it on his or her own premises and, in such case, the
officer may cite such owner for violation of this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 4-19)
Charter reference:
   Authority of city to prevent animals and fowl of all kinds from going at
large, and to maintain a pound for their detention, regulate the keeping and
sale of impounded animals and fowl, and to appoint a poundmaster and define his
or her duties, see Char. §
28, subsec. (30)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals or fowl and
to provide for the impounding, sale or destruction of animals or fowl kept
contrary to law or found running at large, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(26)
   Impoundment and disposition of dogs, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-20-6a through 19-
20-8a
   Impoundment, redemption and sale of animals under the general stock law, see
W.Va. Code §§ 19-18-1 through 19-18-3
§ 90.46  NOTICE TO OWNERS OR PERSONS IN CHARGE.
   (A)   If the owner or person in charge of any animal or fowl impounded under
the provisions of this subchapter is known to the impounding officer, the
impounding officer shall promptly notify him or her of such impoundment, so as
to inform him or her of:
      (1)   The animal or fowl impounded, and a description thereof;
      (2)   The date of impoundment;
      (3)   The place of impoundment;
      (4)   The reason for impoundment;
      (5)   The procedure for redemption of his or her animal or fowl;
      (6)   The costs for redemption; and
      (7)   The consequences of failure to redeem the impounded animal or fowl,
including sale at auction after ten days, or other authorized disposition.
   (B)   If the owner or person in charge of any animal or fowl impounded under
the provisions of this subchapter is unknown to the impounding officer and
cannot be ascertained by reasonable effort within 24 hours, the Animal Warden
shall, within two days following such impoundment, post notices on the City
Hall bulletin board and at three other public places within the city, each such
notice to contain all the information required by divisions (A)(1) through (A)
(7) above.
(1991 Code, § 4-20)
§ 90.47  REDEMPTION; COSTS.
   The owner or person entitled to possession of any animal or fowl impounded
under the provisions of this subchapter may redeem such animal or fowl at any
time prior to the sale or other disposition thereof by the city, upon
satisfactory proof of his or her right to possession and payment to the city
of:
   (A)   The expense, if any, incurred in making the impoundment;
   (B)   The expense incurred for sustenance, shelter and care of the impounded
animal or fowl;
   (C)   The expense incurred for giving notice;
   (D)   The expense incurred for advertising a sale, retention of an
auctioneer and related items; and
   (E)   Any other expense actually incurred by the city; provided, that no
animal or fowl shall be redeemed for less than an amount set forth by Council
from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 4-21)  (Ord. O99-06, passed 4-20-1999)
§ 90.48  DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   (A)   Upon giving or posting of notice to the owner or person in charge of
an impounded animal or fowl, as provided by §
90.46, the City Humane Officer shall, except as provided by division (C) below,
post notices on the City Hall bulletin board and three other public places
within the city, to inform the public of a description of the impounded animal
or fowl and to state that such animal or fowl will be offered for sale at
public auction to the highest bidder, at a designated place within the city, at
a designated time at least seven days subsequent to the date of posting such
notices, unless it shall have been redeemed prior to the time designated for
the sale thereof.
   (B)   Animals and fowl advertised for sale as provided in division (A) above
shall, unless redeemed as provided by this subchapter, be sold by the city at
public auction to the highest bidder at the time and place designated by the
notice of sale; but if there be no bona fide bid for any animal or fowl so put
up for auction, such animal or fowl shall be disposed of as provided by
division (D) below.
   (C)   If, in the judgment of the City Humane Officer, any animal or fowl
impounded would not sell at public auction for a price sufficient to cover the
costs of such sale, he or she shall notify the Chief of Police. If the Chief of
Police shall concur in such judgment, such animal or fowl shall not be
advertised for sale, but shall be disposed of as provided by division (D)
below.
   (D)   Impounded animals and fowl not sold at public auction shall be
released by the City Humane Officer to responsible persons who want them, upon
payment to the city of the expense, if any, incurred in making the impoundment,
and the expense incurred for sustenance, shelter and care; provided, that the
City Humane Officer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, waive such
payment or any part thereof in the case of minors or institutions; and provided
further, that any person to whom an animal or fowl is released shall first
agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter. Animals and fowl for which
there are no responsible applicants shall be destroyed in a humane manner.
However, no animal or fowl shall be released or destroyed under this section
until it shall have been impounded for at least seven days.
(1991 Code, § 4-22)
§ 90.49  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   The proceeds of each sale of an impounded animal or fowl shall be paid into
the city treasury and shall be applied to:
   (A)   The expense incident to the sale;
   (B)   The expense, if any, incident to apprehension and making the
impoundment;
   (C)   The expense of giving notice;
   (D)   The expense incurred for sustenance, shelter and care; and
   (E)   The residue, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the animal or fowl,
if known and, if he or she not be known, the residue shall be held in escrow
for 90 days and shall be paid within such period upon application by the person
entitled thereto, upon satisfactory proof of such entitlement and, if there be
no such applicant within such 90-day period, such residue shall be credited to
the General Fund of the city.
(1991 Code, § 4-23)
§ 90.50  PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   Neither the impoundment of an animal or fowl nor the sale thereof nor the
payment of any redemption fee shall serve to bar prosecution of any person for
the violation of any provision of this chapter which may have resulted in such
impoundment.
(1991 Code, § 4-24)
§ 90.51  INTERFERENCE WITH POUND AND WITH RELEASE OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authority, to release or
cause to be released any animal or fowl impounded pursuant to this subchapter,
or to in any way interfere with the operation or maintenance of the place of
impoundment designated by the Council or by the Mayor or to molest or injure
any animal or fowl therein impounded.
(1991 Code, § 4-25)  Penalty, §
90.99
WATERFOWL
§ 90.65  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and the intent of this subchapter to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the community and its waterfowl, both migratory and
domestic. It is further the purpose of this subchapter to control the feeding
of waterfowl, both migratory and domestic.
(Ord. 121, passed 1-20-2011)
§ 90.66  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FEED or FEEDING. To place, deposit, scatter or distribute any type of food
or sustenance with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing waterfowl,
both migratory and domestic.
   WATERFOWL.
      (1)   DOMESTIC WATERFOWL. Includes those species of birds which are non-
native ducks, geese and swans, not retained in agricultural activities.
      (2)   MIGRATORY WATERFOWL. Includes those species of birds commonly known
as ducks, geese, swans and any other waterfowl falling under the jurisdiction
of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
(Ord. 121, passed 1-20-2011)
§ 90.67  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall feed, cause or permit the feeding of waterfowl within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 121, passed 1-20-2011)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Anyone violating the provisions of §
90.02 shall be liable to a fine of an amount set forth by Council from time to
time or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both and, further, to have
the poultry house, cowshed or cattlepen removed at his or her own expense.
(1991 Code, § 4-2)
   (C)   Any owner or keeper of an animal who violates §
90.14, and whose animal is not ordered destroyed, shall be fined an amount set
forth by Council from time to time, and ordered to pay court costs.
   (D)   (1)   Any person caught violating §
90.29 in the first instance shall be given a warning, stating what section of
the city code he or she is violating and how to comply with the violated
section. The person shall be subject to a follow-up visit by the Animal Service
Officer, at a later time that is adequate to allow the person to correct the
violation, to determine if the person is in compliance with said city code
section.
      (2)   Any person caught violating §
90.29 after being given a warning as specified in division (D)(1) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount
set forth by Council from time to time or confined in jail not more than 30
days, or both.
      (3)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
90.29 forfeits his or her interests in any animal and all interest in the
animal vests in the County Humane Society and is responsible for any costs
incurred by the County Humane Society as a result.
      (4)   The Animal Services Officer may exercise discretion in citing
violators pursuant to §
90.29. In determining whether to cite under §
90.29, the Animal Services Officer shall consider the overall condition of the
dog, and whether the alleged violator is in substantial compliance with §
90.29.
   (E)   The owner of any dog in violation of §
90.30 shall, upon conviction of such violation, be fined an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 4-18)
   (F)   Any person or persons violating any provision of §§
90.65 through
90.67 shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of an amount set forth by
Council from time to time per offense, together with the costs of said
prosecution. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense under the provisions of
§§
90.65 through
90.67, the person or persons shall pay a fine of an amount set forth by Council
from time to time per offense, together with the costs of said prosecution.
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 11-19-1970; Ord. 086, passed 12-4-2008; Ord. 104, passed 8-6-2009;
Ord. 121, passed 1-20-2011)
CHAPTER 91:  NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Operation of coin-operated music devices between 12:00 midnight and 7:
00 a.m.
   
91.002   Places of assignation, prostitution, gambling and the like
   
91.003   On another’s premises
   
91.004   Unlawful acts; extent of jurisdiction
   
91.005   Unlawful acts; enumerated
   
91.006   Stagnant water and putrid matter
   
91.007   Supplemental nature of chapter
Garbage, Refuse and Weeds
   
91.020   Definitions
   
91.021   Disposition of carcasses and offensive matter
   
91.022   Prohibited disposition of refuse generally
   
91.023   Contamination of water supply
   
91.024   Lawful disposal of refuse
   
91.025   Duty of property owner to remove rubbish and cut grass and weeds
   
91.026   Notice to remove or cut grass and weeds; removal by city
Abandoned/Derelict Vehicles
   
91.040   Definitions
   
91.041   Exceptions
   
91.042   Declared a health hazard
   
91.043   Duty to owner to remove from private property
   
91.044   Duty of owner to remove from public property
   
91.045   Notification
   
91.046   Removal of derelict vehicles on private property
   
91.047   Removal of vehicles from public property
   
91.048   Reclamation
   
91.049   Sale of impounded vehicle
   
91.050   Disposition of unsold vehicles
   
91.051   Disposition of proceeds of sale
   
91.052   Unlicensed motor vehicles
   
91.053   Trailers
   
91.054   Immunity
Noise
   
91.065   Declaration of policy
   
91.066   Definitions
   
91.067   Prohibited activities and exemptions
   
91.068   Measurement, penalties and enforcement
   
91.069   Federal law
Abatement
   
91.080   Enforcement officers; inspections
   
91.081   Enforcement officers; right of entry
   
91.082   Notice to cease and desist
   
91.083   Notice to abate; appeal
   
91.084   Recourse of city when notice to abate is ignored
   
91.085   Service of written notices; confirmation of oral notices
   
91.086   Subchapter does not prohibit arrest
 
   
91.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to abate by summary proceedings whatever in the opinion
of the Council is a nuisance, see Char. §
28, subsecs. (26) and (64)
   Authority of Council to enact ordinances to prevent injury or annoyance to
the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome,
see Char. §
28, subsec. (24)
   For a case holding that under the provisions of Charter, §
28, subsecs. (11), (24) and (26), that the Council shall have the power “to
regulate the making of division fences and party walls by the owners of
adjoining and adjacent premises and lots; to prevent injury or annoyance to the
public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome; and to
abate by summary proceedings whatever in the opinion of the Council is a
nuisance”, the Council may abate only that as a nuisance which is recognized as
such per se or branded as such by a lawful statute or ordinance, see Donohoe v.
Fredlock, 72 W.Va. 712, 79 SE 776 (1913)
Cross-reference:
   Abandonment of refrigerators and the like, see §
130.001
   Sewers and sewage disposal generally, see
Ch. 52
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the elimination of hazards to the public
health and safety and to abate or cause to be abated anything which in the
opinion of the Council is a public nuisance, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(23)
   Disposal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles, vehicle tires and household
appliances, see W.Va. Code §§ 17-24A-3 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001  OPERATION OF COIN-OPERATED MUSIC DEVICES BETWEEN 12:00 MIDNIGHT AND
7:00 A.M.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or offer or maintain for
public use any coin-operated device, machine or mechanism to procure or
reproduce music or singing between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-1)  (Ord. passed 8-1-1957)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.002  PLACES OF ASSIGNATION, PROSTITUTION, GAMBLING AND THE LIKE.
   Whoever shall erect, establish, conduct, maintain, use, own or lease any
building, structure or place for the purpose of lewdness, assignation,
prostitution, gambling, illegal sale of whiskey, or indecent exposure of the
person on such premises, or whoever permits profane, vulgar or obscene language
upon any such premises, whereby such language may be heard by adjoining
neighbors or persons upon the street, shall be guilty of a nuisance, and the
building, structure or place, or the ground upon which such lewdness,
assignation, prostitution, gambling, illegal sale of whiskey, profane, vulgar
and obscene language, or indecent exposure of the person on such premises is
conducted, permitted, carried on, continued or exists, and the furniture,
musical instruments and contents of such structure are hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and may be abated as herein provided.
(1991 Code, § 12-2)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003  ON ANOTHER’S PREMISES.
   No person shall create a nuisance on the lot of another.
(1991 Code, § 12-3)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004  UNLAWFUL ACTS; EXTENT OF JURISDICTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, harbor, commit, maintain or
suffer to be caused, harbored, committed or maintained any nuisance as defined
by the statute or common law of this state or as defined by this code or other
ordinance of the city at any place within the city, or at any place beyond the
city limits which is owned by the city or over which the city has a right-of-
way, or at any other place beyond the city limits but within one mile thereof
and not in any other incorporated municipality, and whereon the powers and
authority granted by this chapter cannot be reasonably and efficiently
exercised by confining the exercise thereof within the corporate limits of the
city.
(1991 Code, § 12-4)  Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of Council, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(43) and
8-12-19
§ 91.005  UNLAWFUL ACTS; ENUMERATED.
   (A)   The following acts when committed or conditions when existing, within
the city or within the area surrounding the city and within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as provided in §
91.004 are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:
      (1)   An act committed or aided or assisted to be committed by any
person, or substance, being or thing kept, maintained, placed or found in or
upon any public or private place, which is injurious or dangerous to the public
health or safety;
      (2)   All buildings, bridges or other structures of whatever character
kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or having
control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous,
unhealthful, injurious or annoying to the public;
      (3)   All properties with vegetation growing thereon being lawns, weeds,
shrubs, trees and appendages of, or to realty kept or maintained, or which are
permitted by any person owning or having control thereof to be kept or
maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthful, injurious, unsightly
or annoying to the public;
      (4)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water and all foul or dirty water or
liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout or when thrown into or
upon any street, public place or lot, to the injury or annoyance of the public;
      (5)   All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk, to
the danger or annoyance of the public, and all stones, rubbish, dirt, filth,
slops, vegetable matter or other offensive article thrown or placed by any
person on or in any street, sidewalk or other public place, which, in any way,
may cause any injury or annoyance to the public;
      (6)   All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones permitted to remain in an
unsafe condition or out of repair;
      (7)   All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens or yards for
poultry or other places where animals are kept, permitted by the owner thereof
or the person responsible therefor to be in such a condition as to become
offensive, annoying or injurious to the public;
      (8)   All houses, buildings, structures or enclosures used for special
storage of powder, dynamite or other explosive or highly flammable substances
or gases, except those maintained pursuant to a permit issued by a competent
authority;
      (9)   Any litter, trash, garbage or refuse or any abandoned, unlicensed
motor vehicle or any part thereof, which is or may be offensive to the
neighborhood or citizens generally, or which may afford a harboring or breeding
place for vermin, insects, reptiles or rodents, or which, in any way, may
constitute a fire, health or safety hazard;
      (10)   Any trees, shrubbery and the like growing on private property, the
roots of which clog or choke any public sewer belonging to the city, or damage
the streets or sidewalks of the city;
      (11)   Collections of water which are or are likely to become breeding
places for mosquitoes;
      (12)   Accumulation of manure from horses, mules, cows, chickens or other
animals or birds or accumulations of any other material in which flies may
breed;
      (13)   Any closet not connected with a city sewer and which is not fly-
proof below the seat;
      (14)   Common drinking cups in public places;
      (15)   Common or roller towels in public places;
      (16)   Open wells and springs within the city;
      (17)   Animals dead within the city, other than those slaughtered for
human consumption; and
      (18)   Improperly constructed or managed swimming pools or public bathing
places.
   (B)   The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed as
exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and any condition which
constitutes a nuisance by statute or by common law of the state, when
committed, omitted or existing within the city or within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Council, as provided by §
91.004, is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-5)  (Ord. passed 5-2-1974; Ord. passed 7-6-1989)  Penalty, see
§
91.999
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to declare as public nuisances any trees, shrubbery and
the like growing on private property within the city, the roots of which clog
or choke any public sewer belonging to the city, or damage the streets or
sidewalks of the city, and provide for the removal or destruction of such trees
or shrubbery, see Char. §
28, subsec. (4)
§ 91.006  STAGNANT WATER AND PUTRID MATTER.
   No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building or enclosure
shall allow or suffer to exist in or upon such premises any stagnant water,
animal or vegetable matter or other substance liable to become putrid,
offensive, annoying or unhealthful. Persons owning or in possession of any real
estate shall provide proper and adequate drainage therefor so that no
offensive, baneful or disagreeable liquids shall flow or seep into any street.
Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-6)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007  SUPPLEMENTAL NATURE OF CHAPTER.
   Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other chapters of this code,
and it is the intent of the Council in enacting this subchapter, to make it
supplemental to those other chapters in which nuisances are defined and
prohibited; and the provisions of this subchapter relating to the abatement of
nuisances shall be regarded as alternate methods and procedures for the
abatement of nuisances in those instances where other methods and procedures
for abatement are provided.
(1991 Code, § 12-7)
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS
§ 91.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including
vegetable and animal offal and the carcasses of small animals, kitchen and
table refuse, swill and every accumulation of both animal and vegetable matter
that attends the preparation, decay or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds or
vegetables and all such substances from all public and private establishments
and from all residents, but excluding recognizable industrial byproducts.
   REFUSE. Garbage and trash.
   TRASH. All nonputrescible wastes, including discarded and abandoned
articles.
(1991 Code, § 9-1)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950; Ord. passed 12-5-1968)
Charter reference:
   For Charter provisions as to authority of Council to prevent injury or
annoyance to the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or
unwholesome, see Char. §
28, subsec. (24)
Cross-reference:
   Burning paper, refuse and the like in streets, see §
92.003
   Sewers and sewage generally, see
Ch. 52
Statutory reference:
   Authority of the Council to prohibit the accumulation and require the
disposal of garbage and refuse, and to provide for the elimination of public
health and safety hazards and to abate nuisances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(10),
(23)
§ 91.021  DISPOSITION OF CARCASSES AND OFFENSIVE MATTER.
   (A)   No person shall allow any dead animal or any decaying substance of any
kind, or any filth, brush, garbage, trash or waste of any kind to remain on his
or her premises or on any premises under his or her control, or cast such
matter upon the land or lot of another or upon any street, lot, park or public
place.
   (B)   No person, who was the owner or custodian thereof, shall permit the
carcass of any dead animal to remain in the city after receiving notice that
such animal is dead. Such owner or custodian shall promptly, at his or her own
expense, cause the carcass of such animal to be removed to beyond the city
limits and buried at least three feet under ground or, in lieu thereof, shall
cause the carcass to be removed to the sanitary landfill site operated by the
Sanitation Department.
(1991 Code, § 9-2)  (Ord. passed 5-5-1960)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.022  PROHIBITED DISPOSITION OF REFUSE GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or scatter any garbage,
trash, ashes or other refuse over or upon any premises, street, sidewalk,
gutter or drain, public or private or adjacent thereto and with or without the
intent to later remove or burn such matter, or to suffer or permit the
accumulation of refuse on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
her to become or remain offensive, unsanitary or unsightly, or unsafe to public
health or hazardous as to fire.
(1991 Code, § 9-3)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.023  CONTAMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or to cause to
be thrown or deposited or to permit to be thrown or deposited any refuse,
sewage or pollutant into any well, cistern, spring, reservoir or other source
of water supply to any person or into any stream running through or adjacent to
the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump into the Tygarts Valley
River or onto the banks thereof, between the upper and lower flood control dams
within the corporate limits of the city any trash, weeds, grass or debris,
garbage or other refuse which would be carried downstream and stop up the
outlet tubes in the protection dam.
(1991 Code, § 9-4)  (Ord. passed 2-17-1949; Ord. passed 6-15-1950)  Penalty,
see §
91.999
§ 91.024  LAWFUL DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the lawful
disposal of garbage, trash or other refuse at places designated for such
purposes by governmental authority, or to prohibit such disposal in standard
domestic incinerators constructed for the purpose, which have been inspected by
and approved as safe by the Fire Chief.
(1991 Code, § 9-5)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 91.025  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO REMOVE RUBBISH AND CUT GRASS AND WEEDS.
   Every person owning or occupying any lot, tract or parcel of land or
property including the premises located between the sidewalk and roadway,
whether vacant or occupied, within the city, shall keep the property free from
and remove therefrom any dirt, rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plant
growth, filth, grass or any other deleterious material which may cause blockage
in the city storm sewers of which may endanger or injure neighboring property
or health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, and every person
owning or occupying any lot, tract or parcel of land or property within the
city shall cause the grass, weeds, brush, trees, plant growth, filth or any
other deleterious material thereon to be cut at such other times as the Mayor,
or the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or his or her authorized
representative may direct to prevent such lot, tract or parcel of land from
becoming unsightly, unwholesome, offensive or a menace to health or safety.
(Ord. O-017, passed 6-17-2004)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.026  NOTICE TO REMOVE OR CUT GRASS AND WEEDS; REMOVAL BY CITY.
   (A)   In the event that any person owning or occupying any lot, tract or
parcel of property within the city including the premises located between the
sidewalk and roadway fails to perform his or her duty to cut or remove dirt,
rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plan growth, filth, grass or any other
deleterious material therefrom, as required in §
91.025, the Mayor, Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or his or her
authorized representative shall give or cause to be given in writing to any
person owning or occupying such lot, land or property, notice to remove such
dirt, rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plant growth, filth, grass or any
other deleterious material from such lot or parcel of land, within 72 hours
from the date of the serving, mailing, posting or publication of the notice
provided for herein.
   (B)   Unless within 72 hours provided for in division (A) above, the dirt,
rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plant growth, filth grass or other
deleterious material is removed from such lot, land or property as directed by
such notice, the Mayor or the Chief of Police, or his or her duly-appointed
representative, shall have the option to either:
      (1)   Cause a citation and/or warrant to be issued against any person
owning or occupying such lot, tract or parcel of land; and/or
      (2)   Cause the same to be removed by the agents or employees of the
city, or otherwise as he or she may decide, in which event the Code Enforcement
Officer shall report the cost of cutting and removal to the City Clerk, who
shall immediately cause to be mailed a bill, voucher, or statement of such cost
to the person owning or occupying such lot, land or property and the bill,
voucher or statement shall be due within ten days of the date of date of
mailing the bill, voucher or statement. If payment for such bill, voucher or
statement is not made to the city within 30 days of the mailing of the same,
the city may place a lien on the violator’s property in the amount of the
unpaid bill, voucher or statement. If agents or employees of the city are
required to cut and remove the dirt, rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees,
plant growth, filth, grass or other deleterious material from such lot, land or
property, the city shall charge a fee of $100 per hour for every hour or
portion of an hour that agents or employees of the city were utilized to
complete the cutting and removal of said materials.
   (C)   The notice referred to in division (A) above shall be sufficient and
shall be deemed to have been given when a written notice is delivered in person
to the owner or occupant, or deposited in the United States mail addressed to
the owner or occupant at his or her last known address or by posting notice in
a conspicuous place on the property which is reasonably calculated to give
notice to the property owner, or by any of the methods prescribed for the
service of process issued by the Clerk of a Circuit Court of the state.
   (D)   No error in the name of the property owner, the description of the
property nor in the materials designated to be cut and removed shall affect the
validity of any such notice, provided that from the description of such lot,
land or property, the identity thereof may be established within reasonable
certainty.
   (E)   The payment of the amount so chargeable to the owner shall not relieve
him or her of any fine imposed under the provisions of this subchapter or
constitute a defense against any violation of the provisions of this section.
Each day of failure to comply with the provisions of this section after 72
hours’ notice to do so, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. O-017, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. 177, passed 3-6-2014; Ord. 222, passed 9-
15-2016)
ABANDONED/DERELICT VEHICLES
§ 91.040  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to have been
abandoned for the purpose of this section in the following circumstances:
      (1)   It has been left unattended upon a street or highway in violation
of a statutory law or ordinance regulating or prohibiting parking for a period
of 24 hours;
      (2)   It is left unaccompanied on property owned or operated by the city
or on any street or highway for a period of not less than 48 hours; or
      (3)   It is left unaccompanied on private property for a period of not
less than 30 days, in derelict condition.
   DERELICT VEHICLE. A motor vehicle shall be deemed DERELICT for the purposes
of this section if the vehicle is inoperable, partially wholly dismantled,
wrecked, junked, or of similar condition, for a period exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.041  EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle in an enclosed building, garage or carport;
   (B)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise;
   (C)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in
a lawful place and manner by the city; and
   (D)   A vehicle shall not be declared abandoned or derelict pursuant to this
subchapter if such vehicle is in operable, running condition, which is validly
licensed and registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.042  DECLARED A HEALTH HAZARD.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the Council authorizes the Mayor, Chief
of Police or his or her assigns to declare any abandoned or derelict motor
vehicle remaining on private property for in excess of 30 days a health hazard.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.043  DUTY TO OWNER TO REMOVE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any wrecked, junked,
discarded, partially dismantled non-operable motor vehicle to remain on such
property for more than 30 days.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.044  DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   If a motor vehicle is abandoned or derelict on a public street or highway,
it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of such motor vehicle to
cause the removal thereof immediately.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.045  NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint concerning abandoned/derelict vehicles, as
defined in this subchapter, the Mayor, Chief of Police or his or her assign
will investigate such complaint. If, in his or her judgment a violation has
occurred, the Mayor, Chief of Police or his or her assign shall cause to be
delivered or mailed to the owner of the property upon which the conditions
exist a notice stating the reasons why the conditions may constitute a
violation and that a hearing will be held before a Municipal Judge at a place
therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the delivery or
mailing of the notice. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right
to file an answer to the notice and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
evidence at the place and time fixed in the notice. Any person desiring to do
so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being
heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in such hearings.
   (B)   If a determination is made that such conditions constituting a public
nuisance exist, the Mayor, Chief of Police or his or her assign shall notify,
in writing, the owner of the premises in question of the conditions
constituting such public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof
within 30 days from the receipt of such written notice.
   (C)   Exceptions to this procedure are abandoned or unlicensed vehicles on
public property where action shall be taken within 48 hours of notification of
the nuisance and unidentified vehicles when corrective action shall be taken by
the Police Department immediately.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.046  REMOVAL OF DERELICT VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Chief of the Police Department, or Mayor, or their assigns, upon notice
of violation, may cause a written notice of such violation to be served upon
the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee and/or owner of the motor vehicle, that
such motor vehicle shall be removed within 30 days after receipt of notice. Any
motor vehicle not removed after such notice shall be removed from such land to
an impounding area heretofore designated by the Council and therein impounded.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.047  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Whenever any motor vehicle is abandoned on a public street or highway, or on
property owned or operated by the city, any such vehicle may be removed and
impounded under the direction of the Chief of Police or his or her assigns,
after 48 hours, to a storage garage or area as designated by the Council.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.048  RECLAMATION.
   Upon notification by the Police Department, the owner of an impounded motor
vehicle may, upon furnishing satisfactory evidence of his or her identity and
of his or her ownership of the vehicle, obtain a release from the Police
Department, and upon payment of towing and storing charges, and any fines or
penalties, remove such motor vehicle from the impounding area.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.049  SALE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   Should the owner of an impounded motor vehicle fail or refuse to pay the
costs above mentioned or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be
unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search, and after written notice
to him or her at his or her last known address if his or her identity is known,
and to the holder of any lien on record in the office of the State Department
of Motor Vehicles against such vehicle, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee may, after holding such vehicle for 30 days and after having the value
thereof determined by three disinterested automobile dealers or garage and
after giving 20 days’ notice to the State Department of Motor Vehicles, such
notice to include all information which can be reasonably ascertained to
identify such vehicle, dispose of the same by private or public sale and shall
forward the proceeds of such sale to the City Treasurer.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.050  DISPOSITION OF UNSOLD VEHICLES.
   Whenever any motor vehicle which has been removed pursuant to this
subchapter shall remain unsold for a period of 60 days from and including the
day of its removal, such vehicle may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by
the city official charged with its safekeeping. Notice of any such destruction
or disposition shall be given the State Department of Motor Vehicles, such
notice to include all information on which can be reasonably ascertained to
identify such vehicle.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.051  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   The proceeds of the sale of a motor vehicle covered in this subchapter,
after all costs of removal, storage, investigation and sale, and satisfaction
of any liens on record on the vehicle have been deducted therefrom and after
any fines or penalties have been paid, shall be held by the City Treasurer for
up to 30 days and paid to the registered owner, after providing satisfactory
evidence of his or her identify upon demand. If the owner does not appear to
claim the remainder of the proceeds within 30 days after disposal of the
vehicle, the funds shall be deposited into the city’s General Fund and the
owner’s rights therein shall be forever extinguished.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.052  UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall park, store or leave or permit the parking or storage of any
unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind, for a period in excess of 48 hours,
whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city, unless the
vehicle is enclosed within a building, garage, carport, or further, is
connected with and essential to the operation of a business enterprise
conducted in a lawful place and manner and properly licensed. The Chief of
Police, upon notice of a violation, may cause either personal or written notice
of such violation to be served upon the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee and/or
the owner of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.053  TRAILERS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to trailers or wagons
in a wrecked, junked, discarded, abandoned, partially dismantled, non-operable
or otherwise derelict condition.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.054  IMMUNITY.
   Neither the city nor any person shall be held to answer in any civil or
criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession
of any abandoned, lost or stolen vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as
contemplated by this subchapter.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
NOISE
§ 91.065  DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   This subchapter is enacted to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize
the health, welfare or safety of the citizens of the city or degrade the
quality of life. It is neither the purpose not intent of this subchapter to
unduly interfere with the freedoms of speech or religion. This subchapter shall
be known as the “City of Elkins Noise Ordinance”.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016)
§ 91.066  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is
designated dB(A) or dBA.
   CITY. The jurisdictional limits of the City of Elkins, West Virginia
   DECIBEL. The symbol for which is dB, means a unit for measuring the volume
of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
   DWELLING. A residence or abode, including, but not limited to, a house,
mobile home, condominium, apartment or other structure used as a home.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING SYSTEM. A device used primarily on trucks for the conversion
of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the
purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes, said devices sometimes
known as ENGINE BRAKES.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contract with the
ground, excluding a tractor.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle including passenger cars, trucks,
truck-trailers, semi-trailers, recreational vehicles, campers and racing
vehicles.
   MUFFLER. A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the count of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is part
of the normal configuration of the equipment.
   NOISE. Any sound of such character, level or duration:
      (1)   Which may be injurious to human health or welfare;
      (2)   Which unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or
property throughout the city or in any portion thereof;
      (3)   Which disturbs the good order or quiet of the community; or
      (4)   Which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivity.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplified, RMS
detector, integrator or time average, output meter and weighting networks used
to measure sound pressure levels. Such instrument shall be used for measurement
of the intensity of sound and calibrated in decibels as standardized by the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Readings shall be made on a dB(A)
scale.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016; Ord. 217, passed 8-4-2016)
§ 91.067  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Noise prohibited generally. Subject to the exceptions contained
herein, no person shall make, continue or cause to be made any noise as
prohibited herein or alternatively make, continue or cause to be made any noise
exceeding the limitations established herein.
   (B)   Noise prohibited: motor vehicles, motorcycles.
      (1)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street or
highway shall amplify from within the motor vehicle the sound produced by a
radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument used
for entertainment, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 25
feet or more from the motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be
removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair
or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle,
motorcycle or motorboat operated within the city.
      (3)   No person shall operate, or permit the operation within the city of
any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat without factory installed mufflers
or their equivalent; provided that if no factory installed or equivalent
muffler was present at the time of manufacture of the motor vehicle, motorcycle
or motorboat, then sound emanating from the motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor
boat, shall be effectively muffled in a reasonable manner by equipment so
constructed and used to muffle sound.
      (4)   No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon
any motor vehicle or motorcycle operated within the city.
      (5)   No person in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the
city shall use a dynamic braking system unless said use is necessary to prevent
or avoid an accident that may cause property damage, injury or loss of life.
This provision shall not apply to fire trucks or other emergency vehicles, or
any school bus equipped with a dynamic braking system.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
         (a)   Noise resulting from emergency or necessary maintenance work as
performed by the city, or the United States of America or any of their
political subdivisions, or public utility companies, including, but not limited
to, any work of any kind on roads, streets, bridges, alleys, city-owned
cemetery, rights-of-way or government owned property;
         (b)   Noise resulting from any emergency vehicle, when responding to
an emergency call or acting in time of emergency, or during training exercises
and maintenance, or from any school bus;
         (c)   Noise from any emergency signaling device;
         (d)   Noise from a burglar or fire alarm installed on any building,
motor vehicle or other property so long as the alarm terminates its operation
within five minutes of its activation; provided that it shall be deemed
reasonable for an activated alarm to continue to operate if a crime or fire is
in progress at or near the property and/or until law enforcement or other
emergency personnel have responded to a legitimate call for assistance related
in any way to the property at which the activated alarm is located;
         (e)   Noise from domestic power tools, landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, agricultural equipment and standby generator self-test
verifier but only when operated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
during weekdays and weekends. Lawn mower racing is never deemed to be an exempt
activity pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter;
         (f)   There are no restrictions against using generators to provide
power when power has been interrupted to a home or homes, whether that
interruption is due to a widespread power event, restricted to a local event
(including, but not limited to, damage to the power supply to a home or homes)
or is intentional related to maintenance, repair or other upgrades. However,
generator self-tests may only occur during the hours specified in division (C)
(1)(e) above;
         (g)   Noise from commercial or industrial power tools, landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment, and agricultural equipment on a residential
property or within 250 feet of a residential property line when operated on
commercial or industrial property, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
on weekdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and
legal holidays;
         (h)   Noise from church or chapel bells and chimes when used as part
of any religious observance or service or for national celebrations or public
holidays, and those bells and chimes that are presently installed and in use;
provided said use is reasonable and for a church-related purpose;
         (i)   Noise generated during the normal course of business by any
properly licensed commercial or industrial enterprise operating lawfully within
an area properly zoned for said enterprise;
         (j)   Noise from construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavating or
demolition activity provided all motorized equipment used in such activity is
equipped with functioning mufflers;
         (k)   Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers and snow plows when
operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal;
         (l)   Noise generated in situations within the jurisdiction of the
Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration;
         (m)   Noise generated from city-sponsored or approved celebrations or
events, including, but not limited to, parades, outdoor concerts, festivals and
athletic events;
         (n)   Noise generated from any school, higher education and community
sponsored or approved celebrations or events, including, but not limited to,
outdoor concerts or band festivals and outdoor athletic events and practices;
         (o)   Noise produced by a governmental body or employee thereof in the
performance of any governmental function;
         (p)   Noise generated from athletic events or practices;
         (q)   Noise generated from airplanes, helicopters or other piloted
vehicles arriving to or departing from the city’s Airport Authority and Davis
Medical Center;
         (r)   Noise generated from railroads operating within the city;
         (s)   Noise generated from fireworks authorized by the city;
         (t)   Noise generated during events promoted by the County Convention
and Visitors Bureau, Elkins Main Street and the Mountain State Forest Festival;
and
         (u)   Noise generated during events promoted by Davis and Elkins
College upon the college campus, or otherwise authorized by the city.
      (2)   For the purposes of the exemptions contained in divisions (C)(1)(a)
and (C)(1)(m) above, all celebrations and events held during the annual
Mountain State Forest Festival, or any college sanctioned events held upon the
campus of Davis and Elkins College, or school and higher education approved
shall be presumed to be “city-sponsored or approved”. County Convention and
Visitors Bureau and Elkins Main Street events are also presumed to be “city-
sponsored and approved” and are specifically exempt from the foregoing
prohibitions. Any list of presumed city-sponsored or approved and school and
high education approved celebrations and events listed under this division (C)
is not intended to be exclusive.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.068  MEASUREMENT, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Any noise that exceeds a noise level of 83 dBA calculated on a distance from
the point of generation of the noise source of not less than 25 feet shall be
prima facie evidence of a noise prohibited by §
91.067. Noise resulting in a decibel reading or calculation less than 83 dBA
from 25 feet also constitutes a prohibited noise activity pursuant to §
91.067. Furthermore, there is no specific decibel measurement requirement to
establish a violation of any noise prohibited by §
91.067.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.069  FEDERAL LAW.
   The Council of the city specifically recognizes the existence and
application of the Federal Noise Pollution and Abatement Act of 1972, popularly
known and referred to as the Noise Control Act of 1972, 42 U.S.C. §§ 4901 et
seq. The provisions of this subchapter are intended to supplement the federal
law and applicable rules and regulations established therefrom and as are
administered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016)
ABATEMENT
§ 91.080  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and the
Building Official to cause inspections to be made, from time to time, within
the city and, when such officers deem it in the interests of the city so to do,
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as provided in §
91.004, to determine whether any condition exists or any activity is being
practiced which constitutes a nuisance; and each such officer shall cause an
investigation to be made, upon written complaint made by any responsible
person.
   (B)   Each officer mentioned in division (A) above shall, for the purposes
of this chapter, be designated as an “enforcement officer”.
(1991 Code, § 12-8)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to abate by summary proceedings whatever in the opinion
of the Council is a nuisance, see Char. §
28, subsecs. (26) and (64)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the abatement of nuisances, see W.Va.
Code § 8-12-5(23)
§ 91.081  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Enforcement officers shall have the right to enter upon private premises for
the purposes specified in §
91.080, upon proper identification and in compliance with all applicable
provisions of law. Unless it appears probable that advance warning would defeat
the purpose of such entry, the occupants of premises to be entered shall be
given reasonable notice in advance and, in any case, it shall be unlawful for
any owner or occupant to prevent such entry which is sought to be made in
compliance with law.
(1991 Code, § 12-9)  Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for entering and inspecting private premises
to enforce city ordinances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-15
§ 91.082  NOTICE TO CEASE AND DESIST.
   If, at any time, an enforcement officer shall find that an activity or
practice which constitutes a nuisance is occurring within the city or within
the area surrounding the city and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city as provided by §
91.080, he or she shall, promptly and by the most expeditious means, notify the
violator to cease and desist such nuisance forthwith.
(1991 Code, § 12-10)
§ 91.083  NOTICE TO ABATE; APPEAL.
   If, at any time, an enforcement officer shall find that a condition which
constitutes a nuisance exists within the city or within the area surrounding
the city within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as provided by §
91.080, he or she shall give notice in writing to the owner, occupant or person
in charge of the premises upon which such condition exists, stating therein the
condition which constitutes a nuisance, and directing such addressee to remedy
the condition within the time stated in such notice, which shall be not more
than ten days; and it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person
in charge to fail to comply with the terms of such notice; provided, that any
owner, occupant or person in charge may, within two days from the service
thereof, appeal to the Council, in which case the terms of such notice shall be
stayed pending action of the Council, which action shall be final; provided
further, that if the enforcement officer shall state in such notice that the
condition which constitutes a nuisance is such as to be an imminent hazard to
the health, safety or welfare of the public or of any person within or near the
premises upon which such nuisance exists, the addressee shall comply with the
terms of such notice.
(1991 Code, § 12-11)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.084  RECOURSE OF CITY WHEN NOTICE TO ABATE IS IGNORED.
   (A)   Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant
to §
91.083 to comply with the terms of such notice or with the terms imposed by the
Council on appeal, as the case may be, the enforcement officer shall forthwith
direct the appropriate city officer to remedy the condition which is the
subject of such notice, and the expense incurred by the city in so doing shall
be charged to the addressee of such notice, as well as to the owner of the
premises which is the subject of such notice, jointly or severally, to be
collected as city taxes or in any other manner authorized by law for the
collection of money due the city.
   (B)   Abatement by the city of any condition which constitutes a nuisance
and reimbursement to the city of expenses incurred thereby shall not bar
prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-12)
§ 91.085  SERVICE OF WRITTEN NOTICES; CONFIRMATION OF ORAL NOTICES.
   (A)   Written notices provided for in this subchapter may be served in any
manner authorized by law for the service of process in civil cases, including
service by publication against nonresidents and parties unknown or whose
address is unknown.
   (B)   Oral notices given pursuant to §
91.082 shall promptly be confirmed in writing, which shall be served as
provided in division (A) above.
(1991 Code, § 12-13)
§ 91.086  SUBCHAPTER DOES NOT PROHIBIT ARREST.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit any police officer
from arresting any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance when such
arrest is made pursuant to law.
(1991 Code, § 12-14)
§ 91.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any property owner or occupant of such property who is convicted of a
violation of §
91.025 shall for a first conviction thereof be fined $50 and for a second or
subsequent conviction, such person shall be fined at least $100 but not more
than $500.
   (C)   Any person violating any section of §§
91.040 through
91.054 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For every day such violation shall
thereafter exist, it shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense; and if
found guilty of such misdemeanor, be punishable upon conviction by a fine not
exceeding $50 or by imprisonment of not more than 30 days, for each violation.
   (D)   Any person found guilty before the Municipal Court of the city of
violating any provision of §§
91.065 through
91.069 shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor offense, and shall be
punished by fine as follows: $100 for the first offense within a 24-month
period; $200 for the second offense within a 24-month period; $300 for a third
offense within a 24-month period; $400 for a fourth offense within a 24-month
period; and $500 for a fifth and each subsequent offense within a 24-month
period. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which said
violation occurs shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004; Ord. O-017, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. 210, passed
5-19-2016)
CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.001   Installation of storage tanks for certain flammable liquids
prohibited; exception
   
92.002   Fire seasons; outdoor fires
   
92.003   Burning paper, refuse and the like; in streets
   
92.004   Wood-burning stoves and chimneys
Fire Prevention Code
   
92.015   Adopted; filed; applicability; short title
   
92.016   Administration and enforcement
   
92.017   Definitions
   
92.018   Amendments
   
92.019   Storage of explosives, flammable liquids and gases, district
established; approval of building permits
   
92.020   Modifications
   
92.021   Appeals
Fire Department
   
92.035   Fire Chief; office established; powers and duties generally
   
92.036   Fire Chief; power as to repair or removal of fire hazards
   
92.037   Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission
   
92.038   Using or tampering with city fire equipment
   
92.039   Riding upon fire apparatus
   
92.040   Obedience to officers at scene of fire
   
92.041   Key lock box system
Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund
   
92.055   Establishment and maintenance
   
92.056   Board of Trustees
Fire Protection Service Assessments
   
92.070   Legislative purpose; maintenance
   
92.071   Definitions
   
92.072   Administration
   
92.073   Rates; fees; charges established
   
92.074   Billing and collection of fees
   
92.075   Charge or fee debt due city
   
92.076   Assessment; rules and regulations generally
   
92.077   Charges are responsibility of property owner; owner’s responsibility
   
92.078   Protests
   
92.079   Fire service fee Appeal Board
   
92.080   Exemptions
   
92.081   Restricted use of revenues; future rates and charges
 
   
92.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Code, see §§
150.035,
150.036
   Giving false alarms and reports, see §
130.005
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to enact ordinances to provide for the elimination of
hazards to the public safety and to abate public nuisances, see W.Va. Code § 8-
12-5(23)
   Authority of Council to enact ordinances to prevent injury to the public or
individual from anything dangerous; to regulate the keeping of gunpowder and
other combustibles; and to make regulations guarding against danger or damage
by fire, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(13) to (15)
   Authority to enact ordinances to protect the public safety, see W.Va. Code §
8-12-5(44)
   Plenary power of Council to provide for the prevention and extinguishment of
fires, see W.Va. Code § 8-15-1
   State Fire Prevention and Control Act, see W.Va. Code §§ 29-3-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001  INSTALLATION OF STORAGE TANKS FOR CERTAIN FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install in any residential
district of the city, as designated on the official zoning map of the city, any
fuel storage tank for the purpose of storing flammable liquids for use as motor
vehicle fuels. The term FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS shall include gasoline and all other
petroleum products used as fuel for motor vehicles; provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall prohibit any person from installing a fuel
storage tank for the purpose of storing fuel heating oil to be used solely for
the furnishing of heat to dwellings or buildings located on the property on
which such storage tank is installed.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to administer and enforce
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 8-5)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1979)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.002  FIRE SEASONS; OUTDOOR FIRES.
   (A)   The periods of each year between March 1 and May 31, inclusive, and
October 1 and December 31, inclusive, are hereby designated as fire seasons. No
person shall, during any such fire season, except between the hours of 5:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., set on fire or cause to be set on fire within the city any
forest land, grassland, grain, stubble, slash, debris or other flammable
material, if it is located in a place from which it is reasonable to expect
that the fire may spread to any adjoining property. Any person who sets or
causes to be set such a fire during any period of time permitted by this
division (A) shall not leave such fire unattended and shall completely
extinguish such fire before 5:00 a.m. If damage to the property of another
results from any such fire during a fire season, it shall be prima facie
evidence that the person who set such fire or caused such fire to be set
violated the provisions of this division (A).
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be in addition to
any requirement imposed by the Fire Prevention Code adopted by this chapter,
but shall supersede any provision of such Fire Code in conflict with this
section.
(1991 Code, § 8-6)  (Ord. passed 3-7-1963)  Penalty, see §
92.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 20-3-5
§ 92.003  BURNING PAPER, REFUSE AND THE LIKE; IN STREETS.
   No person shall burn any shavings, paper, house sweepings or other thing
upon any street or sidewalk or upon any public pavement, nor shall such refuse
be burned at such a place where such burning would endanger any building.
(1991 Code, § 8-7)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.004  WOOD-BURNING STOVES AND CHIMNEYS.
   (A)   Building permit required. No owner, agent or tenant in the city shall
commence with the installation of any outside wood- or coal-burning stove or
appliance unless such person first obtains a building permit from the Building
Inspector.
   (B)   Prohibition against burning trash, refuse or other debris in boiler
units or otherwise. No person shall within the city burn either in a boiler
unit or other container any trash, plastics, debris, garbage, refuse, gasoline,
rubber, materials treated with petroleum products, or materials other than wood
and/or coal and/or coke and/or wood pellets or other commercially produced
products devised specifically for burning in fireplaces, stoves or boiler
units.
   (C)   Smoke stacks. All smoke stacks for boiler units shall extend one foot
or more above the highest point of the roof to which the smoke stack is
attached or the building which the boiler serves. Furnaces should be located no
less than 100 feet from any residence not served by the furnace. If located
within 100 feet to 300 feet to any residence not served by the furnace, the
stack should be at least two feet higher than the peak of that residence.
   (D)   Boiler units. No wood- and/or coal- and/or coke-burning boiler unit
may be used within the city for any purpose during the warm months between the
dates of May 1 through October 1.
(Ord. 068, passed 11-1-2007)  Penalty, see §
92.999
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 92.015  ADOPTED; FILED; APPLICABILITY; SHORT TITLE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known as the city’s Fire Prevention Code and
there is hereby adopted, and incorporated by reference as if set out at length
herein, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known
as the State Fire Code, including all statutes, codes and requirements
referenced therein, as adopted and thereafter amended, by the State Fire
Commission pursuant to W.Va. Code § 29-3-5, except such portions as are herein
modified, and from the date on which this section takes effect, the provision
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
   (B)   The Code adopted by this section shall be known and may be cited as
the “Fire Prevention Code”.
(1991 Code, § 8-8)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1965; Ord. passed 4-2-1970; Ord. passed 9-
17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to regulate the construction, alteration and repair of
dwellings, buildings and other structures and the like, within the city, see
Char. §
28, subsec. (45) and, see also, subsecs. (11), (12), (47), (49) and (50)
   Authority of Council to regulate the construction and inspection of new
buildings and the alteration and repair of all buildings and the like, and to
require building permits, plans and specifications and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (51)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the erection, construction, repair or
alteration of structures of wood or other combustible material see W.Va. Code §
8-12-13
   Authority of city to require permit for construction, alteration or repair
of buildings or equipment, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-14
   Authority of Council relating to buildings, safety hazards and nuisances
generally, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(23), (28)
   Authority of State Fire Marshal to promulgate rules relating to buildings,
see W.Va. Code §§ 29-3-4a, 29-3-4b
   Authority to inspect private premises, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-15
   Fire Prevention and Control Act, see W.Va. Code §§ 29-3-1 to 29-3-30
§ 92.016  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Prevention Code, as adopted under §
92.015, shall be administered and enforced by the City Fire Chief, or any
member of the City Fire Department deputized by the State Fire Marshal.
(1991 Code, § 8-9)  (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.017  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUNICIPALITY. As used in the Fire Prevention Code, adopted by this
subchapter, it shall be construed to mean the City of Elkins.
(1991 Code, § 8-10)  (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.018  AMENDMENTS.
   The Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by this subchapter, shall be amended as
follows:
   (A)   Permits required. Written permits shall be required for all sections
of the Fire Prevention Code.
   (B)   Addition. By adding the following: “Burning within the city limits of
grass from lawns, leaves and wood and papers will be permitted with an approved
container on Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each week. Burning shall be
permitted between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All burning shall be
only with a written permit. Permits to be issued by the City of Elkins Fire
Chief or his or her designated representatives.”
(1991 Code, § 8-11)  (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010; Ord.
246, passed 10-19-2017)
§ 92.019  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES, FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES, DISTRICT
ESTABLISHED; APPROVAL OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by this
subchapter, in which the storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by
this subchapter, in which the storage of Class I liquids in outside, above-
ground tanks, is prohibited.
   (B)   Petroleum gas. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, as
adopted by this subchapter, in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is restricted, and hereby established as follows: from the railroad tracks;
south on Randolph Avenue to High Street; west on High Street to Davis Street;
north on Davis Street to Savannah Street; south on Savannah Street to the
Tygart Valley River; west along the Tygart Valley River to Railroad Avenue;
north on Railroad Avenue to Randolph Avenue.
   (C)   Inspection. The City Fire Chief or his or her representative shall
inspect and approve all building permits in this area.
(1991 Code, § 8-12)  (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.020  MODIFICATIONS.
   The City Fire Chief, with approval of the Council, shall have the power to
add to, or delete there from, provisions of the City Fire Prevention Code when,
in the opinion of the City Fire Chief, the best interest of the general public
and the city will thus be served. The City Fire Chief, with approval of the
Council, may modify any of the provisions of the City Fire Prevention Code upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized
agent, of any property or installation affected thereunder, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
Code, provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such additions,
deletions or modifications, when granted, allowed or ordered by the City Fire
Chief, with approval of the Council, shall be entered upon the records of the
Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
(1991 Code, § 8-13)  (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.021  APPEALS.
   Whenever the City Fire Chief or his or her representative shall disapprove
an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, the applicant may
appeal the decision of the City Fire Chief to the Council, within 30 days from
the date the decision is appealed.
(1991 Code, § 8-14)  (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 92.035  FIRE CHIEF; OFFICE ESTABLISHED; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   The office of Fire Chief is hereby established.
      (2)   The Fire Chief shall be the Chief of the Fire Department and the
commanding officer thereof, and shall be responsible to the Mayor and the
Council for the administration, training, discipline, morale and effective
deployment and utilization of the members of the Department and for the
maintenance and effective deployment and utilization of the property, equipment
and apparatus of the Fire Department.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have all such powers as may be necessary and
lawful to meet the responsibilities imposed upon him or her by this section,
including, but not limited to, the following.
      (1)   He or she shall have absolute command, control, management,
assignment to duties and supervision of every officer, member and employee of
the Fire Department during a fire, at all practices and drills and during all
hours when such personnel are on duty.
      (2)   He or she shall have absolute control, authority and command of the
police officers present at the scene of any fire during the time and
continuance of any fire or conflagration, and all orders issued by him or her
to such police officers and to other persons present shall be by them
explicitly obeyed and performed.
      (3)   He or she shall have supervision over the engine houses, trucks and
all apparatus and equipment belonging to the Fire Department. He or she shall
be responsible for the serviceable condition of all equipment belonging to the
Fire Department and he or she shall be responsible that every piece of fire
apparatus is equipped at all times with the necessary wrenches and all other
equipment belonging to that piece of apparatus and necessary to the successful
fighting of fire.
      (4)   He or she shall have supervision over all repairs to apparatus and
the charge of all supplies, and shall issue them, at his or her own discretion
or upon the authority of the Council, to the units of the Fire Department,
taking from such units the receipts of the commanding officer of the unit to
which the supplies are issued. He or she shall have sole control, management
and command at fires and alarms of fire over all apparatus and equipment
belonging to the Fire Department. Whenever any purchases are to be made and
when the fire apparatus used by the Department requires attention or repairs,
he or she shall make a report and recommendations to the Council unless the
repairs needed are of a character which will require immediate attention.
      (5)   He or she shall have authority to direct the pulling down or
destroying of any fence, house, building or other thing, if deemed necessary to
prevent the spreading of a fire.
      (6)   (a)   He or she shall be responsible for the keeping of necessary
records for the Fire Department, which records shall be subject to the
inspection of the Mayor and the members of the Council at any time.
         (b)   Such record shall list and note, inter alia, the state of repair
of all property belonging to the Fire Department.
         (c)   He or she shall record, and communicate monthly to the Council,
a report of all fires occurring since the previous report, the units and
personnel responding to alarms, the loss and insurance as far as has been
ascertained, the causes of any such fires and such suggestions as he or she may
deem advisable to bring the number of fires to a minimum.
         (d)   He or she shall also keep at his or her office such books or
other records as the Council may prescribe.
(1991 Code, § 8-16)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to give authority to Fire Department officers to pull
down structures when deemed necessary to prevent spread of fire, see W.Va. Code
§§ 8-15-1, 8-15-2
   Authority of Council to provide for the prevention and extinguishment of
fires, to procure proper engines and implements, to provide for the
organization, equipment and government of a volunteer or paid Fire Department
and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-15-1
   Authority of local Fire Departments, see W.Va. Code Ch. 29, Art. 3A
   Authority to use fire equipment three miles beyond city limits, see W.Va.
Code § 8-15-3
   Paid Fire Departments and civil service, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-15-9 et seq.
   Volunteer fire companies, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-15-4 to 8-15-8
§ 92.036  FIRE CHIEF; POWER AS TO REPAIR OR REMOVAL OF FIRE HAZARDS.
   Whenever the Fire Chief, acting in his or her capacity as assistant to the
State Fire Marshal, shall find any building or other structure on property of
any kind, or any other object of any kind or any place or condition which, for
want of repairs or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any other
cause or condition or for any reason whatever, is especially conducive or
liable to fire or liable to cause a fire and which is so located or constructed
as to endanger it or other property or life, he or she shall order such
condition or thing to be remedied or such building or buildings, structures or
property to be repaired and remedied and, if not so repaired and remedied, to
be torn down and removed, and he or she shall proceed to enforce his or her
order according to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 29, Art. 3.
(1991 Code, § 8-17)  (Ord. passed 11-15-1962)
§ 92.037  FIREFIGHTER’S CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission, existing immediately prior
to the effective date of this code, is hereby continued in full force and
effect; and all the pertinent provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 8-15-11 through 8-15-
27, inclusive, are hereby adopted by the Council and made applicable to the
regular members of the Fire Department who are paid on a full-time basis from
city funds and to applicants for such regular membership.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under the Municipal Home
Rule Pilot Program, under W.Va. Code § 8-1-5a, the city hereby declares itself
to be exempt from the requirement that no more than two of the members of its
Fire Civil Service Commission be members of the same political party as
required by W.Va. Code § 8-15-12.
(1991 Code, § 8-18)  (Ord. passed 3-3-1960; Ord. 232, passed 3-2-2017)
Editor’s note:
   The Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission was established in this city for
regular, full-time paid members of the Fire Department, under the provisions of
W.Va. Code prior Ch. 8, Art. 6A, since superseded by the sections mentioned in
the text of this section.
§ 92.038  USING OR TAMPERING WITH CITY FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment of the city for any
private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority
remove, take away, tamper with, keep or conceal any tool, piece of equipment,
appliance or other article used in any way by the Fire Department.
(1991 Code, § 8-19)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.039  RIDING UPON FIRE APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to ride upon any fire
apparatus of the city at any time; and no person, other than those assigned to
such apparatus, shall be authorized to ride thereon while such apparatus is
responding to a fire alarm, except by authority of the Fire Chief.
(1991 Code, § 8-20)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.040  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   Every person present at the scene of a fire shall be subject and obedient to
the orders of any police officer or member of the Fire Department there present
as to any matter relating to the extinguishment of the fire, the removal and
protection of property or the maintenance of order; and it shall be unlawful
for any person present at the scene of any fire to disobey any such lawful
order of any police officer or member of the Fire Department there present.
(1991 Code, § 8-21)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.041  KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM.
   (A)   Structures where required. The following structures shall be equipped
with a key lock box:
      (1)   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm
system and/or automatic suppression system, or any other structure that is
required by NFPA Life Safety Code 101 to be so equipped;
      (2)   Commercial or industrial property protected by a locked fence or
gate and where immediate access to the property is necessary for life, safety
or firefighting purposes; and
      (3)   This section shall not apply to residential one- and two-family
dwellings, however, key lock boxes may be installed.
   (B)   Type. The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system
to be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require all
structures subject to this section to use the designated system. The Fire Chief
shall be the sole source of forms to order key lock boxes. The rapid entry key
box shall be installed in a location approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (C)   Key box contents. The rapid entry key boxes shall contain the
following labeled keys:
      (1)   Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of
such buildings;
      (2)   Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
      (3)   Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
      (4)   Keys to the elevator controls;
      (5)   Keys to any fence or secured areas;
      (6)   Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Chief; and
      (7)   Any box containing more than 15 keys shall include a floor plan.
   (D)   Newly constructed structures; installation. All newly constructed
structures subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and
operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. All structures in
existence on the effective date of this section and subject to this section
shall have 12 months from the effective date of this section to have a key lock
box installed and operational.
   (E)   Fire Chief; duties. The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement
rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system.
(Ord. 084, passed - -2008; Ord. 160, passed 11-5-2012)  Penalty, see §
92.999
FIREMEN’S PENSION AND RELIEF FUND
§ 92.055  ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund is hereby established, pursuant to
the authority of W.Va. Code § 8-22-16, for the purposes enumerated in W.Va.
Code Ch. 8, Art. 22. Such fund shall consist of gifts, grants, devises and
bequests of money and real and personal property, upon such terms as to the
investment and expenditure thereof as may be fixed by the grantors thereof or
determined by the Board of Trustees of the Fund, plus other funds, assessments
and levies, as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-19.
   (B)   (1)   The existing pension plan for firefighters employed by the city,
as established, is hereby closed to new entrants, in accordance with the
authority provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-16(e).
      (2)   The city shall utilize the optional method of financing the
unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the existing Firemen’s Pension and
Relied Fund as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-20(e).
      (3)   Newly hired firefighters shall be enrolled in a retirement plan
created in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 22A and approved and administered by the
State Consolidated Public Retirement Board.
      (4)   All current active member, retirees and other beneficiaries covered
by the existing Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund shall remain covered by that
plan and shall be paid all benefits of that plan in accordance with applicable
provisions of the West Virginia Code.
(1991 Code, § 8-22)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1953; Ord. 191, passed 3-19-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Federal Social Security benefit, see §
30.03
   Participation of city in state employment employees’ retirement system, see
§
30.04
Editor’s note:
   This subchapter was enacted in 1953 pursuant to authority of the then W.Va.
Code Ch. 8, Art. 6; and all references herein to the West Virginia Code have
been revised so as to refer to the West Virginia Code as in effect upon the
cut-off date of this city code.
Statutory reference:
   Duty of Council to levy annual tax for fund, see W.Va. Code § 8-22-19
   State law relating to municipal firemen’s pension and relief funds, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-16 to 8-22-28
§ 92.056  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund shall be
composed and have the powers and duties provided for such boards by W.Va. Code
§§ 8-22-17 and 8-22-18.
(1991 Code, § 8-23)
FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE ASSESSMENTS
§ 92.070  LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Fire protection service shall be continued, maintained and improved by
the city, in part, at the charge and expense of the owners of buildings and
structures of every kind and nature within the municipal corporate limits and
outside the municipal corporate limits within the Fire Service District (First
Due Area) of the City Fire Department as designated by the State Commission and
State Fire Marshal, which owners are declared to be the users and beneficiaries
of such fire services as contemplated by W.Va. Code § 8-13-13.
   (B)   The charges and expenses with respect to each of such users as set out
in this subchapter shall be based and imposed, in part, upon recognition of the
following legislative findings. The size of a nonresidential structure and a
multiple-family residential unit structure, as reflected by the total square
feet, is a factor which affects the cost of providing fire protection and,
therefore, the fees imposed hereunder are related in part to the size of the
building.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.071  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DUAL RESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE. Any structure or unit which is insurable as
a permanent dwelling, and used or intended by the nature of its design and
construction to be used as a two- (separate) family dwelling by persons for
living or sleeping quarters, and having only two units within such structure,
but shall not include unit structures intended primarily for transient lodging,
including without limitation, hotels, motels, rest homes and hospital rooms.
Such structure shall include, but not be limited to, duplexes.
   FACTORY BUILT HOME. Modular homes, mobile homes, house trailers and
manufactured homes.
   FIRE CHIEF. The City of Elkins Fire Chief.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The paid Fire Department of the City of Elkins and all
firefighters serving as volunteers within said Department.
   FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES. Specifically, and the scope of the services
contemplated as being provided by the City Fire Department and charged for
through the fire protection service fee program described in this subchapter;
including, but are not limited to: response to fires; motor vehicle accidents;
entrapment; extrication; high-angle rescue; gas leaks; downed power lines;
arcing electrical equipment; aircraft standby; lock-outs; smoke removal; animal
rescue; public service; and/or unauthorized burning.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE. A residential unit structure
having more than two-family dwellings or units within such structure. Such
structure shall include, but not be limited to, apartment buildings,
condominiums, townhouses or boarding houses. Such structure shall exclude
hotels, motels, tourist homes and the like.
   NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE. All other buildings not included within the
definitions of residential unit structure. Such structures shall include, but
not be limited to, all commercial establishments, schools, churches, government
buildings and the like. If a structure has multiple uses such as residential
and commercial, it will be classified as a NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT.
   OWNER. The owner of record of any tract or parcel of real estate, as
reflected by the records maintained in the office of the Clerk of the County
Commission of Randolph County but may also include the grantee or transferee of
any interest in any real estate by unrecorded deed, or by an owner-financed
sale evidenced by written agreement, such as a “land contract”; provided that
the parties to any such transaction are required to notify the Treasurer as to
which party to any such transaction shall be responsible to pay any fire
service fees due and payable pursuant to this subchapter.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure or unit which is insurable as a permanent dwelling
and used or intended by the nature of its design and construction to be used as
a single-family dwelling by persons for living or sleeping quarters, but shall
not include unit structures intended primarily for transient lodging, including
without limitation, hotels, motels, rest homes and hospital rooms.
      (2)   It shall also not include cabins, camps or other structures that
are:
         (a)   Intended by the nature of their design and construction for
occasional, seasonal use;
         (b)   Actually used in a manner that is nonremunerative to the owner;
and
         (c)   Assessed by the County Assessor at a value less than $25,000.
   SQUARE FOOTAGE. All space within a building including all attics, basements
and garages attached or detached, and all utility buildings upon the premises
of the property owner shall be included in as part of the total SQUARE FOOTAGE
in determining the fire protection service assessment provided for in this
subchapter. SQUARE FOOTAGE shall be fixed and determined by the City Collector
and Treasurer, and in fixing and determining SQUARE FOOTAGE, the City Collector
and Treasurer may make, or cause to be made, such reports, investigations,
surveys and measurements as be requisite and, as an said, may consult the
SQUARE FOOTAGE records maintained by the State Tax Department and the Assessor
of the county.
   TOTAL SQUARE FEET. The sum as measured by the exterior dimensions of each
structure on a lot multiplied by the number of stories, also including enclosed
porches, finished basements, garden centers, finished attics, detached garages
utility buildings and car washes with roofs. The following shall not be
included in the calculation of total square footage: canopies for banks,
hotels, gas stations and retail stores.
   TREASURER. The City of Elkins Treasurer.
(Ord. 049, passed 7-6-2006; Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-
2015; Ord. 203, passed 10-8-2015; Ord. 208, passed 3-17-2016)
§ 92.072  ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Treasurer or his or her duly authorized representative is hereby
empowered to make such rules and regulations not in conflict with the
provisions of this subchapter relative to the offering and providing of fire
protection services as are necessary to protect the property or the safety or
health of the public, and no persons shall fail to comply with any such rule
and regulation so promulgated.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall administer all sections of this subchapter dealing
with financing, billing, collection and the like and is determined to carry out
the provisions of all sections of this subchapter dealing with the same.
   (C)   The Treasurer is hereby empowered to adjust, settle or cancel any
charge or fee required or made under this subchapter or any controversy which
may arise in the administration of this subchapter. However, such exercise of
authority by the Treasurer shall be in a uniform manner, and not exercised in a
capricious or arbitrary fashion and a written or electronic record shall be
kept of any and all such adjustments, settlements or cancellations.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.073  RATES; FEES; CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
   The fees or charges levied, imposed and assessed pursuant to this subchapter
for the maintenance, continuance and improvement of fire protection utility
services, within corporate limits and outside of the corporate limits but
within the First Due Area, shall be as follows:
 
Owner - dual-residential unit structure $100 per year per unit
                                        $0.05 x gross square feet minimum $100
Owner - multiple-family residential     per year (total number of square feet
unit structure                          contained in the structure multiplied
                                        by $0.05 per year)
                                        $0.05 x gross square feet minimum $100
Owner - nonresidential unit structure   per year (total number of square feet
                                        contained in the structure multiplied
                                        by $0.05 per year)
Owner - single-family residential unit  $100 per year
 
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015; Ord. 203, passed 10-8-
2015)
§ 92.074  BILLING AND COLLECTION OF FEES.
   (A)   All fees and charges for fire protection services shall be billed and
collected by the Treasurer and will be assessed to the owner as of July 1.
   (B)   Charges for the fire protection service may be billed on a monthly,
quarterly or annual basis as determined by the Treasurer and all charges shall
be billed in advance of the services being rendered.
   (C)   To avoid the late payment penalty imposed by §
92.999, payment for any fire protection service fee imposed by this subchapter,
shall be paid within 20 days of the date of the bill for services is mailed.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.075  CHARGE OR FEE DEBT DUE CITY.
   The fees or charges provided for by this subchapter shall be a debt due the
city. The city may collect any such fee or charge and all accrued penalties by
action against the owner of property against whom the service charges have been
assessed by action before the Magistrate Court of the county or by appropriate
proceedings in the Circuit Court of the county.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.076  ASSESSMENT; RULES AND REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   The Treasurer shall make and promulgate, from time to time, suitable
regulations governing the services hereby provided, the making of statement of
accounts, the collection thereof, and such other rules and regulations as he or
she may deem proper or necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.077  CHARGES ARE RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER; OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Each and every property owner of residential unit structures, dual
residential unit structures, multiple-family residential unit structures and
nonresidential unit structures shall be responsible for the payment of the fire
protection service fee charges assessed, imposed and levied under this
subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or owners of all buildings
and structures to notify the Treasurer of any change in ownership and other
items requested by the Treasurer within 30 days of such change.
   (C)   (1)   The city will utilize square footages supplied by a combination
of county records, measurement by city employees and/or information supplied by
the property owners for purposes of billing this fire fee. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the building to review these square footages and
notify the city of any changes within 60 days of the billing. Failure to notify
the city of discrepancies will void the owner’s right for reduction of previous
billings.
      (2)   (a)   If the owner determines that the city is not billing at
sufficient square footage, the owner must notify the city within 60 days or the
owner will be subject to a penalty.
         (b)   The penalty shall be the lesser of:
            1.   All fire fees for the duration of owner’s ownership of the
property from the enactment of this subchapter, plus penalties and interest at
the highest rates allowed by law; or
            2.   Five years of fire fees, plus penalties and interest at the
highest rates allowed by law.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.078  PROTESTS.
   The owner of any such building above feeling aggrieved by a charge or fee
for fire protection service may protest the same by giving written notice under
oath to the Treasurer setting forth his or her objections on or before 35 days
after the billing date. The owner shall present information and documentation
to the Treasurer concerning his or her objections with regard to the charge or
fee for fire protection service. The Treasurer shall consider the information
and documentation and make a determination concerning the appropriate charge or
fee to be assessed. If the owner is not satisfied with the Treasurer’s
determination, the owner may continue the protest by notifying the Treasurer in
writing and paying a non-returnable filing fee of $50. Upon receipt of such
protest, the Treasurer shall report the same to the Fire Service Fee Appeals
Board, which shall set a date within 30 days of the filing of the protest for a
hearing thereon. Any such owner shall have the right to be heard concerning
such protest in person or by an attorney at such hearing The Fire Service Fee
Appeals Board shall render its decision based on the record made at the hearing
within a reasonable time, giving notice in writing of its decision to all
parties concerned. Any decision made by the Fire Service Fee Appeals Board
shall not have any bearing on the valuation placed on property by the County
Assessor. The amount, if any, due the city under such decision shall be due and
payable 30 days after service of the decision. Any person aggrieved by such
decision may, within 30 days from the service of the decision, file a petition
duly verified with the Circuit Court of the county, requesting review by
certiorari; otherwise, such decision becomes final and conclusive.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015)
§ 92.079  FIRE SERVICE FEE APPEAL BOARD.
   There is hereby established a Fire Service Appeals Board consisting of three
members, one shall be a member of Council appointed by the Mayor, one shall be
the Fire Chief and the third shall be a resident of the city appointed by
Council. The members’ terms, except for the Fire Chief, shall be for a term of
three years. Any vacancy for whatever cause shall be filled as soon as
possible, but no longer than 30 days after the vacancy occurs.
(Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015)
§ 92.080  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No structure or building shall be exempt from the fees imposed by this
subchapter, whether the title or ownership thereof and therein be vested in the
United States of America, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or
whether the property is used for educational, literary, scientific, religious,
charitable or cemetery purposes, or otherwise be exempt from the payment of
real property taxes under the provisions of Article X of the West Virginia
Constitution.
   (B)   Residential property owners and tenants of rental properties may apply
for hardship reductions and/or exemptions from this fee by following procedures
that may be adopted or amended from time to time by the Council via resolution.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 208, passed 3-17-2016)
§ 92.081  RESTRICTED USE OF REVENUES; FUTURE RATES AND CHARGES.
   All revenues received from the collection of fire protection fees provided
in this subchapter shall be used only to defray the cost of and the
continuance, maintenance and improvement of fire protection services provided
by the Fire Department and no part of such revenues shall be used for any other
municipal purpose. Any future adjustment of the rates and charges imposed by
this subchapter shall be determined by applying the same percentage adjustment
equally to all rates and changes imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
92.002 shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set forth by Council from
time to time for each offense.
(1991 Code, § 8-6)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
92.004 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time. Each day that a violation
continues to exist without correction, shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   (1)   Any person or corporation, or responsible officer of the
corporation, who violates any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code,
adopted under §§
92.015 through
92.021, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or imprisoned not
more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned.
      (2)   Each and every day during which any illegal erections,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use continues after
knowledge or official notice that the same is illegal shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      (3)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, where applicable.
(1991 Code, § 8-15)
   (E)   Any property or building owner failing to comply with, or in violation
of, the terms of §
92.041 after notice from the Fire Chief, shall be subject to a fine of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time for noncompliance.
   (F)   Regarding §§
92.074, any charge for service remaining unpaid 20 days after the billing date
shall be deemed delinquent and a late payment penalty of an amount set forth by
Council from time to time of the unpaid charge for that billing shall be
assessed. In the event that any such delinquent charge remains unpaid for 12
months, an additional penalty equal to interest at the rate of an amount set
forth by Council from time to time per annum of the billing shall be assessed.
   (G)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
92.070 through
92.081, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be fined an amount set
forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-7-1963; Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 068, passed 11-7-2007; Ord.
084, passed - -2008; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010; Ord. 160, passed 11-5-2012;
Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015)
CHAPTER 93:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Seating at Mountain State Forest Festival
   
93.002   Harmful or offensive matter
   
93.003   Conducting trade or business
   
93.004   Animals or bicycles on sidewalks
   
93.005   Playing, coasting or skating on sidewalks
   
93.006   Duties of owners and occupants as to sidewalks
   
93.007   Obstructions
   
93.008   Openings in sidewalks
   
93.009   Guttering of porches and balconies
   
93.010   Matters incidental to street improvements; connection standards
   
93.011   Matters incidental to street improvements; notice to make connections;
failure to make connections
   
93.012   Permanent improvements requested by petition
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks
   
93.025   Obligation of owner; exception
   
93.026   Obligation of owner; failure to comply
   
93.027   Liability of adjacent property owners
   
93.028   Construction standards
   
93.029   Permit; form
   
93.030   Permit; required; fee
   
93.031   Permit; determination of Public Works Director
   
93.032   Permit; determination of Public Works Director; approval; certificate
   
93.033   Record of permits and certificates
   
93.034   Applications to have sidewalk grades and lines established
Excavations
   
93.045   Permit required
   
93.046   Excavations near streets, sidewalks and public places
   
93.047   Permit; application
   
93.048   Permit; prerequisites; surety
   
93.049   Companies operating under city franchise
   
93.050   Manner of work; restoration of surface
   
93.051   Required safeguards; footbridges
   
93.052   Bridges over excavations in roadways
   
93.053   Safeguards relating to sidewalk excavations
   
93.054   Handling, conveyance and disposition of dirt
   
93.055   State permit
Street and Alley Abandonment Procedures
   
93.070   Legislative intent
   
93.071   Authority
   
93.072   Procedure
   
93.073   Deposit of costs; fees non-returnable
   
93.074   Grounds for disapproval
   
93.075   Division of abandoned public way
   
93.076   Quitclaim deed
Trees
   
93.090   Certain trees prohibited
   
93.091   Tree guidelines
   
93.092   Definitions
   
93.093   Creation and establishment of City Tree Board
   
93.094   Term of office
   
93.095   Compensation
   
93.096   Duties and responsibilities
   
93.097   Operation
   
93.098   Tree species to be planted
   
93.099   City Arbor Day
   
93.100   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
93.101   Planning meetings
   
93.102   Review by the Council
 
   
93.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to lay off, open, close, vacate and maintain public
grounds, places and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (2)
   Authority to grant franchises for the use of streets and public places, see
Char. §
28, subsec. (57)
   Authority to grant permits for the temporary use of streets and public
places, see Char. §
28, subsec. (58)
   Authority to locate, construct, repair and the like, bridges, streets,
sidewalks, gutters and the like, and to keep them clean and free from
obstruction, see Char. §
28, subsec. (7)
   Authority to regulate the width of sidewalks and streets and abutting public
grounds and grass plots, and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (9)
Cross-reference:
   Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners, see §§
33.050 through
33.060
   Burning paper, refuse and the like in streets, see §
92.003
   Exhibiting stallion, jack or bull on streets and the like, see §
90.11
   Grades and elevations, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
   Loitering generally, see §
130.012
   Parking Authority, see §§
33.110 through
33.116
   Public Works Director, see §
32.19
   Spitting in public, see §
130.017
   Staking cows or other animals on streets or property of another, see §
90.10
   Street carnivals, parades or exhibitions, see §
130.018
   Vehicles and traffic generally, see Title VII
Statutory reference:
   Assessments by city to improve streets and sidewalks, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-
18-1 et seq.
   Authority of city to layoff, construct, repair and the like, streets,
sidewalks, gutters and the like, and to keep them free from obstructions and
the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(1) to (5)
   Authority of city to provide for the regulation and control, acquisition,
care, management and use of the city’s streets, alleys, ways and property, see
W.Va. Code § 8-12-2
   Low cost street and sidewalk improvements, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-17-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001  SEATING AT MOUNTAIN STATE FOREST FESTIVAL.
   (A)   The placing of chairs for viewing the Mountain State Forest Festival
scheduled parades shall, insofar as they are placed between the curb of any
street on the parade route and the property of any person abutting the parade
route, be placed only with the permission, direction and control of such
abutting property owner, subject only to the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Chairs shall be so placed as to leave the sidewalk abutting the parade
route clear and unobstructed for normal pedestrian traffic.
   (C)   Chairs shall not be placed in the traveled portion of any street.
   (D)   No person shall sell chairs or seating for any consideration for the
viewing of parades without written permission of the Council. Such permission
shall be for no longer than one year at a time. Sales of chairs and seating
shall be only by religious, charitable or non-profit organizations.
   (E)   By granting the right to place chairs or seating upon that portion of
the public street right-of-way adjacent to any abutting owner’s property, the
city shall assume no liability or responsibility for injuries of parade
spectators or users of the rights granted herein.
(1991 Code, § 18-1)  (Ord. passed 9-7-1972)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.002  HARMFUL OR OFFENSIVE MATTER.
   No person, except as authorized by this code or other ordinance, order or
regulation of the Mayor or Council, shall drop, place, throw or suffer to
remain or cause to be dropped, placed, thrown or suffered to remain upon any
street or other public place any glass, bottles, scrap-iron, nails, tacks,
paper or offensive matter of any kind.
(1991 Code, § 18-2)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.003  CONDUCTING TRADE OR BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall, without the consent of the Council, perform any work
of any character pertaining to his or her trade or business or the trade or
business of another, upon any public street, sidewalk, park or public square
within the city.
   (B)   No person, without the consent of the Council, shall at any time sell,
offer or expose for sale at public auction any goods, wares, merchandise or
property of any kind upon any street; except, that this requirement shall not
apply to officers of the law in making sales under the process of a court or in
discharge of their official duties.
(1991 Code, § 18-3)  Penalty, see §
93.999
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to regulate or prohibit auctioneering, and to license
or prohibit the sale of goods, wares and merchandise on the streets or other
public places, see Char. §
28, subsec. (16)
§ 93.004  ANIMALS OR BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall lead, ride or drive any horse or other animal, except
dogs, along or upon any of the sidewalks or footwalks.
   (B)   No person shall drive, ride, roll or wheel any bicycle upon or along
any sidewalk or footwalk; except, that persons may roll but not ride bicycles
along the sidewalks and footwalks, if careful not to interfere with
pedestrians.
(1991 Code, § 18-4)  Penalty, see §
93.999
Cross-reference:
   Operation of bicycles generally, see §§
73.20 through
73.33
§ 93.005  PLAYING, COASTING OR SKATING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No one shall engage in or play any game upon any sidewalk or footwalk
nor coast thereon with sleds or skateboards.
   (B)   Nor shall anyone, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises adjacent thereto, skate upon any such sidewalk or footwalk.
(1991 Code, § 18-5)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.006  DUTIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS AS TO SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each owner or occupant of any building or lot
which abuts upon any street upon which there is a brick, stone, concrete, board
or other type pavement or sidewalk to keep such pavement or sidewalk clean and
free from obstruction of every kind and, when necessary, such person shall
remove the snow and ice therefrom at least once each day and shall sweep such
pavement or sidewalk at least once each day; except, that it shall not be
necessary to sweep any such pavement or sidewalk on Sunday.
   (B)   It shall further be the duty of each owner and occupant of any
building or lot which abuts upon any street upon which there is a brick, stone,
concrete, board or other pavement or sidewalk to remove the dirt, paper,
sweepings and refuse of any kind therefrom, nor shall such owner or occupant
sweep or place any paper, sweepings, dirt, debris or any other refuse into the
city streets, but shall remove such sweepings from such pavement or sidewalk.
(1991 Code, § 18-6)  (Ord. passed 5-18-1950)  Penalty, see §
93.999
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the removal of ice and snow from
sidewalks, gutters, and the like by the owners or occupants of adjacent realty,
see Char. §
28, subsec. (9)
§ 93.007  OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   Enumerated. No person shall in any way obstruct any street, sidewalk,
public footwalk, public park or square or any other public place. Obstructions,
within the meaning of this section, shall include, but not be limited to, cut
or fallen trees within the bounds of a public road or walkway which interfere
with travel thereon; limbs of trees which have fallen or branches of trees
overhanging so as to interfere with travel thereon and use thereof; landslides;
carcasses of animals; lumber, wood or logs piled within the bounds of a public
right-of-way, park or square; machinery, vehicles, conveyances and implements
abandoned or habitually placed within the bounds of a public right-of-way, park
or square; fences, buildings or other obstructions within the bounds thereof;
ashes, cinders, earth, stone or other material placed thereon or in any ditch
or waterway along any such public right-of-way; water diverted from its regular
course so as to injure or endanger a public right-of-way; pipe lines,
telegraph, telephone or other poles and wires connected therewith constructed
or erected on a public right-of-way, public park or square which interfere with
the use thereof; or any other thing which will prevent the easy, safe and
convenient use of such public right-of-way, park or square.
   (B)   Prohibited; injunction. Such obstructions so placed and left within
the boundaries of any such public right-of-way, park or square are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and, in addition to other remedies provided by
this subchapter and other chapters of this code, the city may apply to the
Circuit Court of the county for an injunction to abate such nuisance.
   (C)   Obligation as to removal or repair.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of land situated
along any public right-of-way or abutting any public park or square to remove
all obstructions within the boundaries of such public right-of-way, park or
square which have been placed thereon by himself or herself or with his or her
consent.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of all telephone, telegraph or other power or
communication companies to remove and reset telephone, telegraph and other
poles and the wires connected therewith when such poles or wires constitute
obstructions to the use of a public right-of-way, park or square.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of all pipe line companies whose lines have
been laid across or along any public right-of-way, park or square for the
purpose of transporting natural gas, oil, water or other substance, to fill up
all excavations made thereby so that the surface or pavement overlying such
excavation is, in all respects, in as good condition as it was before the
excavation was made.
   (D)   Removal or repair by city.
      (1)   Notice. If such obstructions or poles, wires or pipe lines are not
removed or such poles and wires reset or such excavations are not properly
filled and maintained within ten days after the service of a notice by the city
upon any such owner or occupant requesting such correction to be made, the
Council, by its duly designated agent, shall cause such obstructions and such
poles, wires or pipe lines to be removed and reset or such repairs on the
excavations to be made, as may be necessary to return such pavements or
surfaces to their original condition.
      (2)   Costs. The Council shall assess the cost of removing obstructions
and removing and resetting piles and wires, or such repairs as are necessary to
faulty excavations pursuant to this section, against any owner, occupant,
company or corporation neglecting to perform its duty imposed by the provisions
of this section. The Council shall cause to be served upon such owner, occupant
or company a written notice stating that, at the time and place specified
therein, the Council proposes to assess such cost against such owner, occupant
or company neglecting to perform such duty. Such notice shall be served at
least ten days prior to the time specified therein. If directed against a
corporation, such notice may be served as other notices or processes are served
under W.Va. Code Ch. 56. At the time and place specified, the Council shall
hear the parties interested and shall thereupon complete the assessment, as
provided by W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 18.
(1991 Code, § 18-7)  (Ord. passed 3-3-1959; Ord. passed 3-19-1959)  Penalty,
see §
93.999
§ 93.008  OPENINGS IN SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall, without the consent of the Council, build any cellar door,
window way, coal hole or other opening of any kind into or through any sidewalk
or footwalk; and where any such way, hole or opening exists in any sidewalk or
footway with the consent of the Council. Such opening shall never, under any
circumstances, be left open so that pedestrians might fall therein, nor shall
it at any time be opened if there is danger of pedestrians falling therein,
unless someone is stationed to warn pedestrians of the danger during the time
such aperture is open.
(1991 Code, § 18-8)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.009  GUTTERING OF PORCHES AND BALCONIES.
   It shall be the duty of every person who owns property upon which there is a
house or other building which has a porch or balcony which protrudes or extends
over the street or sidewalk to have such porch or balcony properly spouted or
equipped with gutters; and if the owner fails or refuses to properly spout such
porch or balcony within ten days after being duly notified so to do, he or she
shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by §
93.999.
(1991 Code, § 18-9)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.010  MATTERS INCIDENTAL TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS; CONNECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Whenever the city shall determine to permanently pave or improve any
street, 30 days before the paving shall be begun, property owners having gas,
water, sewer or other lines or conduits in the street where the paving is to be
done shall connect or have their property connected with such lines and
conduits, and where such connections have already been made, all property
owners shall have examined or examine and test the connections thoroughly, and
renew or repair them wherever such renewal or repair is deemed necessary by the
Public Works Director, and put them in good order and condition; and, at least
two feet below the surface, all the way from the mains to the inner side of the
curb line and where deemed necessary by the Public Works Director, shall fit
the pipe with the new valves, cut-offs, and the like of the weight, thickness,
diameter and style prescribed by the Public Works Director. These connections
shall be of such size and according to such regulations as are prescribed by
the Council or the Public Works Director and shall extend from the respective
lines to a point beyond the curb line.
   (B)   One such connection shall be made in front of every lot abutting on
the proposed permanent pavement or improvement and, in the business section of
the city, such connections shall be spaced more closely as directed by the
Council or Public Works Director, but such connections shall be no less than 25
feet apart. Where a permanent improvement is to be made along the side of any
corner lot, such connection shall be made as may be required by the Council or
Public Works Director upon notice. Where a permanent pavement or improvement is
to be made along vacant land not laid off into lots, the connections shall be
made at intervals of 40 feet; provided, that in such cases where the Council is
satisfied that there is no probability of the land being laid off into lots in
the future, the connections may be more distantly spaced.
(1991 Code, § 18-11)
§ 93.011  MATTERS INCIDENTAL TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS; NOTICE TO MAKE
CONNECTIONS; FAILURE TO MAKE CONNECTIONS.
   Notice to property owners to make connections with gas, water, sewer or
other lines and conduits prior to the construction of permanent pavements or
improvements may be made by service of notice upon the respective property
owners or may be given by publication, in a newspaper published in the city,
for two successive weeks, designating therein the streets along which the
permanent improvements are to be made and if, after giving such notice, the
property owner fails to install such connections within 30 days after notice is
served or within 30 days after the first issue of notice appears in such
newspaper, the city may put in the necessary connections, and the expense
thereof shall be assessed against the abutting property and the owners thereof
and placed in the hands of the City Collector and Treasurer for collection, and
such expenses may be collected, with interest, as are taxes, and the costs
shall be a lien upon such abutting property; provided, that the failure of the
city to give notice in either form shall not release the property owners from
the obligation of putting in connections prior to the construction of a
permanent pavement or improvement. In no event shall any property owner be
permitted to connect with or use any connections until the cost thereof has
been paid to the city; but this last provision shall not release any property
owner from the payment of the costs thereof even if he or she does not use such
connection.
(1991 Code, § 18-12)
§ 93.012  PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS REQUESTED BY PETITION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   All permanent improvements to streets, roads or alleys
requested by petition of persons owning property abutting such streets, roads
or alleys shall be made in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by
the city.
         (b)   Such plans and specifications shall provide for adequate grading
and drainage, including the construction of curbs and gutters in such cases as
curbs and gutters are deemed necessary to properly preserve and protect the
paving or surfacing improvements so made.
      (2)   In those cases where curbs and gutters are not deemed necessary to
properly preserve or protect the paving and surface improvements contemplated,
the city may construct said improvements, as herein provided, without curbs and
gutters, and shall thereafter maintain said improvements, pursuant to division
(C) below.
   (B)   In the event that the petition for improvements is directed only to
the paving or surfacing of the streets, roads or alleys and does not request
curbs, gutters or related improvements, and the plans and specifications for
the project require the construction of curbs, gutters or related improvements,
then the city will so advise the petitioners. If the petitioners agree that
these related improvements are necessary and are willing to pay for the same,
then petitioners will submit an amended petition requesting the city to
construct such curbs, gutters or related improvements as are necessary;
thereafter, the city will make the improvements requested by the petition or
amended petition.
   (C)   Where the permanent improvements are made by the city in accordance
with division (B) above, the city will bear the expense of resurfacing such
street, road or alley in the future when such resurfacing becomes necessary.
   (D)   In the event that the petition for surfacing or paving improvements
does not request any improvements other than the actual surfacing or paving of
any street, road or alley, and in the event that is determined by the city that
curbs, gutters or related improvements are necessary to preserve and protect
the surfacing or paving so requested and the petitioners, being so advised,
refuse to submit an amended petition as set forth in division (B) above and
decline to agree to bear the expense of such improvements, then the city will
proceed to make the improvements only as requested by the petition.
   (E)   Where improvements are made in accordance with division (D) above, the
city shall not bear the expense of resurfacing or repaving the street, road or
alley so improved at such time as such resurfacing or repaving might become
necessary.
   (F)   Any of the foregoing provisions notwithstanding, the city will
continue to perform ordinary and routine maintenance of all streets, roads and
alleys within the city.
   (G)   This section applies only to petitions for the surfacing or paving of
those streets, roads or alleys which heretofore have not been permanently
improved by surfacing or paving with asphalt or concrete.
(1991 Code, § 18-12.1)  (Ord. passed 5-18-1978; Ord. 006, passed 9-4-2003)
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS
§ 93.025  OBLIGATION OF OWNER; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all persons owning land or lots which front
upon a street which is maintained and kept by the city to put down and keep in
good repair a suitable sidewalk or footwalk along the entire part of such land
or lot which fronts upon any such street.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Council, it has become necessary, the
property owner shall repave the sidewalk, in such a manner, of such width and
of such suitable material as the Council shall direct; provided, that before
any permanent sidewalk or footwalk is laid, it shall be the duty of the Public
Works Director to fix the grade thereof, and such sidewalk shall be laid in
conformity to such grade; and should the city, after the walk is laid, change
the grade, the cost of laying a new walk to conform to such changed grade shall
be paid by the city, as well as all damages the owner of the land or lot may
sustain by reason of such change of grade.
   (C)   The Public Works Director, after establishing of the grade of any such
walk shall report to the Council at the next regular meeting or sooner, if the
Council shall so require, what is necessary for the protection and preservation
of such walks to be laid in pursuance of this subchapter; and the Council,
having made such provision for the protection and preservation of the walks as
it deems necessary and proper, may thereupon direct that such walks be laid.
(1991 Code, § 18-13)  (Ord. 097-03, passed 3-26-1997)
Charter reference:
   Authority of city to construct and maintain sidewalks and to assess owners
of abutting realty therefor; manner of construction and the like, see Char. §
28, subsecs. (68), (70) through (74) and (77) through (84)
   Authority of Council to regulate the width of sidewalks, grass plots,
gutters and the like and to order that sidewalks and gutters be paved and kept
in good order and repair by the owners and occupants of adjacent realty, see
Char. §
28, subsec. (9)
   Nonliability of the city for damages for injury to persons or property
caused by defects and the like, in the ground between the gutter or curb and
the edge of sidewalks, unless city had notice thereof, see Char. §
28, subsec. (7)
Statutory reference:
   Assessments by city to improve streets and sidewalks, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-
18-1 et seq.
   Low cost street and sidewalk improvements, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-17-1 et seq.
§ 93.026  OBLIGATION OF OWNER; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   Notice; authority of city. If at any time any sidewalk or footwalk
needs repair, or if any land or lot owner fails to build such walk or repave
any walk when repaving, in the opinion of the Council, has become necessary, it
shall be the duty of the Mayor to cause the owner of the land or lot adjacent
thereto to be notified in writing of such need of laying or repair of the walk
and of the character of repaving needed to be done and, if such repairs are not
made by the land or lot owner within ten days after the service of such notice
or if such new walk is not laid or repaving done within 30 days after the
service of such notice, the Council shall then have the power and authority to
repair or repave any such sidewalk or footwalk.
   (B)   Alternate arrangements. The Council shall have the authority and it
shall be within it sole discretion whether to repair or repave such walk by
force account or by contract.
      (1)   Force account. If the Council elects to repair or repave the walk
by force account, it shall keep an accurate account of the labor and materials
used in making such repairs or repavement, which statement of costs shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk.
      (2)   Contract. If the Council determines to repair or repave by
contract, the Council shall advertise for bids by publication in one of the
newspapers of the city once a week for not more than two weeks, and all
contracts let in pursuant of such advertisement shall be to the lowest
responsible bidder; but nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Council rejecting any and all bids made in pursuant of such advertisement.
   (C)   Costs. After any sidewalk is repaired, constructed or repaved in
pursuance of the power herein granted, the cost thereof shall be paid out of
the city treasury in the first instance and the Council, after allowing such
costs, shall lay an assessment against the lot benefitted thereby, with a
penalty of an amount set forth by Council from time to time added, and this
assessment shall be placed in the hands of the City Collector and Treasurer, to
be collected by him or her from such land or lot owner as city taxes are
collected; and the cost of such work shall be a lien against such land or lot
abutting on such walkway, taking priority over all other liens, except taxes,
and shall be enforced as city taxes and assessments are enforced against real
estate, or by other appropriate procedure.
   (D)   Fines. If the owner of any such land or lot, after having been given
notice by the Mayor, as herein provided, to lay, repave or repair said sidewalk
shall fail to do so within the time as herein provided, the Mayor may cause any
such land or lot owner to be summoned before the Municipal Court Judge to show
cause why a fine should not be imposed for such failure to repair, repave or
construct the sidewalk as herein provided.
   (E)   Service of notices to nonresidents. If the owner of any such land or
lot is not a resident of the city, the notice to him or her required by this
regulation may be served upon him or her as notices are served under the laws
of this state.
(1991 Code, § 18-14)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.027  LIABILITY OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to relieve the adjacent
property owner from liability for personal injury or property damage sustained
by any person on account of any sidewalk becoming out of repair, and it shall
be the duty of the property owner to keep the sidewalk adjacent to his or her
property repaired, in good order, free and clean and, in case any damage is
sustained by the city or recovered against it on account of such sidewalk not
being kept repaired, in good order, free and clean, the damages, including
costs and expenses, shall be recoverable by the city from the adjacent property
and the owner thereof. In case any suit is brought against the city by any
person on account of any sidewalk being out of repair, it shall be the duty of
the Mayor to notify the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk where
the accident on which such suit is based is alleged to have occurred, and such
property owner shall have the right to employ counsel and to come in and defend
the suit if he or she so desires; provided, that the provision for the giving
out of notice by the Mayor is only directory, and shall not preclude the right
of the city to recover as aforesaid from the property owner, although such
notice is not given.
(1991 Code, § 18-15)
§ 93.028  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   No permanent sidewalk or footwalk shall be constructed within the city by
any person unless it conforms to the specifications therefor on file in the
office of the Mayor of the city; provided, that under special circumstances the
Council may, by an order entered of record, specify any change or variation
from such specifications. All permanent sidewalks or footwalks built by the
city, where the owners have failed to construct them, shall be built in
accordance with those specifications; but if any variation is made in the
construction of such sidewalks by the city, such variation shall not deprive
the city of its right to recover the cost of the construction of the sidewalk,
and such variation in the specifications shall be deemed to have been made
under the authority of the Council if the sidewalks, after being so
constructed, are accepted from the contractor by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 18-16)
§ 93.029  PERMIT; FORM.
   Prior to the construction of any sidewalk outside the property lines of any
street in the city, there shall be secured from the City Clerk a sidewalk
permit, made out in substantially the following form:
 
ORIGINAL.
Sidewalk Permit
No. _____________   Elkins, W. Va., ________________ 20_____________
   PERMIT is hereby issued to ___________________ owner and __________________
contractor, subject to the ordinances of the City of Elkins, West Va., and the
approval of the Public Works Director, to construct a concrete sidewalk
____________ feet in width, and ____________ feet in length, in front of Lot
____________, Block ____________, of ____________ Subdivision, abutting and
fronting on ____________ Street, Avenue, in the City of Elkins, West Va.
   Sidewalk to be built to conform to the lines, grades and specifications of the
City of Elkins, West Va., and subject to the inspection and approval of the Public
Works Director.
   This permit to be void upon the date of the advertisement of the lot or lots
herein specified for public letting, providing the actual work of placing concrete
walk shall not have been begun on that date.
 
      ___________________________ City Clerk.
      Elkins, W. Va., ________________ 20_____________
   The walk in front of Lot ____________, Block ____________, of ____________
Subdivision,  abutting and fronting on ____________ Street, Avenue, in the City of
Elkins, West Va., conforms to the lines and grades given by this office and are,
to the best of my information, constructed in accordance with the City
specifications.
   Grade and Line given __________________
Inspected ____________      ____________ Public Works Director
Page ____________ Sidewalk Record.
 
(1991 Code, § 18-17)
§ 93.030  PERMIT; REQUIRED; FEE.
   The permit fees shall be as set forth by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 18-18)
§ 93.031  PERMIT; DETERMINATION OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   Forty-eight hours previous to the construction, repair or opening of any
sidewalk, a notice shall be given the Public Works Director in order that the
proper lines and grades may be established. No sidewalk shall be constructed,
repaired or opened unless the lines and grades are either determined by or
subjected to the inspection or supervision of the Public Works Director, as he
or she may direct.
(1991 Code, § 18-19)
§ 93.032  PERMIT; DETERMINATION OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR; APPROVAL;
CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Upon the completion of the construction, repair or opening of the
sidewalk, such permit shall be approved by the Public Works Director and, at
the same time, a certificate shall be given, governing the amount of work done
in the construction, repair or opening of such sidewalk, if desired by the
property owner or the contractor.
   (B)   The certificate given shall be in substantially the following form:
 
Dist. No. _____________   Elkins, W. Va., ________________ 20_____________
   THIS IS TO CERTIFY, that the sidewalk on the ___________________ Street,
Avenue, frontage of ___________________ of Lot No ___________________ Block No.
___________________ owned ___________________ by ___________________ was finished
________________ 20____________, by _________________, under contract dated
________________ 20____________, in accordance with the specifications of the
City of Elkins and under my supervision and inspection. The walk is_______ feet
in length and ________ feet in width, and contains ___________ square feet,
which, at the contract price of ______________ cents per square foot, amounts to
$_________________. I hereby accept the walk subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Council of the City of Elkins.
   Extra:  _______________________________________
          _______________________________________
   Public Works Director.
   THIS IS TO CERTIFY, That the excavation or embankment has been measured and
calculated on the above described walk and found that there is due the contractor
for excess excavation or embankment as follows:
Cubic yards Excavation at ________________ per cubic yard, $________________
Cubic yards Embankment at ________________ per cubic yard, $________________
Cubic yards Rock at ________________ per cubic yard, $________________
Total cost of improvement, $________________
   ________________ Public Works Director.
   Recorded in the office of the City Clerk of Elkins, West Virginia, in Sidewalk
Record Book ________________ Page ________________
(Public Works Director’s Note Book ________________ Page ________________)
 
(1991 Code, § 18-20)
§ 93.033  RECORD OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.
   A record of the sidewalk permits and certificates of work done shall be kept
in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the Public Works Director,
for inspection at all times. At the time of the determination of the grades and
lines such determinations shall be fully described and set forth by the Public
Works Director and entered in a record kept for that purpose.
(1991 Code, § 18-21)
§ 93.034  APPLICATIONS TO HAVE SIDEWALK GRADES AND LINES ESTABLISHED.
   Any citizen desiring that sidewalk or other grades and lines be established
shall make application, in writing, to the Council, on a form to be determined
by the Public Works Director and, should the Council see fit to establish the
grade and lines requested, the application shall be referred to the Public
Works Director, with instructions to establish such grades and lines and to
make report back to the Council, in writing, on the back of the application,
giving the grades and lines as established upon true meridian and elevation
above sea level, as established by the United States geological survey.
(1991 Code, § 18-22)
Cross-reference:
   Grades and elevations generally, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
EXCAVATIONS
§ 93.045  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into or otherwise damage or
excavate any street, sidewalk or public place within the city for the purpose
of connecting property with water, sewer or gas lines thereunder or for any
other purpose, except pursuant to a permit as provided by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 18-23)  Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to provide for the opening and excavation of streets,
sidewalks and public places belonging to the city, and to regulate the
conditions under which such openings may be made, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(2)
§ 93.046  EXCAVATIONS NEAR STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall, without a permit so to do and except in compliance with all
provisions of this subchapter, make any excavation whatever upon or within ten
feet of any street, sidewalk, footwalk, public park or square; nor shall
excavation of any kind be made upon the land of another without his or her
consent; and any person making an excavation within ten feet of any street,
sidewalk or footwalk shall keep such sidewalk or footwalk so protected that
persons and property cannot fall therein, except by breaking through proper and
sufficient guard rails or other adequate protection.
(1991 Code, § 18-24)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.047  PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring, for any purpose, to cut, open or otherwise
excavate any street, sidewalk or public place, paved or unpaved, in the city
shall apply to the Public Works Director for a permit so to do.
   (B)   The application shall be in form as prescribed by the Public Works
Director and shall contain such pertinent information as may be required by him
or her including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The purpose of the proposed excavation;
      (2)   The site at which the work is to be done;
      (3)   The date work is to begin and the expected duration of the work;
and
      (4)   The name and address of the person for whose benefit the proposed
work is to be done and who shall be responsible for all required safeguards,
the diligent prosecution of the work, the restoration of the surface, the
payment of all expenses incurred and the compliance with all requirements of
this subchapter.
   (C)   The application shall be signed by such person responsible or by
someone authorized by him or her or by the plumber or other contractor employed
by him or her to do the work.
(1991 Code, § 18-25)
§ 93.048  PERMIT; PREREQUISITES; SURETY.
   (A)   No excavation permit shall be granted, unless it appears, to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director, that the excavation is necessary to
the health, safety or welfare of the person upon whose behalf the excavation is
to be made; and the connection of property to a water, sewer or gas main shall
be deemed sufficient under this section.
   (B)   No excavation permit shall be granted until the applicant therefor or
someone on his or her behalf has made a cash deposit or given bond to the city
in such amount as may be deemed by the Public Works Director sufficient to
cover the cost of safeguards, disposal of excavated dirt and the like, and
restoration of the surface of the place of excavation so as to place it in as
good a condition as it was in prior to the making of the excavation. Each such
bond shall be payable to the city, shall have corporate surety, shall be
approved by the City Attorney and shall be conditioned that the work be
diligently and skillfully prosecuted, barring unforeseeable circumstances
beyond control of the person doing the work, that all necessary safeguards be
maintained, that all excavated materials not required for refill be disposed of
as provided by this subchapter, that the surface of the place of excavation and
not less than ten feet in all directions from the outer perimeter thereof be
placed in as good condition as it was in immediately prior to the commencement
of the work and to the reasonable satisfaction of the Public Works Director
that all requirements of this subchapter shall be complied with, and that any
defective work which appears within five years from the date of acceptance of
the restoration by the Public Works Director shall be subject to repair by the
city at the expense of the permit holder.
(1991 Code, § 18-26)
§ 93.049  COMPANIES OPERATING UNDER CITY FRANCHISE.
   Any gas, water or other company, operating under a franchise from the city
and which, in the course of its business and the exercise of its franchise
rights, finds it necessary to tear up the streets and such sidewalks, at
numerous locations shall not be required in such cases to make the deposit
herein required; but immediately upon the tearing up of any street or
sidewalks, such company shall notify the Public Works Director, and shall
repair the surface to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director and shall
in all other respects comply with the provisions of this subchapter; and, in
the case of failure on the part of any such company to comply therewith, the
Public Works Director shall repair the site of the excavation and the company
shall immediately pay the cost thereof and shall be subject to fine for failure
to comply; provided, that where any location is torn up by any company and the
provisions of this subchapter are not complied with, in addition to the
liability of the company itself, the individuals actually tearing up the street
or sidewalk or the person failing to carry out the provisions of this
subchapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by §
93.999.
(1991 Code, § 18-27)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.050  MANNER OF WORK; RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
   Any person making an excavation shall do the work carefully and
professionally and shall diligently prosecute such work to completion without
undue delay. Materials used and methods employed in filling, tamping and
closing excavations and in restoring the surface shall comply with all
requirements of the Public Works Director.
(1991 Code, § 18-28)
§ 93.051  REQUIRED SAFEGUARDS; FOOTBRIDGES.
   All excavation sites shall be provided with all necessary safety devices to
protect persons and animals from falling into ditches or pits. Such devices
shall include, inter alia, warning signs, lamps and barricades; and, where
practicable, secure planking for pedestrians to cross upon, which shall be well
lighted, the entire way, between sunset and sunrise.
(1991 Code, § 18-29)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.052  BRIDGES OVER EXCAVATIONS IN ROADWAYS.
   Between sunset and sunrise, upon bridges for maintaining traffic over
excavations, the roadway shall be indicated by a sufficient number of lights so
as to clearly identify the course of the roadway and the edges thereof; and the
edges of the bridge itself shall be indicated by red lights or flares.
(1991 Code, § 18-30)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.053  SAFEGUARDS RELATING TO SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS.
   All persons causing any excavations to be made for sidewalks shall have the
place of excavation properly graded and protected and shall properly barricade
such place for the protection of the public. Whenever necessary, they shall, at
their own expense, properly erect masonry or steel construction or a retaining
wall sufficient to properly support the adjoining earth. Such retaining wall
shall be properly coped or provided with an iron railing to guarantee safety to
the public.
(1991 Code, § 18-31)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.054  HANDLING, CONVEYANCE AND DISPOSITION OF DIRT.
   (A)   No person engaged in excavating or having charge or control of
excavation or who may be engaged in or may have charge or control of conveying
material from excavations shall deposit or permit to be deposited, in any
manner, upon the surface of a sidewalk or any paved street or other public
place, by placing, spilling, dropping or tracking from wheels of vehicles or
from the feet of animals, any earth, clay, mud, sand, gravel or other excavated
material; and all such sidewalks, streets and public places adjacent to
excavations or traversed by vehicles in the process of conveying material from
such excavation or in returning from the place of deposit to the place of
excavation, shall be covered with planking so far as may be required to prevent
any mud, earth, clay or other material from the excavation or from the place of
deposit from reaching the surface of such roadway.
   (B)   The excavations referred to in this section include those made on
private as well as public property.
(1991 Code, § 18-32)  Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.055  STATE PERMIT.
   No permit shall be granted under this subchapter to excavate within any
street or right-of-way which is a part of the state highway system except upon
display to the engineer of a permit so to do, issued by a competent authority
of the state.
(1991 Code, § 18-33)
STREET AND ALLEY ABANDONMENT PROCEDURES
§ 93.070  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   Council finds and declares that within the city there are one or more
streets, alleys and public rights- of-way that have not, do not or will not in
the future serve any public purpose; that exist only by means of appearance on
plats or maps of sections of the city; that it would be in the best interest of
the city to abandon and vacate such streets, alleys and public rights-of-way,
thereby absolving any actual or contingent liability; and that would otherwise
permit more appropriate land use within the city thereby promoting orderly
development of the city.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.071  AUTHORITY.
   Council, pursuant to the authority granted it by the Charter and the West
Virginia Code, reserves the right to close, abandon, discontinue for public use
any part or all of any street, alley, land, road or other designated travel way
presently owned by or dedicated to the city.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.072  PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any landowner whose land abuts on any street, alley, lane, road or
other designated travel way seeking to close, abandon, discontinue for public
use any part or all of such right-of-way shall file with the City Clerk:
      (1)   A petition to Council;
      (2)   The petition shall be accompanied by an engineer’s or surveyor’s
map of such right-of-way together with abutting property owners; and
      (3)   A list of all owners of property abutting on such right-of-way.
   (B)   Before acting to close, abandon, discontinue for public use any part
or all of such right-of-way, the Council shall accept the petition and refer it
to Street Committee to fix a time and place for a public hearing on the
petition. Such public hearing shall be held not less that 15 days after the
date and place have been so fixed. The Street Committee shall cause notice of
the time and place of such hearing and the purpose thereof to be published as a
Class I legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code
Art. 59-3. The notice shall be published at least 15 days before such hearing.
The applicant shall cause to be served, at least 15 days before such hearing,
in the manner provided by law for the service of notices and process a notice
showing the time, place and purpose of such hearing, upon every owner of
property, and every person holding a lien thereon, abutting such street, alley,
lane, road or other designated travel way. The affidavit of publication of such
notice shall be filed with the Street Committee at or before the hearing as
part of the record in the proceedings. After considering the evidence presented
at the public hearing, as well as any other documented evidence which may come
before the Street Committee, the Committee shall report its recommendations to
Council at the next Council meeting. The recommendations of the Street
Committee to Council may include a recommendation as to a value to be placed on
the right-of-way or portion thereof to be considered for abandonment.
   (C) Upon receipt of the Street Committee’s recommendations, Council shall
direct the preparation of an ordinance in the manner prescribed by law. Council
shall then vote on passage or rejection of the ordinance by a simple majority
vote of the members present at a regular or special meeting at which a quorum
is present.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.073  DEPOSIT OF COSTS; FEES NON-RETURNABLE.
   The landowner shall deposit an amount set forth by Council from time to time
at the time of the filing of the petition for each quitclaim deed to cover the
administrative cost, cost of legal publication, the cost of preparation of the
deed, and recordation thereof. No part of the filing fee paid pursuant to this
section shall be returnable to the landowner or petitioner.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.074  GROUNDS FOR DISAPPROVAL.
   Council will not approve an abandonment or vacation of any street, alley or
public way under the following conditions:
   (A)   If the street, alley or public way serves or is expected to serve any
public purpose;
   (B)   If any person or property, not consenting to such vacation or
abandonment, is found to suffer special damage; and
   (C)   If the vacation or abandonment unreasonably impedes the flow of
traffic.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.075  DIVISION OF ABANDONED PUBLIC WAY.
   Unless otherwise agreed by the owners of the property abutting thereon, the
street, alley or public way shall be divided along the centerline, and each
abutting property owner taking such portion thereof to the centerline.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.076  QUITCLAIM DEED.
   The ordinance vacating and abandoning the street, alley or public way shall
provide that the Mayor execute and deliver to the proper party a quitclaim deed
for that portion of the street, alley or public way to go to such property
owner. Any such quitclaim deed shall reserve all necessary water, sewer and
other utility easements.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
TREES
§ 93.090  CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or maintain upon his or
her property or upon any street adjoining thereto any tree commonly known as
the North Carolina poplar or any other shade tree which, by its nature, will
tend to plug up or damage sewers, sidewalks, streets or other property.
   (B)   If any such tree be planted after the effective date of this code, it
shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Streets to immediately cut down and
destroy it, provided, that if the Superintendent of Streets does not have
personal knowledge that such tree has been planted since that time, a notice
and proceeding, shall be had before the Council; and, if it be ascertained by
the Council that such tree was planted since the effective date of this code
then such tree shall be declared a nuisance and the owner required to abate the
nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 18-10)  Penalty, see §
93.999
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to declare as public nuisances any trees, shrubbery and
the like growing on private property within the city, the roots of which clog
or choke any public sewer belonging to the city, or damage the streets or
sidewalks of the city, and provide for the removal or destruction of such trees
or shrubbery, see Char. §
28, subsec. (4)
   Authority to regulate the planting, trimming and the like of shade trees and
ornamental shrubbery and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (3)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the protection of shade and ornamental
trees, whether on public or private property, and for the removal of limbs of
trees when in a dangerous condition, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(29)
§ 93.091  TREE GUIDELINES.
   In accordance with a request made by the Elkins Main Street Project, the
city, by committee appointed by the Mayor, shall ensure that the following
guidelines are adhered to with respect to trees in the downtown:
   (A)   Flowering trees shall receive pruning;
   (B)   Application of organic fertilizer shall occur in spring and early
fall;
   (C)   Girdling of trees shall be prohibited and particular care shall be
taken in circumstances where guy wire maintenance is required;
   (D)   Mulching in spring shall occur;
   (E)   Tree areas shall be maintained weed free;
   (F)   Regular maintenance shall occur, including observation for insect
infestation and disease or fungus; and
   (G)   Necessary watering shall occur in times of drought and close
monitoring of water situation shall occur in the first three years after a tree
is planted.
(Ord. passed 3-4-1993)
§ 93.092  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELKINS TREE BOARD. The body which advises the city on matters affecting the
urban forest.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elkins, Randolph County, West Virginia.
   PARK. Includes all public parks, the ownership and control of which as
vested in the city.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person owning designated property as shown by the County
Assessor’s plat of the City of Elkins, as the case may be.
   PUBLIC PLACES. Includes all public rights-of-way owned by the City of
Elkins, Randolph County.
   PUBLIC TREES. All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any
street or any public right-of-way or grounds owned or controlled by the city.
   REMOVE. The cutting down, damaging or taking of public trees.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right for the
purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and extending from the property
line to property line.
   TREE ARBORIST. The person within the committee who provides technical
expertise and advice to the City Tree Board.
   URBAN FOREST. All trees located on city-owned or controlled property.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.093  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREE BOARD.
   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the city of
which will consist of no less than four and no more than six members, who are
citizens and residents of the county recommended by the City Tree Board, and
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The
members will come from different interest groups including, but not limited to,
homeowners, tree professionals and Council. One of the members of the City Tree
Board shall be a member of Council.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.094  TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of the persons to be appointed will be three years. The term of two
members appointed to the first Board will be only one year and the term of two
members of the first Board shall be for two years. Following the terms of the
members of the first Board, the terms shall be three years. In the event that a
vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor may be appointed
for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may serve consecutive terms
without restriction. Any member who is unable or unwilling to serve on the Tree
Board may be dismissed by the Board, due to continual or consecutive absences,
by a majority vote of members present at any meeting. Replacement of any member
who is dismissed shall be done in the same manner as provided for herein.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.095  COMPENSATION.
   Members of Board will serve without compensation.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.096  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It will be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and administer a written plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in
parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to
the Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the
official comprehensive city tree plan. Any changes to the city tree plan shall
be presented to Council for its consideration.
   (B)   The Board will promote and supervise the establishment of a tree
inventory for public trees. The inventory should be updated as often as
practicable.
   (C)   The Board shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and
recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its
work. The Board shall report the results of its investigations to Council
within a reasonable time.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.097  OPERATION.
   The Board will choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations,
and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members will be a
quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.098  TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   The City Tree Board will develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for
planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small;
medium; and large. Efforts will be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of
tree species. A list of trees not suitable for planting will also be created by
the Tree Board. All species of trees to be planted on public property shall be
made known to the Tree Board.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.099  CITY ARBOR DAY.
   The City Tree Board will specify a “City Arbor Day”, to be determined
annually by the Tree Board, and approved by the Council.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.100  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city will have the right to request the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute
a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a
potential threat to other trees within the city.
   (B)   The City Tree Board will notify in writing the owners of such trees.
   (C)   In the event that the private property owner takes no action following
the notification, the city may, with the approval of Council, proceed to take
further action if determined to be warranted to protect life and property.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.101  PLANNING MEETINGS.
   (A)   Property owners, business owners and neighborhood associations are
encouraged to attend planning meetings with the Tree Board.
   (B)   Citizens should be welcome to help plan with the Tree Board before
planting, pruning or tree removal programs being.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.102  REVIEW BY THE COUNCIL.
   The Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and plans of
the City Tree Board. The City Tree Board shall file an annual report of its
actions with Council on or before December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   For any violation of §
93.006, such violator shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
(1991 Code, § 18-6)
   (C)   If any obstruction is not removed by the person responsible therefor
causing it within ten days after written notice so to do, as provided in §
93.007, the person causing the obstruction shall, upon conviction of such
violation of §
93.007, be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or be
imprisoned for not more than ten days, or be punished by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day such noncompliance with the provisions of §
93.007 is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 18-7)
   (D)   For every day such land or lot owner fails to repair, repave or
construct such sidewalk as provided in §
93.026, after being summoned before the Municipal Court Judge, as aforesaid, he
or she shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 18-14)
(Ord. passed 5-18-1950; Ord. passed 3-3-1959; Ord. passed 3-19-1959)
TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES, REGULATIONS AND TAXES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
      
113.   FARMERS’ MARKET
      
114.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSES, REGULATIONS AND TAXES
Section
Licenses Generally
   
110.001   Required; compliance with chapter
   
110.002   Issuance; payment of tax
   
110.003   Record, collection
   
110.004   Multiple requirement
   
110.005   Term; minimum tax
   
110.006   Exhibition
   
110.007   Limitations to privilege
   
110.008   Effect of change in partners or name of firm
   
110.009   Issuance of duplicate; fee
   
110.010   False statements
   
110.011   Unlawful acts
   
110.012   Confidentiality of statements
   
110.013   Issuance of other licenses
   
110.014   Definitions
Permits and Fees
   
110.025   Owning and operating coin-operated merchandise, service, music and
amusement devices or vending machines
   
110.026   Coin-operated laundries, coin-operated auto wash and other coin-
operated cleaning devices
   
110.027   Circuses, carnivals and other itinerant public shows; generally
   
110.028   Circuses, carnivals and other itinerant public shows; filing with
City Collector and Treasurer of list of all rides and concessions; bond for
municipal taxes
   
110.029   Trading stamps
   
110.030   Fortune-telling, mind reading and the like
   
110.031   Wholesale or subjobber dealers in cigarettes
   
110.032   Junk dealers and their agents
   
110.033   Hawkers and peddlers
   
110.034   Pawnbrokers
   
110.035   Theaters and other permanent places for public shows
   
110.036   Collection agencies
   
110.037   Employment agents
   
110.038   Bowling lanes and billiard, pool or bagatelle tables
   
110.039   Business registration certificate required
   
110.040   Itinerant vendors
   
110.041   Yard sales
   
110.042   City business license fee
Business and Occupation Tax
   
110.055   Short title
   
110.056   Purpose and intent
   
110.057   Definitions
   
110.058   Imposition of tax
   
110.059   Natural resource production
   
110.060   Selling tangible property
   
110.061   Public service or utility business
   
110.062   Contracting
   
110.063   Amusements
   
110.064   Service business or calling not otherwise classified
   
110.065   Rentals and royalties
   
110.066   Banking and other financial businesses
   
110.067   Health maintenance organizations
   
110.068   Additional credits
   
110.069   Exempt activities
   
110.070   Tax cumulative
   
110.071   Administration generally
   
110.072   Returns; computation and payment of tax
   
110.073   Taxpayer records
   
110.074   Tax return information confidentiality
   
110.075   Erroneous computation of tax
   
110.076   Investigations
   
110.077   Assessments
   
110.078   Notice of assessment; petition for reassessment
   
110.079   Hearing procedure; decision; review
   
110.080   Injunction
   
110.081   Unpaid tax a lien; delinquency notice filing and release
   
110.082   Successor liability
   
110.083   Revocation, non-renewal of licenses and permits
   
110.084   Settlement agreements and compromises
   
110.085   Additional administrative provisions concerning contracting
   
110.086   Claims for refund or credit
   
110.087   Interest and penalty
   
110.088   Effective date
   
110.089   Publication
Municipal Sales and Use Tax
   
110.100   Council findings
   
110.101   Definitions
   
110.102   Imposition of municipal sales and service tax
   
110.103   Imposition of municipal use tax
   
110.104   Calculation of tax on fractional parts of dollar
   
110.105   State and local tax bases
   
110.106   Exceptions
   
110.107   Credit against municipal use tax
   
110.108   Tax cumulative
   
110.109   Local rate and boundary data base; changes
   
110.110   State level administration
   
110.111   Administrative procedures
   
110.112   Criminal penalties
   
110.113   Automatic updating
   
110.114   Deposit of taxes collected in General Revenue Fund
   
110.115   Effective date
   
110.116   Notification of Tax Commissioner
 
   
110.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority to require license for certain purposes and to impose tax on such
licenses, see Char. §
28,  subsecs. (13), (15), (16), (17), (19) and (46)
   Council shall prescribe the time and manner in which licenses shall be
granted, and shall require payment of tax thereon before delivery of license,
see Char. §
35
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose business and occupation tax on businesses and
occupations taxed by the state, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5, as modified by W.Va.
Code § 11-13-25
   Authority of city to require a city license for anything for which a state
license is required, unless prohibited by general law, and to impose a
reasonable tax thereon not in excess of the state tax see W.Va. Code § 8-13-4,
as modified by W.Va. Code § 11-12-4
LICENSES GENERALLY
§ 110.001  REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or prosecute within the
city any business, trade, occupation, profession, calling, vocation or activity
for which the payment of any city license tax or fee is required or for which a
city license certificate is required without having paid to the city such
license tax or fee or without holding an appropriate, currently valid city
license certificate, as provided by this chapter; and the fulfillment of all
terms and conditions of such license certificate and the provisions of this
chapter relating thereto shall be conditions precedent to engaging in or
prosecuting within the city and such business, trade, occupation, profession,
calling, vocation or activity.
(1991 Code, § 6-1)  (Ord. passed 6-20-1957)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.002  ISSUANCE; PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The licenses provided for in this subchapter shall be issued in the form of
a certificate by the City Collector and Treasurer to any person making proper
application therefor on forms to be prescribed and furnished by the City
Collector and Treasurer and tendering the license tax and a filing tax fee of
an amount set forth by Council from time to time for each license certificate
requested. The City Collector and Treasurer shall collect in full the proper
taxes and fees and determine to his or her satisfaction that all the conditions
precedent to the granting of such license have been fulfilled by the applicant
before issuing a certificate of license.
(1991 Code, § 6-2)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)
§ 110.003  RECORD, COLLECTION.
   There shall be kept by the City Clerk, in a well-bound book or sturdy file
to be known and designated as the “License Record”, a record of all licenses
issued, when and to whom issued, dates of issue and duration of licenses,
license numbers and for what purposes issued, and the City Clerk shall therein
charge the City Collector and Treasurer with all licenses placed in his or her
hands for collection, with order dates and amounts, as well as any and all
transfers thereof.
(1991 Code, § 6-3)
§ 110.004  MULTIPLE REQUIREMENT.
   Except as may be provided otherwise in this code or other ordinance, any
person who, at more than one fixed place of business within the city, engages
in or prosecutes any business, profession, calling, vocation, trade or activity
for which a city license is required, or who, within the city, engages in or
prosecutes more than one type of business, profession, calling, vocation, trade
or activity for which a city license is required, shall obtain a separate
license and pay the prescribed tax or fee therefor for each such fixed place of
business and for each such business, profession, calling, vocation, trade or
activity.
(1991 Code, § 6-4)
§ 110.005  TERM; MINIMUM TAX.
   Except as may be otherwise expressly provided herein, all annual licenses
issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period of one
year, beginning on July 1 and ending on the following June 30; provided,
however, that the fee for any such license issued following January 1 of any
year and to expire on June 30 of such year shall be one-half of the annual
license fee prescribed in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-5)  (Ord. passed 6-20-1957; Ord. passed 7-3-1986)
§ 110.006  EXHIBITION.
   Every person to whom a license shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall keep such certificate posted in a conspicuous position in the
place where the privileges of such license are exercised; except as may be
otherwise specifically provided by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-6)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.007  LIMITATIONS TO PRIVILEGE.
   Every license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall confer a
personal privilege only to transact the business, activity, trade, occupation,
profession, calling or vocation which may be the subject of the license and
shall not be exercised except by the person holding the license, nor be
assignable.
(1991 Code, § 6-7)
§ 110.008  EFFECT OF CHANGE IN PARTNERS OR NAME OF FIRM.
   No changes in the name of a firm, nor the taking in of one or more new
partners, nor the withdrawal of one or more members of the firm, as long as at
least one member remains the same, shall be considered as terminating the
privileges of any license granted to such partners or firm.
(1991 Code, § 6-8)
§ 110.009  ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE; FEE.
   Any person losing, misplacing or destroying any license or certificate
issued under the provisions of this chapter may, by application to the City
Clerk, procure a duplicate thereof, upon satisfactory proof of the loss of the
original, upon the payment to the City Clerk of a fee of an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-9)
§ 110.010  FALSE STATEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in
any application for a city license, a city business franchise registration
certificate, in any tax return, report or in any other statement relating to
any activity licensed by the city and which is required to be made to any city
officer or agency.
(1991 Code, § 6-10)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.011  UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Nothing in this chapter and no payment or issuance of any certificate of
license under the provisions hereof, shall be deemed to legalize any act which
otherwise may be in violation of law, or to exempt any person from any penalty
prescribed for such violation.
(1991 Code, § 6-11)  (Ord. passed 6-20-1957)
§ 110.012  CONFIDENTIALITY OF STATEMENTS.
   All returns and statements made by licensees and taxpayers pursuant to this
chapter to city officers and employees shall be regarded as confidential,
except in compliance with a judicial order or as may be required by the proper
administration hereof, and no city officer, agent or employee or former city
officer, agent or employee shall divulge facts or information obtained by way
of the administration of this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-12)
§ 110.013  ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to forbid or prohibit
the issuing of city licenses for the conduct of any other business or for any
other thing for which a state license is required; but full power and authority
is reserved for the Council to adopt any other ordinances or regulations in
respect to the conduct of any other business or the operation of any other
thing within the city not enumerated in this chapter and the licensing of which
is permitted by the laws of the state.
(1991 Code, § 6-13)  (Ord. passed 6-20-1957)
§ 110.014  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any business, whether a person is engaged expressly or impliedly
holds himself or herself out as engaged in business, or supplies his or her
products or a commodity or service to the public as a class or a limited
portion of the public, or sells any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or
provides a service of any kind; provided, that BUSINESS shall not include sales
of products of the farm, garden or dairy by the producer or grower thereof;
occasional sales by societies acting for charitable, religious or benevolent
purposes; judicial sales directed by law or court order; or any business the
gross income of which is less than $4,000 per license year.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts of the business received as compensation
for personal services and from trade, commerce or sales, and the value accruing
from the sale of tangible property, real or personal, or service, or both,
without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, materials used,
labor costs, taxes or any other expense whatsoever.
(1991 Code, § 6-14)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see W.Va. Code § 11-12-2
PERMITS AND FEES
§ 110.025  OWNING AND OPERATING COIN-OPERATED MERCHANDISE, SERVICE, MUSIC AND
AMUSEMENT DEVICES OR VENDING MACHINES.
   (A)   The annual license fee to own and operate a coin-operated baggage or
parcel checking machine or device which is used for the storage of baggage or
parcels of any character shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to
time for each section of any such device which is operated on the coin-in-the-
slot principle; the annual license fee to own and operate any coin-operated
toilet locker or device, sanitary napkin device or bed vibrator device shall be
an amount set forth by Council from time to time for every such locker or
device.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   The annual license fee to own and operate a total of 20 or
more coin-operated amusement or music devices of the following types shall be:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   The operator of more than one type of such devices shall pay the
highest fee prescribed.
      (2)   (a)   The license fee to own and operate less than 20 amusement or
music devices shall be upon a per device basis as follows:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   Any device taking more than one denomination of coin shall be
licensed on the basis of the largest denomination of coin taken or the total of
the coins necessary to make the device function or operate.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   The annual license fee to own and operate a total of 20 or
more coin-operated merchandise or service devices of the following types shall
be:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   The operator of more than one type of such devices shall pay the
highest fee prescribed.
      (2)   (a)   The license fee to own and operate less than 20 merchandise
or service devices shall be upon a per device basis as follows:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   Any device taking more than one denomination of coin shall be
licensed on the basis of the largest denomination of coin taken or the total of
the coins necessary to make the device function or operate.
   (D)   No license fee shall be required of stores or businesses owning and
operating such machines or devices owned by them in their own licensed stores;
provided, that where the principal business is the operation of the machines or
devices, licenses shall be obtained as outlined above.
   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any pay
telephone, postage stamp vending machines or currency changing machines
operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.01)
§ 110.026  COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRIES, COIN-OPERATED AUTO WASH AND OTHER COIN-
OPERATED CLEANING DEVICES.
   (A)   The annual license fee to own coin-operated devices which wash, dry,
clean or dry clean items of any description, including clothing, household
items, automotive vehicles or boats, or dispense merchandise for use in such
washing, drying, cleaning or dry cleaning, shall be an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
   (B)   No machine or device licensed under the provisions of this section
shall be subject to the license fees and taxes imposed by §
110.025.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.02)
§ 110.027  CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER ITINERANT PUBLIC SHOWS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   The license to exhibit a circus or menagerie, a circus and menagerie
combined, wild west show or other itinerant show not exhibited in a theater,
opera house or other permanent place for public shows shall be based upon the
number of railroad cars or motor trucks used to transport the property or
equipment of such shows, but not including railroad cars or motor trucks used
to transport the personnel thereof. If railroad cars are used, the fee shall be
an amount set forth by Council from time to time for each car for each day on
which any performance is given; if motor trucks are used, the fee shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time for each truck for each day on
which any performance is given.
   (B)   The license fee to exhibit a street or other carnival shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time a week for each entertainment,
performance or exhibition given at or in the vicinity of any such carnival.
Each such entertainment, performance or exhibition shall require a separate
license, whether or not shown under the same canvas and whether or not
exhibited for additional compensation; and upon any such entertainment,
performance or exhibition being concluded, so that an additional fee for
admission is charged, an additional license fee shall be required for any
further or additional entertainment, performance or exhibition. To operate any
riding device of any kind at or in the vicinity of any street or carnival show,
the fee shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time a week for
each such device.
   (C)   (1)   To keep or maintain any concession stand selling services,
goods, wares or merchandise, such as food, soft drinks, ice cream, candy floss
and the like, at or in the vicinity of such street or carnival show, the fee
shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time a week for each such
concession.
      (2)   To maintain any concession stand, such as ball games, bingo, cane
rack, penny pitch-till- you-win, striking machine, weighing machine, shooting
gallery, artful dodger, bumper, fish pond, dart game or other legitimate games
of skill, none of which shall be controlled by the operator, at or in the
vicinity of any street or carnival show, the fee shall be an amount set forth
by Council from time to time a week for each such concession.
      (3)   To operate or maintain a candy wheel or any other legitimate
merchandise wheels, when operated without control of the operator, the license
fee shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time a day.
      (4)   To operate or maintain rides of all kinds, the license fee shall be
an amount set forth by Council from time to time each a week.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.03)
§ 110.028  CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER ITINERANT PUBLIC SHOWS; FILING WITH
CITY COLLECTOR AND TREASURER OF LIST OF ALL RIDES AND CONCESSIONS; BOND FOR
MUNICIPAL TAXES.
   The proprietor, professional director, manager, owner of the rides or other
person who owns the predominant percentage thereof (hereinafter referred to as
“person”) shall be responsible for the purchase and display of all applicable
licenses provided for in this subchapter. Such person shall furnish to the City
Collector and Treasurer’s office prior to the first performance at any location
a list of the rides, concessions and other attractions to be displayed along
with a statement indicating the duration of the performance at any location,
and shall post a cash bond or a surety bond in an amount set forth by Council
from time to time, the sufficiency of such surety to be solely in the
discretion of the City Collector and Treasurer or his or her authorized
representative as surety for all municipal taxes. If such person has not made
an accounting with the City Collector and Treasurer’s office within five days
after the last performance as indicated in the document filed with the City
Collector, the city may elect to forfeit the bond under the terms and
conditions thereof without further notice to the principal on the bond.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.03a)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)
§ 110.029  TRADING STAMPS.
   The annual license fee to sell or offer for sale merchants’ trading stamps,
premium stamps or stamps or certificates of like nature, or to undertake to
redeem such stamps or certificates in money or goods, shall be an amount set
forth by Council from time to time; provided, that this section shall not apply
to any coupon or similar device issued and redeemed by a manufacturer or
packer.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.04)
§ 110.030  FORTUNE-TELLING, MIND READING AND THE LIKE.
   The annual license to act as a fortune-teller, palmist, phrenologist,
spiritualist, medium, clairvoyant, mind reader or any other person who performs
the art or profession of telling the past or forecasting the future shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.05)
§ 110.031  WHOLESALE OR SUBJOBBER DEALERS IN CIGARETTES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CIGARETTE. Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not
containing tobacco; or any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing
tobacco which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the
filler or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to or purchased
by consumers as a CIGARETTE.
      PACKAGE. The individual package, box or other container in or from which
retail sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made.
      SALE. Selling, exchange, transfer of title, barter, gift, offer for sale
or distribution.
      SALE BY WHOLESALER OR SUBJOBBER. Any bona fide transfer of title to
cigarettes by a wholesaler or subjobber for a valuable consideration, made in
the ordinary course of trade or in the usual conduct of the wholesaler’s
business.
      SUBJOBBER or SUBJOBBER DEALER. Any person who purchases stamped
cigarettes from any other person who purchases from the manufacturer, when such
other person is located in any state which levies an excise tax on cigarettes,
and who purchases such cigarettes solely for the purpose of bona fide resale to
retail dealers or to other wholesalers.
      WHOLESALER or WHOLESALER DEALER. Any person who purchases unstamped
cigarettes directly from the manufacturer.
   (B)   The annual license fee as a wholesaler or subjobber dealer to sell
cigarettes shall be divided into three classes, as follows:
      (1)   Class A. All dealers who sell annually up to 750,000 packages of
cigarettes, an amount set forth by Council from time to time;
      (2)   Class B. All dealers who sell annually from 750,000 packages of
cigarettes to 1,500,000 packages, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; and
      (3)   Class C. All dealers who sell annually more than 1,500,000 packages
of cigarettes, an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.06)
§ 110.032  JUNK DEALERS AND THEIR AGENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ITINERANT JUNK COLLECTOR. Any person who gathers junk from place to place
with the aid of a cart or vehicle hand drawn or propelled, who has no fixed
place of business.
      JUNK. Old or scrap gold, copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
rubber, automobile parts, iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous
metals.
      JUNK DEALER. Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling
junk.
      JUNK DEALER’S AGENT. Any person who buys or sells junk for or on behalf
of a junk dealer, but the term shall not be construed to include any person
regularly employed upon a salary by a regularly licensed junk dealer engaged in
such business within the city.
      NONRESIDENT JUNK DEALER or NONRESIDENT JUNK DEALER’S AGENT. Any person
who acts as a junk dealer or junk dealer’s agent who is a nonresident of the
city, and any firm so engaged whose members are nonresidents of the city, and
any corporation which has not been admitted to hold property and transact
business in the city.
   (B)   The annual license fee to act as a resident junk dealer shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time; to act as a junk dealer’s agent,
an amount set forth by Council from time to time; to act as a nonresident junk
dealer or his or her agent who buys or solicits for the purchase of junk within
the city, an amount set forth by Council from time to time; and to act as an
itinerant junk collector, an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.07)
§ 110.033  HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS.
   (A)   (1)   The annual license fee to act as a hawker and peddler, if the
person licensed travels without a vehicle, shall be an amount set forth by
Council from time to time, if he or she travels with a motor vehicle of not
more than one-half ton capacity, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; if he or she travels with a vehicle of more than one-half ton capacity,
but not exceeding one ton capacity, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; if he or she travels with a vehicle of more than one ton capacity, but
not exceeding two tons capacity, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; and if he or she travels with a vehicle of more than two tons capacity,
an amount set forth by Council from time to time; and the person licensed shall
pay at the same rate for each and every motor vehicle so used. Such person
shall carry his or her license in some conspicuous place in his or her vehicle
or about his or her pack.
      (2)   When used in this section, the term SALE shall mean and include
both sales for money payment or for barter, and offers to make any such sale
and offers to render any service or the rendering thereof.
      (3)   Any person who shall carry goods, wares or merchandise from place
to place, either in person or by agent or employee, and sell, for delivery at
the same time, any such goods, wares or merchandise to any purchaser, at
wholesale or retail, and any person who shall solicit for the purpose of
rendering any service, shall be deemed a hawker or peddler under this section.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who sells
any goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered in the future; or to any of the
following who offer immediate delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise being
sold:
      (1)   Any person or persons engaged within this county in the business or
calling of agriculture, horticulture or grazing, who sells or sell individually
or collectively, one or more for the other or others, the products derived from
his, her or their business or calling aforesaid;
      (2)   Any person engaged in the maintenance or operation of a retail
merchandise store to exchange goods, wares or merchandise from such store for
agricultural, horticultural or grazing products, or to resell any such products
received in due course of such business; nor to any other retail business
concern, established and operating continuously for one year or more within
this state in the sale of any product or products over regular route;
      (3)   Any wholesaler or jobber selling soft drinks or nonintoxicating
beer for which he or she is duly licensed under other provisions of this code;
      (4)   Any person who sells petroleum products, ice, wood, meat, milk, ice
cream, bread, cakes, pies, and other bakery products, butter and eggs,
manufactured, grown or produced by any such person and not purchased by him or
her for resale;
      (5)   Any sales by societies, groups or organizations acting for
charitable, religious or benevolent purposes; and
      (6)   Any agent or salesperson selling manufactured products, except
green groceries and canned or bottled fruit products, produced by his or her
employer, and who sells the same to retail dealers for the purpose of resale.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.08)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1984)
§ 110.034  PAWNBROKERS.
   (A)   The annual license fee to engage in the business of pawnbroker shall
be an amount set forth by Council from time to time. The term PAWNBROKER shall
include any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit or
pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, other than securities or
printed evidence of indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal
property, such as articles made of or containing gold, silver, platinum or
other precious metals or jewels of any description, for the purpose of reducing
or smelting them into any form different from their condition or construction
when purchased and reselling or marketing the product.
   (B)   (1)   Every pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business an
accurate detailed description of all personal property, bonds, notes and other
securities received or purchased and mentioning particularly any descriptive or
identifying marks that may be on such property, bonds, notes or other
securities, together with the name, residence and an accurate description of
the person by whom they were left.
      (2)   IDENTIFYING MARKS include a listing of serial numbers on items
received or purchased.
         (a)   Such entries shall list the date such property is taken by using
ink or indelible pencil; no entry shall be erased or obliterated. All such
records shall be clean and legible.
         (b)   On Monday of each week, a copy of the record sheets for the
preceding seven-day period shall be picked up by the police. Such record shall
be open to inspection by any law enforcement officer in this state during
normal business hours of the purchaser.
         (c)   Every pawnbroker must keep for his or her own records the name,
residence and an accurate description of the person by whom items are left. In
the event the name of the person pawning an item is needed by a law enforcement
officer to conduct an investigation, such information must be provided by the
pawnbroker to the law enforcement officer.
         (d)   All books and records shall be preserved or made available in
this city for a period of two years from date of the transaction, or one year
from final entry made thereon, whichever is later.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.09)  (Ord. passed 3-17-1994)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.035  THEATERS AND OTHER PERMANENT PLACES FOR PUBLIC SHOWS.
   A theater, opera house or other permanent place for public shows may be kept
or maintained upon the payment of a license fee in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time; provided, that if such theater, opera house or other
permanent place for public shows is conducted outside of but within one mile of
the corporate limits of the city, the license fee shall be the same as if such
performance were given within the city or town; provided, further, that any
theater, opera house or other permanent place for public shows, including
drive-in theaters kept, maintained or operated in such a location as to be
exempt from the foregoing provisions of this section shall pay an annual
license fee of an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.10)
§ 110.036  COLLECTION AGENCIES.
   The annual license fee to engage in the business of a collection agency
within the city shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time. For
the purposes of this section, solicitation or collection by or through an agent
operating within the city shall be considered to be engaging in the business of
a collection agency within the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.11)
§ 110.037  EMPLOYMENT AGENTS.
   The annual license fee to conduct the business of an employment agent, to
receive applications for employment or to hire or contract with persons for
employment shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time; except,
that the annual license fee for an agency or registry for the employment of
registered professional nurses, practical nurses or undergraduate nurses shall
be an amount set forth by Council from time to time; provided, that this
section shall not apply to any such agency or registry operated by a registered
professional nurses’ association or any district subdivision thereof for the
exclusive benefit of its registrants and not for profit.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.12)
§ 110.038  BOWLING LANES AND BILLIARD, POOL OR BAGATELLE TABLES.
   The annual license fee to keep or maintain a bowling lane or a billiard,
pool or bagatelle table, or table of like kind, for public use, where any
charge is made for the use of the same, shall be an amount set forth by Council
from time to time; but, if more than one of such lanes or tables are kept or
maintained in the same building by the same person, the fee shall be an amount
set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.13)
§ 110.039  BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Business registration certificate required. No person shall, without a
business registration certificate, engage in or prosecute within the city and
business, trade, occupation, profession, calling, vocation or activity, without
obtaining a business registration certificate from the city.
   (B)   Application for business registration certificate. Any person making
and filing the proper application for a business registration certificate on
forms to be prescribed and furnished by the City Treasurer shall be provided a
certificate if the City Treasurer determines to his or her satisfaction that
all of the conditions precedent to the granting of such certificate have been
fulfilled by the applicant before issuing the certificate of registration. A
certificate shall not be issued unless the applicant presents a valid and
current business franchise registration certificate issued by the state nor
shall a certificate be issued if the municipal business and occupation taxes of
the applicant are not paid on a current basis.
   (C)   Time for which registration certificate granted; power of City
Treasurer to cancel certificate.
      (1)   All annual certificates issued under this section shall be for a
period of one year beginning July 1 and ending the following June 30.
      (2)   If a registrant shall at any time knowingly or willfully file false
data or information required by division (B) above, or shall willfully refuse
or neglect to file any tax report or to pay the tax, additions to tax
penalties, or interest, or any part thereof, required by §§
110.055 through
110.089, the City Treasurer may cancel his or her certificate. Before canceling
any such certificate, the Tax Commissioner shall set a hearing as hereinafter
prescribed and notify the person by certified mail not less than 20 days prior
to the hearing date to appear and show cause why such registration certificate
should not be canceled.
   (D)   Business certificate a personal privilege not assignable; change of
name, location, ownership and the like.
      (1)   Every business certificate issued under the provisions hereof shall
confer a personal privilege only to transact the business, activity or trade,
which may be the subject of the business certificate and shall not be exercised
except by the persons holding the same and shall not be assignable to any other
person.
      (2)   Changes in the name of the person or change of location, or
address, or changes in ownership of the business or changes in real parties of
interest shall be considered a cessation of the business and a new certificate
shall be required. Changes of partners or members of firms or officers of a
corporation shall not require a new certificate to be issued.
   (E)   Display of registration certificate. Any person to whom a certificate
of registration shall be issued shall keep such certificate posted in a
conspicuous position in the place where the privilege of such business is
exercised. Such certificate of registration shall be produced for inspection
whenever required by the city, Treasurer or by any law enforcement officers of
the city.
   (F)   Hearing; appeal. Any person adversely affected by refusal of the City
Treasurer or his or her representative, to issue a business registration
certificate or to renew this certificate may request a hearing before the City
Treasurer if such request is made within 30 days from receipt of written notice
of the refusal. A person may appeal the administrative decision of the City
Treasurer by taking appeal to the Circuit Court of the county within 30 days
after being served with notice of the City Treasurer’s administrative decision.
   (G)   Issuance fee. The City Treasurer, in his or her discretion, may impose
an issuance fee in an amount set forth by Council from time to time to cover
administrative and clerical costs of administering this section.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.14)  (Ord. passed 6-18-1981; Ord. passed 2-5-1987)
§ 110.040  ITINERANT VENDORS.
   (A)   (1)   When used in this section, the term ITINERANT VENDOR shall mean
and include all persons who engage or conduct within this city, either in one
place, or in traveling from place to place, a temporary or transient business
of selling goods, wares and merchandise; and who, for the purpose of carrying
on such business, use, lease or occupy either in whole or in part, a room,
building or other structure, or who use, lease or occupy for such purposes a
room or rooms at any hotel, motel or lodging house, for the exhibition and sale
of such goods, wares and merchandise; and the person so engaged shall not be
released from the provisions of this section by reason of association
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by
conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part
of the business of, or in the name of, any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to sales made to
persons by commercial travelers, or selling agents in the usual course of
business, nor to bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample for
future delivery; nor to hawkers or peddlers in the streets, roads or highways,
from packs or vehicles, nor to persons selling meat or the produce of the farm,
garden, dairy, nor to any sales of goods, wares and merchandise on the ground
of any agricultural association during the continuance of any annual fair held
by such association; nor to any sales by societies acting for charitable,
religious or benevolent purposes; nor to judicial sales directed by law, or
under the orders of any court; nor to the sales of the common necessities of
life in any public market place.
   (B)   No itinerant vendor shall advertise, represent or hold forth a sale of
goods, wares or merchandise as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee,
estate, executor, administrator, receiver, attorney, manufacturer’s wholesale
or closing out sale, or the sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or
otherwise, unless before so doing he or she shall state in writing, under oath,
to the City Collector and Treasurer at the time he or she makes application for
a license, hereinafter provided for, all the facts relating to the reason and
character of such special sale as advertised, held forth, or represented,
including a statement of the names of the persons from such goods, wares or
merchandise were purchased, and the date of the delivery of the same to the
person applying for license; the place, if any, where such goods, wares or
merchandise were previously exposed for sale, and such details as are necessary
to exactly locate and fully identify all such goods, wares and merchandise
proposed to be sold. And such itinerant vendor shall also include in such
statement the name and residence of the owner or owners in whose interest the
business is conducted, to be kept on file in the office of the City Collector
and Treasurer and a record shall be kept by said Collector and Treasurer of all
such statements, in convenient form and open to public inspection.
   (C)   The annual license fee to carry on the business of itinerant vendor
shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (D)   Every itinerant vendor who sells or exhibits for sale at public or
private sale, any goods, wares or merchandise without first obtaining a license
therefor, and in all other respects complying with the provisions of this
subchapter, or who makes any false statement in reference to the matter set out
in division (B) above, or who fails to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter, and every person, whether principal or agent, who, by circular,
handbills, newspaper, or in any manner advertises such sale, as herein
described, before proper licenses are issued to the vendor and before he or she
has complied with the provisions of this subchapter, shall be guilty of a
violation of this subchapter, and shall be punished accordingly.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.15)  (Ord. passed 3-15-1984)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.041  YARD SALES.
   (A)   Citizens of the city may hold up to four yard sales per year, each
yard sale lasting up to, but not to exceed, 72 hours at any particular area
within the city limits. Any citizen desiring to hold more than four yard sales
per year, or any yard sale longer than a 72-hour period, shall file for a
business license with the city, and pay the appropriate city business license
registration fee, and remit all business and occupation taxes pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to current business license holders of
the city, who are current on their business and occupation taxes. Any citizen
who violates the provisions of this section shall be classified as itinerant
vendors, and shall be subject to fees enumerated in §
110.040 which apply to itinerant vendors. Said offenders who are classified as
an itinerant vendor, by virtue of failure to abide by this section shall also
be subject to the collection provisions found in this chapter.
(Ord. 045, passed 6-1-2006)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.042  CITY BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.
   A copy of the revised city business license fees as itemized are attached to
the ordinances codified in this section and incorporated by reference as if set
out in full herein.
(Ord. O-042, passed 6-1-2006; Ord. 054, passed 9-7-2006; Ord. 212, passed 6-16-
2016; Ord. 221, passed 9-15-2016)
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX
§ 110.055  SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “City of Elkins Municipal Business and
Occupation Tax Ordinance”.
(1991 Code, § 6-15)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose business and occupation tax on businesses and
occupations taxed by state, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5, as modified by W.Va. Code
§ 11-13-25
   State business and occupation tax, see W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 13
§ 110.056  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to impose a municipal business and
occupation tax pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-13-5 to the fullest extent allowable
under the operative laws of the state and the United States unless a more
restrictive application is required by an express limitation set forth in this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-16)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.057  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANKING BUSINESS or FINANCIAL ORGANIZATION. Any bank, banking association,
trust company, industrial loan company, small loan company or licensee,
building and loan association, savings and loan association, credit union,
finance company, investment company, investment broker or dealer, and any other
similar business organization at least 90% of the assets of which consists of
intangible personal property and at least 90% of the gross receipts of which
consists of dividends, interest and other charges derived from the use of money
or credit.
   BUSINESS. All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the
object of gain or economic benefit, either direct or indirect. The production
of raw materials or manufactured products which are used or consumed in the
main business shall be deemed a BUSINESS engaged in taxable in the class for
which it falls.
   CONTRACTING. The furnishing of work, or both materials and work, in the
fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration
or improvement of a new or existing building or structure, or any part thereof,
or for the alteration, improvement or development of real property.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts of the taxpayer, other than a banking or
financial business, received as compensation for personal services and the
gross receipts of the taxpayer derived from trade, business, commerce or sales
and the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property, real
or personal, or service, or both, and all receipts by reason of the investment
of the capital of the business engaged in, including interest, discount,
rentals, royalties, fees, reimbursed costs or expenses or other emoluments
however designated and without any deductions on account of the cost of
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, taxes, royalties,
interest and discount paid, or sums paid to independent contractors,
subcontractors or persons furnished services or property used in the operation
of any business to produce gross income, or any other expense whatsoever. GROSS
INCOME of a banking or financial business is specified in §
110.066.
   GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES. The value actually proceeding from the sale of
tangible property without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold
or expenses of any kind. The words gross income and GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES
shall not be construed to include cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;
the proceeds of sale of goods, wares or merchandise returned by customers when
the sale price is refunded, either in cash or by credit; or the sale price of
any article accepted as part payment on any new article sold, if the full sale
price of the new article is included in the gross income or GROSS PROCEEDS OF
SALES; excise taxes imposed by the state; money or other property received or
held by a professional person for the sole use and benefit of a client or
another person or money received by the taxpayer on behalf of a bank or other
financial institution for repayment of a debt of another; and excise taxes
imposed by the federal government upon the consumer, not manufacturer, and
which are held in trust by the vendor as agent for the federal government.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elkins.
   PERSON and COMPANY. The terms are used interchangeably in this subchapter
and mean and include any individual, firm, copartnership, joint adventure,
association, corporation, limited liability company, trust, estate or any other
group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular
number. The word IT shall also include the pronouns “he” and “she”.
   RETAIL SALES and SELLING AT RETAIL. All sales other than wholesale sales,
including, but not limited to, sales to persons for use in any activity not
subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter, all sales of real property, and
sales to consumers.
   SALE and SALES. Any transfer of the ownership of or title to property,
whether for money or in exchange for other property.
   SERVICES or SERVICE BUSINESS OR CALLING. Includes all activities engaged in
for other persons for a consideration, which involve the rendering of a service
as distinguished from the production or sale of tangible property, but shall
not include the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer.
   TAX YEAR and TAXABLE YEAR. Either the calendar year or the taxpayer’s fiscal
year when permission is obtained in writing from the Treasurer to use such
fiscal year in lieu of the calendar year.
   TAXPAYER. Any person liable for any tax hereunder.
   TREASURER. The municipality’s Treasurer and his or her agents, delegates or
representatives.
   WHOLESALE SALES and SELLING AT WHOLESALE. Only:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property for the purpose of resale in
the form of tangible personal property;
      (2)   Sales of machinery, supplies or materials which are to be directly
consumed by the purchaser in the conduct of any business or activity which is
subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter; or
      (3)   Sales of tangible personal property to the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, or to the state, its institutions
and political subdivisions.
(1991 Code, § 6-17)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.058  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   There are hereby levied and imposed and shall be collected annual
privilege taxes, against the persons, on account of the business and other
activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates
against values or gross income or gross proceeds as set forth in §§
110.059 through
110.067, inclusive.
   (B)   If any person liable for any tax under §
110.059 shall ship or transport its products, or any part thereof, out of the
municipality without making sale of such products, the value of the products in
the condition or form in which they exist immediately before transportation out
of the municipality shall be the basis for the assessment of the tax imposed in
those sections. Gross income included in the measure of the tax under §
110.059 shall neither be added nor deducted in computing the tax levied under
the other sections of this subchapter. In determining value, however, as
regards sales from one to another of affiliated companies or persons, or under
other circumstances where the relation between the buyer and the seller is such
that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of
the subject matter of the sale, the value upon which such privilege tax shall
be levied shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the
sale of similar products of like quality or character where no common interest
exists between the buyer and the seller but where the circumstances or
conditions are otherwise similar.
   (C)   The municipal business and occupation tax is imposed on each person
engaged in privileges taxable under this subchapter if such person is engaged
in purposive revenue generating activities within the municipality’s limits and
such person has sufficient contacts to sustain the municipality’s taxing
jurisdiction. By way of example (but not limitation), if a person’s activities
within the municipality contributes to the establishment and maintenance of a
market, such contacts are considered to be sufficient to sustain the
municipality’s taxing jurisdiction assuming federal constitutional nexus
standards are satisfied.
(1991 Code, § 6-18)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.059  NATURAL RESOURCE PRODUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality
in the business of severing, extracting, mining, quarrying, reducing to
possession and/or producing for sale, profit or commercial use any natural
resource products, the amount of such tax shall be equal of the value of the
articles produced as shown by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof
by the producer, except as hereinafter provided, multiplied by the respective
rates as follows:
         (a)   Coal, 0.69%;
         (b)   Limestone or sandstone quarried or mined, 1%;
         (c)   Oil or blast furnace slag, 1.94%;
         (d)   Natural gas in excess of the value of $250 quarterly, 3.88%;
         (e)   Sand gravel or other mineral products, not quarried or mined,
1.94%;
         (f)   Timber, 1%; and
         (g)   Other natural resource products, 1.38%.
      (2)   The measure of this tax is the value of the entire production in
the municipality, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that delivery may
be made to points outside the municipality.
   (B)   A person exercising privileges taxable under this section and using or
consuming the natural resources so produced in his or her business or
transferring or delivering the natural resources as any royalty paid, in kind,
or the like, shall be deemed to be engaged in the business of producing natural
resources and shall be required to make returns on account of the production of
the business, showing the gross proceeds or equivalent in accordance with
uniform and equitable rules for determining the value upon which privilege
taxes shall be levied, corresponding as nearly as possible to the gross
proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or character by
other taxpayers.
   (C)   Persons who produce natural resources outside the municipality and who
make sale of those products within the municipality shall not pay the tax
imposed by this section but shall pay the tax imposed by §
110.060 for the privilege of selling such products within the municipality.
   (D)   A person exercising any privilege taxable under this section and
engaging in the business of selling its natural resource products in the
municipality shall be required to make returns of the gross proceeds of such
sales and pay the tax imposed in §
110.060 for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling such natural
resource products in the municipality.
(1991 Code, § 6-19)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.060  SELLING TANGIBLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in
the business of selling any tangible property whatsoever, real or personal,
including the sale of food in hotels, restaurants, cafeterias, confectioneries
and other public eating houses and wholesale sales from a rolling stockpile,
except sales of any person engaging or continuing in the business of
horticulture, agriculture or grazing, or selling stocks, bonds or other
evidence of indebtedness, there is hereby levied, and shall be collected, a tax
equal to 0.20% of the gross income of the business; except, therein the case of
selling at wholesale, the tax shall be equal to 0.13% of the gross income of
the business.
   (B)   Gross income or gross proceeds of sales derived from sales within the
state that is not taxed or taxable by any other municipality are included in
the measure of municipal business and occupation tax if the sales are either
directed from a location within the municipality or the taxpayer’s principal
West Virginia office is located in the municipality. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, when the taxpayer has only one office location and
this office is located within the municipality and its activities elsewhere in
the state are neither taxed nor taxable by another municipality, the gross
income or gross proceeds from those activities are taxable by this
municipality.
   (C)   Persons domiciled outside the municipality who solicit sales within
the municipality and sell tangible personal property within the municipality
are doing business in the municipality, irrespective of the domicile of such
persons and irrespective of whether or not such persons maintain a permanent
place of business in the municipality and irrespective of how a sales order is
transmitted or processed. If an order is placed in connection with solicitation
by a representative (regardless whether there is an employment or agency
relationship or whether acting as an independent contractor) who solicits
orders within the municipality, and the tangible personal property is to be
delivered in the municipality, then the gross proceeds of such sales are
included in the measure of the tax imposed by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-21)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.061  PUBLIC SERVICE OR UTILITY BUSINESS.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in
any public service or utility business, except railroad, railroad car, express,
pipeline, telephone and telegraph companies, water carriers by steamboat or
steamship and motor carriers, there is levied, and shall be collected, taxes on
account of the business engaged in equal to the gross income of the business
multiplied by the respective rates as follows:
      (1)   Water companies, 2%;
      (2)   Electric light and power companies, 4% on sales and demand charges
for domestic and commercial lighting and 3% on sales and demand charges for all
other purposes;
      (3)   Natural gas companies, 3%; and
      (4)   Upon all other public service or utility business, 1.31%.
   (B)   (1)   The measure of this tax shall not include gross income derived
from commerce between the state and other states of the United States.
      (2)   The measure of the tax under this section shall include only gross
income received from the supplying of public service. The gross income of the
taxpayer from any other activity shall be included in the measure of the tax
imposed upon such other activity by the appropriate section of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-22)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.062  CONTRACTING.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of contracting, the tax shall be equal to 2% of the gross income of
the business.
(1991 Code, § 6-23)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.063  AMUSEMENTS.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of operating a theater, opera house, moving picture show, vaudeville,
amusement park, carnival, circus, dance hall skating rink, racetrack, radio
broadcasting station or any other place at which amusements are offered to the
public, the tax shall be equal to 0.31% of the gross income of the business.
(1991 Code, § 6-24)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.064  SERVICE BUSINESS OR CALLING NOT OTHERWISE CLASSIFIED.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in
any service business or calling not otherwise specifically taxed under this
subchapter, there is hereby levied, and shall be collected, a tax equal to
0.50% of the gross income of any such business.
   (B)   Gross income or gross proceeds of sales derived from services within
the state that is not taxed or taxable by any other municipality are included
in the measure of tax under this subchapter if the services are either directed
from a location in the municipality or the taxpayer’s principal West Virginia
office is located in the municipality. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, when a taxpayer has only one office location and this office is
located within the municipality and its activities elsewhere in the state are
neither taxed nor taxable by another municipality, the gross income or gross
proceeds from those activities are taxable by this municipality.
(1991 Code, § 6-25)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.065  RENTALS AND ROYALTIES.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of furnishing any real or tangible personal property which has a tax
situs in the municipality, or any interest therein, for hire, loan, lease or
otherwise, whether the return is in the form of rentals, royalties, fees or
otherwise, the tax shall be 0.50% of the gross income of any such activity. The
term TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY, as used herein, shall not include money or
public securities.
(1991 Code, § 6-26)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.066  BANKING AND OTHER FINANCIAL BUSINESSES.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of banking or financial business, the tax shall be equal to 0.75% of
the gross income received from interest, premiums, discounts, dividends,
service fees or charges, commissions, fines, rents from real or tangible
personal property, however denominated, royalties; charges for bookkeeping or
data processing, receipts from check sales, charges or fees, and receipts from
the sale of tangible personal property; provided, that gross income shall not
include:
   (A)   Interest received on the obligations of the United States, its
agencies and instrumentalities;
   (B)   Interest received on the obligations of this or any other state,
territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision of
any of the foregoing or of the District of Columbia; or
   (C)   Interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first
mortgages or deeds of trust on residential property occupied by non-transients;
provided further, that all interest derived on activities exempt under this
division (C) shall be reported, as to amounts, on the return of a person
taxable under the provision of this section.
(1991 Code, § 6-27)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.067  HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS.
   The rate tax on the activity of a health maintenance organization holding a
certificate of authority under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 33-25A-1 et
seq., shall not exceed 0.50% to be applied solely to that portion of gross
income received from the Medicaid program pursuant to Title XIX of the Social
Security Act, the state employee programs administered by the public employee
insurance agency pursuant to W.Va. Code §§ 5-16-1 et seq. and other federal
programs for health care items or services provided directly or indirectly by
the health maintenance organization that is expended for administrative
expenses; and shall not exceed 0.50% to be applied to the gross income received
from enrollees, or from employers on behalf of enrollees, from sources other
than Medicaid, state employee programs administered by the public employees
insurance agency and other federal programs for health care items or services
provided directly or indirectly by the health maintenance organization;
provided, that this tax rate limitation shall not extend to that part of the
gross income of health maintenance organizations which is received from the use
of real property other than property in which any such company maintains its
office or offices in the municipality, whether such income is in the form of
rentals or royalties.
(1991 Code, § 6-28)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.068  ADDITIONAL CREDITS.
   (A)   A person taxable under §
110.060 with respect to selling products at wholesale in this municipality
shall be allowed a non-refundable credit against the tax imposed on such
wholesale sales pursuant to §
110.060 for any:
      (1)   Manufacturing taxes paid by such person with respect to the
manufacturing of products so sold at wholesale in this municipality; and/or
      (2)   Extracting taxes paid by such person with respect to the extracting
of products so sold in this municipality or ingredients of products so sold at
wholesale in this municipality.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EXTRACTING TAX. A gross receipts tax imposed by a municipality or other
local government unit on the act or privilege of engaging in the business as a
producer of natural resource products and includes:
         (a)   The tax imposed in §
110.059; and
         (b)   Similar gross receipts taxes paid to other municipalities or
other local government units within the United States (other than state
governments) within the United States.
      GROSS RECEIPTS TAX. A tax which:
         (a)   Is imposed on or measured by the gross volume of business in
terms of gross receipts or in other terms and in the determination of which
deductions allowed would not constitute the tax, an income tax or value added
tax; and
         (b)   Which is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from
the sales price.
      MANUFACTURING TAX.
         (a)   A gross receipts tax imposed by a municipality or other local
government unit on the act or privilege of engaging in the business as a
manufacturer and includes: similar gross receipts taxes paid to other
municipalities or other local government units (other than State governments)
within the United States.
         (b)   The manufacturing tax was deleted effective July 2018 by
Ordinance 248.
   (C)   If imposition of the municipality’s tax would place an undue burden
upon interstate commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer
shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of
the tax under this subchapter, and still apply the tax to as much of the
taxpayer’s activities as may be subject to the municipality’s taxing authority.
(1991 Code, § 6-30)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.069  EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Insurance companies which pay the state a tax upon premiums; provided,
that such exemption shall not extend to that part of gross income of insurance
companies which is received for the use of real property, other than property
in which any such company maintains its office or offices, in the municipality,
whether such income is in the form of rentals or royalties;
   (B)   Non-profit cemetery companies organized and operated for the exclusive
benefit of their members;
   (C)   Fraternal societies, organizations and associations organized and
operated for the exclusive benefit of their members and not for profit;
provided, that this exemption shall not extend to that part of gross income
arising from the sale of alcoholic liquor, food and related services of such
fraternal societies, organizations and associations which are licensed as
private clubs under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 60-7-1 et seq.;
   (D)   Corporations, associations and societies organized and operated
exclusively for religious or charitable purposes;
   (E)   Production credit associations, organized under the provisions of the
Federal Farm Credit Act of 1933, being 12 U.S.C. §§ 2001 et seq.; provided,
that the exemption of this section shall not apply to corporations or
cooperative associations organized under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 19-4-
1 et seq.;
   (F)   Any credit union organized under the West Virginia Code; provided,
that the exemptions of this section shall not apply to corporations or
cooperative associations organized under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 19-4-
1 et seq.; and
   (G)   Gross income derived from advertising service rendered in the business
of radio and television broadcasting.
(1991 Code, § 6-31)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.070  TAX CUMULATIVE.
   The tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter shall be in
addition to all other licenses, taxes and other revenue measures levied or
collected by the municipality as a condition precedent to the right of any
person to engage or continue in any business, profession, trade, calling or
other activity within this municipality. A person exercising a privilege
taxable under this subchapter, subject to the payment of all licenses and
charges which are conditions precedent to exercising the privileges taxed, may
exercise the privilege in this municipality for the tax year upon the condition
that he or she shall pay the tax, interest and penalty imposed by this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-32)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.071  ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY.
   The administration of this subchapter is vested in and shall be exercised by
the Treasurer who shall prescribe forms and may promulgate from time to time
reasonable rules, publications and instructions for the making of returns, and
for ascertaining, assessment, collection and administration of tax, interest
and penalty imposed hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 6-33)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.072  RETURNS; COMPUTATION AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   The tax levied by this subchapter shall be due and payable in
quarterly installments on or before the expiration of one month from the end of
the calendar quarter in which they accrue. The taxpayer shall, within one month
from the expiration of each quarter, make a return reporting the computation of
tax for which it is liable for each quarter; sign and mail the completed
return, together with any remittance due, to the location specified by the
Treasurer. In reporting and remitting the amount of the tax, interest and
penalties due for each quarter, the taxpayer may deduct the quarterly credit
allowed by §
110.068. The Treasurer may allow return and payment under this section for
periods other than quarterly periods.
   (B)   On or before 31 days after the end of the tax year, each person liable
for the payment of tax under this subchapter shall make a fourth quarter
return, showing the gross proceeds of sale or gross income of business, trade,
calling or activity, computing the amount of tax, interest and penalty
chargeable against the person in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and transmit with the return a remittance in the sum required by
this subchapter, covering the remainder of the tax, interest and penalty
chargeable against the person for the tax year, to such location or locations
specified by the Treasurer. Such returns shall be verified by the oath of the
taxpayer, if made by an individual, or by the individual designated by a
taxpayer that is an entity to take the oath on behalf of the taxpayer.
   (C)   All remittances and payments of tax, interest and penalty imposed by
this subchapter shall be made to the Treasurer, in lawful money of the United
States or by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check or other commercially
acceptable means specified by the Treasurer, to be kept, deposited and
accounted for as provided by law.
(1991 Code, § 6-34)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.073  TAXPAYER RECORDS.
   Each person subject to this subchapter shall maintain sufficient records for
review by the Treasurer as long as the contents of such records may be material
in the administration of tax imposed by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-35)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.074  TAX RETURN INFORMATION CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Except when required in an investigation or proceeding to ascertain or
collect amount of tax, interest, penalty, refund or credit due, or pursuant to
an exemption in W.Va. Code § 11-10-5d, it shall be unlawful for any officer,
employee or agent of the municipality to divulge or make known in any manner
the tax return, or any part thereof, of any person, or disclose information
concerning the personal affairs of any individual or the business of any
person, or disclose the amount of income or any particulars set forth or
disclosed in any report, declaration or return required to be filed with the
Treasurer or otherwise obtained by the municipality in an investigation
undertaken by the Treasurer concerning the tax imposed by this subchapter. Any
person protected by the provisions of this subchapter may, in writing, waive
the confidentiality provisions of this section for such purpose and such period
as he or she shall therein state. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the publication or release of statistics so classified as to prevent
the identification of particular reports and the items thereof. This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the publication by the Treasurer of the list
of delinquent business and occupation taxpayers as provided for in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Treasurer may permit the proper
officer, or his or her authorized representative or agent, of the United States
or the state, or any political subdivision of the state, to inspect return
information to or may furnish to such officer or representative a copy of any
such return or any other tax return information, provided, that such other
jurisdiction grants similar privileges to this municipality or if the other
jurisdiction is a party of an intergovernmental agreement authorizing the
exchange of such information.
(1991 Code, § 6-36)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 226, passed 12-15-2016;
Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.075  ERRONEOUS COMPUTATION OF TAX.
   If any taxpayer shall make any error in computing the tax, interest and
penalty under this subchapter, the Treasurer shall correct such error or
reassess the proper amount of tax, interest and penalty, and notify the
taxpayer of his or her action by mailing the taxpayer promptly a copy of the
corrected assessment, and any additional tax, interest and penalty for which
such taxpayer may be liable shall be paid within 15 days after the receipt of
such statement. If the amount already paid exceeds that which should have been
paid on the basis of the tax so recomputed, the excess so paid shall be
immediately refunded to the taxpayer upon the request of the Treasurer and
shall be payable out of any funds available for the purpose. The taxpayer may,
at its election, apply an overpayment as credit upon tax subsequently accruing
hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 6-37)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.076  INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a tax return, claim
or assessment or for the purpose of making an estimate of any taxpayer’s
liability for the tax administered under this subchapter, the Treasurer shall
have the power to examine or cause to be examined any books, papers, records,
memoranda and other documents or data bearing upon the matters required to be
included in the return and may require the attendance of the person rendering
the return or the attendance of any other person having knowledge of relevant
matters. In connection therewith, the Treasurer may take testimony and shall
have the power to administer oaths.
   (B)   The Treasurer has the power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces
tecum to compel the attendance of witnesses and production of documents for the
purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return or claim or for performing
an assessment or for any hearing held by the Treasurer. In case of the failure
or refusal of a witness to appear and testify or to produce evidence, the
Treasurer may invoke the aid of the Circuit Court of the county. Upon proper
showing, the Treasurer may apply for an order requiring the witness to appear
and give testimony and produce evidence concerning the matter in question.
(1991 Code, § 6-38)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.077  ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   If any person who is required by this subchapter to do so shall fail
or refuse to make a return, either in whole or part; or if the Treasurer
believes the tax imposed by this subchapter has been insufficiently returned by
any taxpayer, the Treasurer may proceed to assess the tax and shall notify the
person assessed of the amount of the tax, additional tax, interest and
penalties so assessed.
   (B)   The Treasurer may, at any time before the assessment becomes final,
amend, in whole or in part, any assessment whenever the Treasurer ascertains
that such assessment is improper or incomplete in any material respect. The
Treasurer may, at any time within the period prescribed for assessment, make a
supplemental assessment whenever the Treasurer ascertains that any assessment
is incorrect in any material respect.
   (C)   The amount of tax, interest and penalties imposed by this subchapter
shall be assessed within three years after the date the fourth quarter return
for the year in which such tax arose is filed by the taxpayer; provided, that
in the case of a false or fraudulent return filed with the intent to evade the
tax or in case no return is filed, an assessment may be made at any time.
(1991 Code, § 6-39)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.078  NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; PETITION FOR REASSESSMENT.
   The Treasurer shall give the taxpayer written notice of any assessment made
pursuant to this subchapter. Unless the taxpayer to whom the notice of
assessment is given shall within 30 days after service thereof file with the
Treasurer a petition for reassessment, the assessment shall become final and
not subject to administrative or judicial review. A petition for reassessment
must be in writing verified under oath by the taxpayer or his or her duly
authorized agent having knowledge of the facts, setting forth with
particularity the items of the assessment objected to, together with the
reasons for the objections. The total amount of an assessment shall be due and
payable on the day following the date upon which the assessment becomes final.
(1991 Code, § 6-40)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.079  HEARING PROCEDURE; DECISION; REVIEW.
   (A)   When a petition for reassessment or a petition for refund or credit is
properly filed pursuant to this subchapter within the time prescribed for such
filing, the Treasurer shall assign a time and a place for a hearing thereon and
shall notify the petitioner of such hearing by written notice at least 20 days
in advance thereof. Such hearing shall be held within 90 days from the date of
filing the petition, unless continued by agreement of the parties or by the
Treasurer for sufficient cause. The hearing shall be informal and shall be
conducted in an impartial manner by the Treasurer or a hearing examiner
designated by the Treasurer. The burden of proof shall be upon the taxpayer to
show that the assessment or denied refund or credit is incorrect and contrary
to law, in whole or in part.
   (B)   After such hearing, the Treasurer shall, within a reasonable time,
give notice in writing to the taxpayer of the Treasurer’s decision. An appeal
may be taken by the taxpayer to the Circuit Court of the county within 60 days
after service of the Treasurer’s administrative decision issued pursuant to
this section.
(1991 Code, § 6-41)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.080  INJUNCTION.
   After any delinquency shall have continued 60 days, the Treasurer may
proceed in the Circuit Court of the county to obtain an injunction restraining
the further exercise of the privilege until full payment shall have been made
of all tax, interest and penalty due under this subchapter. In any proceeding
under this section, upon judgment or decree for the municipality, the
municipality shall be awarded its costs.
(1991 Code, § 6-42)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.081  UNPAID TAX A LIEN; DELINQUENCY NOTICE FILING AND RELEASE.
   Any tax, interest and penalties due and payable under this subchapter shall
be a debt due the municipality and shall constitute a lien on the real and
personal property of the taxpayer. The Treasurer, for the more effective
collection of the tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter, may
file with the Clerk of the County Commission a certified notice of lien for
delinquent taxes, interest and penalty under this subchapter for recordation.
If a lien has been recorded respecting a delinquency, upon full payment of all
delinquent tax, interest and penalty, the Treasurer shall attest to the fact
and amount of payment, and shall forward a certificate of release to the
taxpayer. Upon presentment and payment of the recording fee by the taxpayer,
the Clerk of the County Commission shall record such certificate in the book in
which releases are recorded.
(1991 Code, § 6-43)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.082  SUCCESSOR LIABILITY.
   The tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter shall be a
continuing lien upon the property of any person subject to the provisions
hereof who shall sell out its business or stock of goods, or shall quit
business, and such person shall be required to make the return provided for in
this subchapter within 30 days after the date it sold out its business or stock
of goods, or quit business, and its successor in business shall be required to
withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of such tax,
interest and penalty due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall
produce a receipt from the Treasurer showing that all tax, interest and penalty
has been paid. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to
withhold purchase money as hereby provided, and the tax, interest and penalty
shall be due and unpaid after the 30-day period allowed, the successor shall be
personally liable for the payment of the tax, interest and penally accrued and
unpaid on account of the operation of the business by the former owner.
(1991 Code, § 6-44)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.083  REVOCATION, NON-RENEWAL OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   The Treasurer has the authority to revoke, deny and prevent any and
all licenses and permits issued by the municipality in the event a licensee or
permittee fails or refuses to file any return required hereby or fails or
refuses to pay any delinquent tax, interest or penalty due and owing to the
municipality.
   (B)   In the event of such a revocation or denial, the Treasurer will
provide written notice to the affected person at least five days prior to the
contemplated revocation or denial and such notice shall be served by certified
mail. The notice shall indicate the time and the place of a revocation/denial
review meeting, the general grounds of said contemplated action, and shall
advise the affected person of its rights to appear at said hearing in person
and represented by legal counsel, and to be heard orally upon the merits of the
person’s defense. The Treasurer may request legal advice from the City
Attorney, and adopt such procedures for its decorum and the dispatch of
business at such hearings as the Treasurer may regard advisable. The revocation
decision of the Treasurer will be final.
   (C)   Each license or permit that has been revoked or denied pursuant to
this section may be issued or re-issued upon payment of all delinquent tax,
interest or penalty due and owing to the municipality and satisfaction of all
relevant licensing conditions otherwise imposed by the municipality.
(1991 Code, § 6-45)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.084  SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS AND COMPROMISES.
   The Treasurer, with approval of the Mayor, is authorized to enter into an
agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person
in respect of the tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter for any
taxable period. If such a closing agreement is duly made and entered into, such
agreement shall be final and conclusive for the periods covered except upon a
showing of fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation of a material fact. The
Treasurer, with approval of the Mayor, may compromise all or part of any
administrative determination or civil case concerning tax, interest and penalty
or otherwise arising under the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-46)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.085  ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS CONCERNING CONTRACTING.
   (A)   Without limiting the generality of the administrative and collection
powers granted to the Treasurer in this subchapter, the Treasurer is also
empowered to require any person engaging or continuing within the municipality
in the business of contracting to furnish a list of the names, addresses and
amounts paid by them to any subcontractors employed and suppliers of materials
used upon any job or to do any work within the municipality. The Treasurer may
also require every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of contracting who is a nonresident of the state to pay or guarantee
the payment of the amount of the tax imposed by this subchapter for the
privilege of engaging in the business of contracting within the municipality,
such payment of such tax to be based upon the amount of the building permit
issued by the municipality for the work to be performed by such person, as a
condition precedent to the issuance of such building permit. In lieu of such
prior payment in cash of such tax, any such nonresident may guarantee the
payment of such privilege tax provided for herein by delivering to the
municipality a bond, with good and adequate surety, payable to the
municipality, and conditioned to pay such tax on or before the estimated date
of the completion of the work to be performed by such person within the
municipality.
   (B)   Any person engaging a contractor or subcontractor within this
municipality shall withhold payment in sufficient amount to cover taxes
assessed by this subchapter in the final settlement of such contracts until the
receipt of a certificate from the Treasurer to the effect that all taxes levied
and accrued under this subchapter against the contractor have been paid. If any
person fails to withhold as provided herein and the contractor or subcontractor
fails to timely pay such tax, such person shall be personally liable for the
payment of such taxes, and the same shall be recoverable by the Treasurer by
appropriate legal proceedings.
(1991 Code, § 6-47)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.086  CLAIMS FOR REFUND OR CREDIT.
   (A)   Any taxpayer claiming to have overpaid any tax, interest or penalty
imposed by this subchapter shall file its claim with the Treasurer within three
years after the due date of the return in respect of which the tax was imposed,
and not thereafter.
   (B)   If, as a result of the claim, the Treasurer shall be of the opinion
that the tax, interest or penalty, or any part thereof, was overpaid, the
Treasurer shall refund the same to the taxpayer. If the Treasurer denies the
claim, the taxpayer may within 30 days after notice of denial file with the
Treasurer a petition for refund or credit, which shall be heard in accordance
with §
110.079. A taxpayer’s failure to abide by express procedures contained in this
section precludes taxpayer’s right to any refund or credit of tax, interest and
penalties paid or collected under this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-48)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.087  INTEREST AND PENALTY.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter, if not paid when due, shall bear
interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the due date of the payment until
paid.
   (B)   If any person fails to make the return or any quarterly installment
required by this subchapter, or makes its return but fails to remit, in whole
or in part, the proper amount of tax, there shall be added to the amount of tax
unpaid, from the date such tax should have been paid, a penalty in the amount
of 5% of the tax for the first month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency, and
1% of the tax for each succeeding month, or fraction thereof of delinquency;
provided, that if such failure is due to reasonable cause, the Treasurer may
waive, in whole or in part, these penalties. Additionally, if the failure to
pay is due to fraud or intent to evade any such tax there shall be added an
additional penalty of 25% of the tax owed, exclusive of penalties. Interest and
penalties may be collected in the same manner as the tax imposed by this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-49)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.088  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall first accrue July 1, 2017.
(1991 Code, § 6-51)  (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.089  PUBLICATION.
   (A)   Delinquent list preparation.
      (1)   The Treasurer shall prepare the delinquent list in a manner set
forth W.Va. Code § 8-13-25.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall adopt policies and procedures designed to
verify each delinquency prior to publication.
      (3)   The delinquent list may include the name of the delinquent taxpayer
and the year(s) in which the delinquency arises.
      (4)   For each delinquent list published by the city, and prior to such
publication, the Treasurer shall take an oath, to be included in or attached to
the delinquent list, certified by the City Clerk or some other person duly
authorized to administer oaths, in form and effect as follows:
“I, _______________ Treasurer of the City of Elkins of _________, do swear, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, that the foregoing list of delinquent
business and occupation taxes to be published on _______________, is complete
and accurate, and, as of the date of this oath, that I have not received
payment from any of the entities listed for the delinquent amounts included in
the list.”
   (B)   Publication and posting of delinquent tax list; costs.
      (1)   A copy of a delinquent list may be posted at the front door of City
Hall and may be published as a Class I-0 legal advertisement in the newspaper
or other media in compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code § 8-13-26,
chapter fifty-nine of this code, on the city’s website or in such other
reasonable manner as determined by the city to provide notice of the
delinquency without incurring unnecessary costs related to the publication.
      (2)   Prior to the publication of such list each delinquent taxpayer
shall be given 30-day written notice that his or her name is on the list to be
published unless the delinquent taxes are paid prior to the date upon which the
name can be deleted by the newspaper publication.
      (3)   To cover the costs of preparing, publishing and posting a
delinquent list, a reasonable charge may be added to the amount owed by a
taxpayer included in any such list, in addition to the tax, interest and
penalty already owed by the taxpayer.
   (C)   Notice of delinquent lists to Council and retention of list by city. A
copy of each published delinquent list shall be provided to the Council not
later than the first regular meeting of the Council after the publication. A
copy of the delinquent list shall be retained by the Treasurer designated in
the ordinance for a period of not less than three years.
(Ord. 220, passed 12-15-2016)
MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAX
§ 110.100  COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Municipal Home Rule Board in July, 2017, approved the amended home
rule plan submitted by the city, thereby allowing the city to adopt a municipal
sales and service tax and a municipal use tax pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-l-5a
without the limiting restrictions in W.Va. Code §§ 8-13C-1 et seq. In
accordance with its amended home rule plan, the Council hereby finds and
declares that the adoption by this city for its municipal sales and service tax
and its municipal use tax provisions of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as
amended, relating to imposition, administration, collection and enforcement of
the state consumers sales and service tax codified in W.Va. Code §§ 11-15-1 et
seq., the state use tax codified in W.Va. Code §§ 11-15A-1 et seq. and the
Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Act codified in W.Va. Code §§ 11-15B-1 et seq.
will:
      (1)   Simplify collection of the city’s sales and use taxes;
      (2)   Simplify preparation of municipal sales and use tax returns by
taxpayers; and
      (3)   Improve enforcement of the city’s sales and use taxes.
   (B)   The Council does, therefore, declare that this subchapter be construed
so as to accomplish the foregoing purposes.
(1991 Code, § 6-52)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.101  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this subchapter or in the administration, collection and
enforcement of the taxes imposed by this subchapter and not otherwise defined
in this subchapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in W.Va. Code Ch.
11, Arts. 9, 10, 15, 15a and 15b.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS. Includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in
by any person with the object of gain or economic benefit, direct or indirect,
and all activities of the state and its political subdivisions, which involve
sales of tangible personal property or the rendering of services when those
service activities compete with or may compete with the activities of other
persons.
      CITY or THIS CITY. The City of Elkins, West Virginia.
      CODE OF WEST VIRGINIA or W.VA. CODE. The Code of West Virginia, 1931, as
amended from time to time by the West Virginia Legislature.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership or any other legal entity,
including this state or its political subdivisions or an agency of either, or
the guardian, trustee, committee, executor or administrator of any person.
      PURCHASE. Any transfer, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration.
      PURCHASE PRICE. The measure subject to the taxes imposed by this
subchapter and has the same meaning as SALES PRICE.
      PURCHASER. A person who purchases tangible personal property, custom
software or a service taxed by this subchapter.
      SALE, SALES or SELLING. The meaning ascribed to those terms in W.Va. Code
Ch. 11, Art. 15b.
      SALES AND USE TAXES. The taxes imposed by §§
110.102 and
110.103.
      SALES PRICE. The meaning ascribed to that term in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art.
15b.
      SALES TAX. The tax levied by §
110.102.
      SERVICE or SELECTED SERVICE. The meaning ascribed to those terms in W.Va.
Code Ch. 11, Art. 15b.
      STATE SALES TAX. The tax levied by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15, as
amended.
      STATE USE TAX. The tax levied by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15a, as amended.
      TAX. The taxes imposed by this subchapter and includes additions to tax,
interest and penalties levied under W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 10, as amended.
      TAX COMMISSIONER. The Chief Executive Office of the Tax Division of the
Department of Revenue of this State, as provided in W.Va. Code § 11-1-1.
      THIS STATE. The State of West Virginia.
      ULTIMATE CONSUMER or CONSUMER. A person who uses or consumes services,
tangible personal property or custom software.
      USE.
         (a)   For purposes of the tax imposed by §
110.103 means and includes:
            1.   The exercise by any person of any right or power over tangible
personal property or custom software incident to the ownership, possession or
enjoyment of the property, or by any transaction in which possession of or the
exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software
or the result of a taxable service is acquired for a consideration, including
any lease, rental or conditional sale of tangible personal property or custom
software; or
            2.   The use or enjoyment in this state of the result of a taxable
service. As used in this definition, ENJOYMENT includes a purchaser’s right to
direct the disposition of the property or the use of the taxable service,
whether or not the purchaser has possession of the property.
      (2)   The term USE does not include the keeping, retaining or exercising
any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software or the
result of a taxable service for the purpose of subsequently transporting it
outside the city for use thereafter solely outside this city.
      USE TAX. The tax imposed by §
110.103.
      VENDOR. Any person engaged in this city in furnishing services taxed by
this subchapter or making sales of tangible personal property or custom
software. VENDOR and SELLER are used interchangeably in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-53)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.102  IMPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property or customer software
and for the privilege of furnishing certain selected service, a vendor doing
business in this city shall collect from the purchaser the taxes imposed by
this section and pay the amount of taxes collected to the Tax Commissioner at
the same time and in the same manner as the consumers sales and service tax
imposed by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15, as amended, are paid to the Tax
Commissioner. The rate of tax shall be 1% of the sales price, as defined in §
110.101 of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service
purchased or leased.
(1991 Code, § 6-54)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.103  IMPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the use in this city of
tangible personal property, custom software and the results of taxable
services, to be collected and paid to the Tax Commissioner as agent for the
city in the same manner that state use tax is collected under W.Va. Code Ch.
11, Arts. 15a and 15b, as amended, and remitted to the Tax Commissioner. The
rate of tax shall be 1% of the purchase price, as defined in §
110.101, of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service
used within the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-55)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.104  CALCULATION OF TAX ON FRACTIONAL PARTS OF DOLLAR.
   The tax computation under §§
110.102 and
110.103 shall be carried to the third decimal place and the tax rounded up to
the next whole cent whenever the third decimal place is greater than four and
rounded down to the lower whole cent whenever the third decimal place is four
or less. The vendor may elect to compute the tax due on a transaction on a per
item basis or on an invoice basis provided the method used is consistently used
during the reporting period but the method used shall be the same as that used
for purposes of computing the state sales or use tax.
(1991 Code, § 6-56)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.105  STATE AND LOCAL TAX BASES.
   The taxable base of the taxes imposed by §§
110.102 and
110.103 shall be identical to the sales and use tax base of this state except
as provided in §
110.106, unless otherwise prohibited by federal law, as required by W.Va. Code
§ 11-15B-34.
(1991 Code, § 6-57)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.106  EXCEPTIONS.
   The taxes imposed by this subchapter do not apply to:
   (A)   The sale or use of motor fuel, as defined in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art.
14c, as amended;
   (B)   The sale or use of motor vehicles upon which the tax imposed by W.Va.
Code § 11-15-3c, as amended, is paid;
   (C)   The purchase or use of any tangible personal property, custom software
or service that the city is prohibited from taxing under the laws of this state
or of the United States;
   (D)   The sales tax imposed by §
110.102 does not apply to any transaction that is exempt from the tax imposed
by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15; and
   (E)   The use tax imposed by §
110.103 does not apply to any purchase upon which the sales tax imposed by §
110.102 has been paid.
(1991 Code, § 6-58)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.107  CREDIT AGAINST MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   (A)   A person is entitled to a credit against the use tax imposed by §
110.103 on the use of a particular item of tangible personal property, custom
software or results of a taxable service equal to the amount, if any, of sales
tax lawfully paid to another municipality for the acquisition of that property,
custom software or service; provided, that the amount of credit allowed may not
exceed the amount of use tax imposed by §
110.103 on the use of the tangible personal property, custom software or
results of the taxable service in this city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MUNICIPALITY. Includes municipalities of this state or of any other state
of the United States.
      SALES TAX. Includes a sales tax or compensating use tax imposed on the
sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or the results of a
taxable service by the municipality in which the sale occurred.
   (C)   No credit is allowed under this section for payment of any sales or
use taxes imposed by this state or any other state. For purposes of this
division (C), STATE includes the 50 states of the United States and the
District of Columbia but does not include any of the several territories
organized by Congress.
(1991 Code, § 6-59)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.108  TAX CUMULATIVE.
   The taxes imposed by this subchapter are in addition to other taxes imposed
on the sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or taxable
services including, but not limited to, the state consumers sales and service
tax imposed by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15; the state use tax imposed by W.Va.
Code Ch. 11, Art. 15a; the public utility tax imposed by this city pursuant to
W.Va. Code § 8-13-5a; the amusement tax imposed by this city pursuant to W.Va.
Code § 8-13-6; the tax on sales of alcoholic liquors and wine imposed by this
city pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-13-6; the hotel occupancy tax imposed by this
city pursuant to W.Va. Code Ch. 7, Art. 18; and the special district excise
taxes imposed by a county pursuant to W.Va. Code §§ 7-22-1 et seq. or a
municipality pursuant to W.Va. Code §§ 8-38-1 et seq.
(1991 Code, § 6-60)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.109  LOCAL RATE AND BOUNDARY DATA BASE; CHANGES.
   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is required by W.Va. Code § 11-15B-35 to maintain
a database for all jurisdictions levying a sales or use tax in this state. The
Treasurer shall furnish the Tax Commissioner with information the Tax
Commissioner requires for that database that will allow the Tax Commissioner to
maintain a database that assigns each five-digit and nine-digit zip code within
the City to the proper rate of tax. If any nine-digit zip code area includes
area outside this city, the single state and local rate assigned to that area
in the Tax Commissioner’s database will be the lowest rate applicable to that
area; provided, that, when sales occur at and are sourced to a physical
location of the seller located in the city in that nine-digit zip code area,
the seller shall collect the tax imposed by §
110.102.
   (B)   Whenever boundaries of the city change, whether by annexation or
deannexation, the Treasurer shall promptly notify the Tax Commissioner in
writing of the change in boundaries; provide the Tax Commissioner with the
nine-digit zip code or codes for the area annexed or de-annexed; and any other
information the Tax Commissioner may require to maintain the database. An
ordinance annexing property into the city, or an ordinance removing property
from the corporate limits of the city may not take effect any sooner than the
first day of a calendar quarter that begins 60 days after the city provides
written notice to the Tax Commission of a change in the municipal boundaries.
   (C)   The nine-digit database shall be maintained by the city until such
time as the Tax Commissioner allows use of a different system to determine
whether a location is within or outside the corporate limits of the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-61)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.110  STATE LEVEL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is responsible for administering, collecting and
enforcing the taxes imposed by this subchapter as provided in W.Va. Code §§ 8-
13C-6 and 11-15B-33. The city may enter into a written agreement with the Tax
Commissioner that will allow employees of the city auditing a vendor whose
primary business location is in the city for compliance with the city’s
business and occupation tax to also audit that business location for compliance
with the sales and use tax laws of this state and this city and obligate the
city to share that information with the Tax Commissioner.
   (B)   The Tax Commissioner may retain from collections of the taxes imposed
by this subchapter the fee allowed by W.Va. Code § 11-10-11c or by any other
state law or legislative rule.
   (C)   The Tax Commissioner shall deposit all the proceeds from collection of
the taxes imposed by this subchapter, minus any fee for collecting, enforcing
and administering taxes retained under this section, in the subaccount for this
city established in a “municipal sales and services tax and use tax fund,” an
interest bearing account created in the state treasury pursuant to W.Va. Code §
8-13C-7. All moneys collected and deposited in the subaccount for the city
shall be remitted at least quarterly by the State Treasurer to the City
Treasurer, as provided W.Va. Code § 8-13C-7.
(1991 Code, § 6-62)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.111  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Each and every provision of the West Virginia Tax Procedure and
Administration Act set forth in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 10 applies to the
administration, collection and enforcement of the sales and use taxes imposed
pursuant to this subchapter, except as otherwise expressly provided in W.Va.
Code Ch. 8, Art. 13-c, with like effect as if that act were applicable only to
the taxes imposed by this subchapter and were set forth in extenso in this
subchapter, as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-13C-6.
(1991 Code, § 6-63)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.112  CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Each and every provision of the West Virginia Tax Crimes and Penalties Act
set forth in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 9 applies to the administration,
collection and enforcement of the municipal sales and use taxes imposed
pursuant to this subchapter with like effect as if that act were applicable
only to the taxes imposed pursuant to this subchapter and were set forth in
extenso in this subchapter, as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-13C-6; provided, that
the criminal penalties imposed upon conviction for a criminal violation of this
subchapter may not exceed the maximum penalties allowed by law for a similar
violation of the ordinances of this city.
(1991 Code, § 6-64)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.113  AUTOMATIC UPDATING.
   Any amendments to W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Arts. 9, 10, 15, 15a and 15b shall
automatically apply to the municipal sales and use tax imposed pursuant to this
subchapter, to the extent they are applicable to the taxes imposed by this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-65)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.114  DEPOSIT OF TAXES COLLECTED IN GENERAL REVENUE FUND.
   When the City Treasurer receives periodic distributions of municipal sales
and use taxes from the State Treasurer, the City Treasurer shall promptly
deposit the amount received in the General Revenue Fund or Account of the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-66)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.115  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective upon its adoption by the Council on
final passage. However, the Council hereby suspends imposition and collection
of the municipal sales and use taxes imposed by this subchapter until July 1,
2018, or such later July 1 as required by the legislative rule codified in
Title 110, Legislative Rule, Department of Tax and Revenue, Series 28.
(1991 Code, § 6-68)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.116  NOTIFICATION OF TAX COMMISSIONER.
   Upon adoption of this subchapter by Council, the City Treasurer shall
forthwith send to the Tax Commissioner a certified copy of this subchapter, the
rate and the boundary database required by §
110.109, along with a description of the boundaries of the city, and such other
information as the Tax Commissioner may need to administer, collect and enforce
the taxes imposed by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-69)  (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of §
110.034 will constitute a misdemeanor with a minimum penalty of an amount set
forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-17-1994)
CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   Tax imposed; exception
   
111.003   License required for distributing or retailing wine; fees; license
period; separate license required for each place of business
   
111.004   Intoxication or drinking in public places; violation
   
111.005   False statement in application for license
Nonintoxicating Beer
   
111.020   License; required; application
   
111.021   Issuance
   
111.022   Tax imposed; computation for less than full year
   
111.023   Subject to conditions for state licenses
   
111.024   Additional tax; return and affidavit; collection; lien
Private Clubs
   
111.035   City license; required
   
111.036   Application; fee
   
111.037   Issuance; application; expiration; renewal; transferability
   
111.038   Schedule of fees; partial fees
   
111.039   Revocation
Unlawful Acts
   
111.050   Unlawful acts of licensees
   
111.051   Unlawful acts of persons
Sale of Alcohol on Sunday
   
111.065   Definitions
   
111.066   Sale of alcohol
Alcohol Policy
   
111.080   General provisions
   
111.081   Use of alcohol general policies
   
111.082   Renters
   
111.083   Insurance
   
111.084   Special events license
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases defined by W.Va. Code §§
11-16-2, 60-1-5 and 60-7-2 shall have the meanings ascribed to them therein.
(1991 Code, § 3-1)  (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
§ 111.002  TAX IMPOSED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code § 8-13-7, as last amended,
there is hereby imposed a tax of 5% of the retail purchase price of any and all
intoxicating liquors purchased from the Alcohol Beverage Control Commission or
from any person licensed to sell wine at retail to the public under the
provision of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8, within the corporate limits of the
city; provided that such tax shall not be levied or collected on intoxicating
liquors, other than wine, sold by or purchased from holders of a license issued
under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7; and further provided, that
such tax shall be collected upon all sales of wine to holders of a license
issued under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7 from a wine
distributor licensed pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 3 et
seq.
   (B)   Such tax shall be levied upon the purchaser of said intoxicating
liquor or wine and shall be added to and collected with the retail purchase
thereof. Such tax shall be received by the city from the State Treasury
pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the Alcohol Beverage Control
Commission.
(1991 Code, § 3-2)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1947; Ord. passed 6-6-1963; Ord. passed 6-
17-1965; Ord. passed 6-18-1981; Ord. passed 8-18-1983)
Editor’s note:
   At the time of enactment of the ordinance codified in this section, and
again at the time of the 1963 and 1981 amendments thereof, certified copies of
the ordinance were sent to the State Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner as
required by W.Va. Code § 8-13-7.
Statutory reference:
   Tax upon liquor sold at state store located beyond but within one mile of
corporate limits of any municipality, for the benefit of such municipality, see
W.Va. Code § 60-3-9d
§ 111.003  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DISTRIBUTING OR RETAILING WINE; FEES; LICENSE
PERIOD; SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in business as a distributor or retailer of
wine as provided by W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8 of 1931, as last amended, within
the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a license from the
city, nor shall a person continue to engage in any such activity after his or
her license has expired, been suspended or revoked. No person may be licensed
in more than one of such capacities at the same time.
   (B)   The city shall collect an annual fee for licenses issued in an amount
set forth by Council from time to time.
   (C)   The license period shall begin on July 1 of each year commencing with
July 1, 1982, and if the initial license is granted for less than a year, the
fee shall be computed in proportion to the number of quarters remaining the
fiscal year, including the quarter in which application is made.
   (D)   A retailer who has more than one place of retail business shall obtain
a license for each separate retail establishment. A retailer’s license may be
issued only to the proprietor or owner of a bona fide grocery store or wine
specialty shop.
   (E)   A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter imposing the tax
shall be certified by the Mayor to the State Alcohol Beverage Commission and to
the Tax Commissioner.
(1991 Code, § 3-2.1)  (Ord. passed 7-16-1981; Ord. passed 9-2-1982)  Penalty,
see §
111.999
§ 111.004  INTOXICATION OR DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES; VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Appear in a public place in an intoxicated condition;
      (2)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a public place other than a business
establishment duly licensed by the state to sell alcoholic liquor or
nonintoxicating beer for consumption on its premises;
      (3)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle on any highway, street,
alley or in a public garage; and/or
      (4)   Tender alcoholic liquor to another person in a public place.
   (B)   Any officer of the law is hereby authorized and empowered to arrest
and to hold in custody, without a warrant, until complaint may be made before
the municipal judge and a warrant issued, any person who, in the presence of
such officer of the law, violates any one or more of the provisions of division
(A) above.
(1991 Code, § 3-3)  Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding state law, and penalties for violation, see W.Va. Code §
60-6-9
   Profane swearing and drunkenness, see W.Va. Code § 61-8-15
§ 111.005  FALSE STATEMENT IN APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any applicant for any license under this chapter to
knowingly make any false statement of any material fact in his or her
application for such license.
(1991 Code, § 3-4)  Penalty, see §
111.999
NONINTOXICATING BEER
§ 111.020  LICENSE; REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No nonintoxicating beer, as defined by W.Va. Code § 11-16-2, shall be sold,
delivered or otherwise distributed within the city without a city license
having been obtained therefor. Such license shall designate the name of the
licensee and, if a different person, the name of the party obtaining the
license, the particular place where nonintoxicating beer shall be sold and the
time for which the license shall run, the kind of license and any other
specifications which may be required by the State Tax Commissioner on similar
licenses issued by the state. The applicant shall make application in writing,
under oath, answering such questions as are provided in the application to the
State Tax Commissioner for a state license.
(1991 Code, § 3-5)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council by ordinance to prescribe the time and manner in which
licenses shall be granted, and to require the payment of the tax thereon to the
City Collector and Treasurer before delivery of the license, see Char. § 35 and
see also Char. § 28, subsec. (19)
Statutory reference:
   Exclusion of nonintoxicating beer from regulations of State Liquor Control
Act, see W.Va. Code § 60-1-7
   Form and contents of application for state license, and bond required by
state, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-12
   State Nonintoxicating Beer Act, see W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 16
   Unlawful acts of holders of state nonintoxicating beer licenses, see W.Va.
Code § 11-16-13
§ 111.021  ISSUANCE.
   The City Clerk shall issue the license applied for when the application has
been filed and upon presentation to him or her of a license duly issued to the
applicant by the state and of the license tax for the city license.
(1991 Code, § 3-6)
§ 111.022  TAX IMPOSED; COMPUTATION FOR LESS THAN FULL YEAR.
   There is hereby levied and imposed an annual license tax upon all dealers in
and of nonintoxicating beer, which license period shall begin on July 1 of each
year and end on June 30 of the following year and, if granted for a shorter
period, the tax shall be computed quarterly, in proportion to the remainder of
the fiscal year, as follows.
   (A)   Retail dealers shall be divided into two classes, A and B.
      (1)   Class A. In the case of a Class A retail dealer, the license fee
shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time for each place of
business; the license fee for social, fraternal or private clubs not operating
for profit and having been in continuous operation for two years or more
immediately preceding the date of application, shall be an amount set forth by
Council from time to time; except, that railroads operating in the city may
dispense nonintoxicating beer upon payment of an annual license tax of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time for each dining, club or buffet
car in which such beverage is dispensed. Class A licenses issued for social,
fraternal or private clubs and for railroad dining, club or buffet cars, as
herein provided, shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at
retail, for consumption only on the licensed premises where sold. All other
Class A licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at
retail, for consumption on or off the licensed premises.
      (2)   Class B. In the case of a Class B retailer, there shall be two
types of Class B license. The fee for a Class B license authorizing the sale of
unchilled beer only shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
The fee for a Class B license authorizing the sale of both chilled and
unchilled beer shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time. A
Class B license shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at
retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers only, and only for
consumption off the licensed premises. Sales under this license, to any person
at any one time, must be in lesser quantities than five gallons. Such license
may be issued only to the proprietor or owner of a grocery store. For the
purposes of this subchapter the term GROCERY STORE means and includes any
retail establishment commonly known as a grocery store or delicatessen, where
food or food products are sold for consumption off the premises.
   (B)   In the case of a distributor, the license fee shall be an amount set
forth by Council from time to time; for each place of business.
   (C)   In the case of a brewery with its principal place of business located
in the city, the license fee shall be an amount set forth by Council from time
to time for each place of manufacture.
(1991 Code, § 3-7)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1961)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose the license taxes herein levied, see W.Va. Code
§ 11-16-17
   State law provisions corresponding to this section, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-4
§ 111.023  SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS FOR STATE LICENSES.
   The license for the sale, delivery or distribution of nonintoxicating beer
shall be issued for the same period as that issued by the state for
corresponding state licenses, and shall be subject to revocation or
cancellation for the same reasons or cause as would subject a state license to
revocation or cancellation.
(1991 Code, § 3-8)
§ 111.024  ADDITIONAL TAX; RETURN AND AFFIDAVIT; COLLECTION; LIEN.
   Every person required, under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 16,
to make return for and affidavit of the amount of nonintoxicating beer sold for
the purpose of additional tax, shall make report and affidavit for the same
period to the City Clerk, who shall assess the additional tax at the rate and
in the amount taxed by the state, and shall certify the additional tax to the
City Treasurer and Collector for collection. Upon failure to pay such
additional tax within 30 days, the tax shall be collected as are other
delinquent taxes or by any appropriate remedy in a court of competent
jurisdiction. In addition thereto, there shall be a similar lien for the city
taxes upon the same property as for state taxes, but such lien shall be
subsequent to the lien for state taxes.
(1991 Code, § 3-9)
PRIVATE CLUBS
§ 111.035  CITY LICENSE; REQUIRED.
   No licensee authorized by the state to sell alcoholic liquors as provided by
W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7 shall do so within the corporate limits of the city
without first having obtained a city license issued by the City Clerk as
hereinafter provided.
(1991 Code, § 3-10)  (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council, by ordinance, to prescribe the time and manner in
which licenses shall be granted and the like, see Char. §
35 and see also Char. §
28, subsec. (19)
Statutory reference:
   Licensing of private clubs to sell intoxicating liquors, see W.Va. Code §§
60-7-1 et seq.
   Prohibited acts by licensee, see W.Va. Code § 60-7-12
§ 111.036  APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Application for a license to operate a private club shall be made on
such forms as may be prescribed by the City Clerk and shall include:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   If such application be an unincorporated association, the names and
addresses of the members of its governing board;
      (3)   If such applicant be a corporation, the names and addresses of its
officers and directors;
      (4)   The place at which such applicant will conduct its operations;
      (5)   The number of members of the applicant;
      (6)   The name or names of any national organization with which the
applicant is affiliated;
      (7)   The size and nature of the dining and kitchen facilities operated
by the applicant; and
      (8)   Such other information as the City Clerk may reasonably require.
   (B)   Such application shall be verified by each member of the governing
board of the applicant if an unincorporated association or, if the applicant be
a corporation, by its officers and members of its board of directors. Such
application shall be accompanied by the license fee hereinafter prescribed.
(1991 Code, § 3-11)  (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
§ 111.037  ISSUANCE; APPLICATION; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall withhold issuing such license until such time as
the applicant exhibits a valid private club license issued by the State Alcohol
Beverage Control Commissioner. Upon the exhibition thereof by the applicant or
within 30 days thereafter, the City Clerk shall issue the city license, unless
it shall appear from the investigation conducted by the City Clerk that the
application submitted by the applicant contains one or more material
inaccuracies or false statements; in which event, the City Clerk shall refuse
to issue such license until such time as the applicant has corrected such
inaccuracies or false statements.
   (B)   Any license issued pursuant to an application received hereunder shall
authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic liquors at only one location specified
in the license.
   (C)   Any license issued hereunder shall expire on June 30 next following
the date of issue, and may be renewed upon the same showing as required for the
issuance of the initial license, and the payment of such fees as hereinafter
prescribed.
   (D)   A license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
transferable with regard to either licensee or location.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall attach to any license issued hereunder a copy of
this subchapter, together with a notice advising the licensee to fully acquaint
himself or herself with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 3-12)  (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
§ 111.038  SCHEDULE OF FEES; PARTIAL FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fee for a license issued under the provisions of
this subchapter to a fraternal or veteran’s organization or a non-profit social
club shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (B)   The annual license fee for a license issued under the provisions of
this subchapter to a private club other than a private club of the type
specified in division (A) above shall be an amount set forth by Council from
time to time if such private club has fewer than 1,000 members, and an amount
set forth by Council from time to time0 if such private club has 1,000 or more
members.
   (C)   The fee for any such license issued following January 1 of any year
and to expire on June 30 of such year shall be half those prescribed by
divisions (A) or (B) above, as may be applicable to the particular type of
group making a license application, as aforesaid.
(1991 Code, § 3-13)  (Ord. passed 6-1-1967; Ord. passed 5-21-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to enact this section, see W.Va. Code § 60-7-7
   For provisions of state law corresponding to this section, see W.Va. Code §
60-7-6
§ 111.039  REVOCATION.
   (A)   Upon final conviction of a licensee or of any employee thereof acting
within the scope of his or her employment of a violation of any provision of
this subchapter, or upon final conviction of a licensee or of any employee
thereof acting within the scope of his or her employment of any violation of
any ordinance of the city relating to the regulation, control or sale of
alcoholic liquors, the City Clerk shall revoke the licensee’s city license.
   (B)   Such license so revoked shall not be reissued or reinstated for one
year from the date of such revocation. Upon final conviction of any licensee or
of any employee thereof acting within the scope of his or her employment as
aforementioned, the City Clerk shall, in writing, immediately advise the State
Alcohol Control Commissioner thereof.
(1991 Code, § 3-15)  (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
UNLAWFUL ACTS
§ 111.050  UNLAWFUL ACTS OF LICENSEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful:
      (1)   For any licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or
employees to sell, give or dispense, or any individual to drink or consume, in
or on any licensed premises or in any rooms directly connected therewith,
nonintoxicating beer or cooler on weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m., or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., on any Sunday,
except in private clubs licensed under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 60-7-
1 et seq., where the hours shall conform with the hours of sale of alcoholic
liquors;
      (2)   For any licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or
employees, to sell, furnish or give any nonintoxicating beer as defined in
state law to any person visibly or noticeably intoxicated, or to any person
known to be insane or known to be a habitual drunkard;
      (3)   For any licensee, his her, its or their servants, agents or
employees, to sell, furnish or give any nonintoxicating beer an defined in
state law to any person who is less than 21 years of age;
      (4)   For any distributor to sell or offer to sell, or any retailer to
purchase or receive, any nonintoxicating beer as defined in state law, except
for cash; and no right of action shall exist to collect any claims for credit,
extended contrary to the provisions of this division (A)(4). Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit a licensee from crediting to a purchaser the actual
price charged for packages or container returned by the original purchaser as a
credit on any sale, or from refunding to any purchaser, the amount paid or
deposited for such containers when title is retained by the vendor;
      (5)   For any brewer or distributor or brewpub or his, her, its or their
agents, to transport or deliver nonintoxicating beer as defined in state law to
any retail licensee on Sunday;
      (6)   For any brewer or distributor to give, furnish, rent or sell any
equipment, fixtures, signs or supplies directly or indirectly or through a
subsidiary or affiliate to any licensee engaged in selling products of the
brewing industry at retail, or to offer any prize, premium, gift or other
similar inducement, except advertising matter of nominal value, to either trade
or consumer buyers; provided, that a distributor may offer, for sale or rent,
tanks of carbonic gas. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a brewer from
sponsoring any professional or amateur athletic event or from providing prizes
or awards for participants and winners in any such events; provided, however,
that no such event shall be sponsored which permits actual participation by
athletes or other persons who are minors, unless specifically authorised by the
Commissioner;
      (7)   For any licensee to permit in his or her premises any lewd, immoral
or improper entertainment, conduct or practice;
      (8)   For any licensee except the holder of a license to operate a
private club issued under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, or a
holder of a license or a private wine restaurant issued under the provisions of
W.Va. Code §§ 60-8-1 et seq., to possess a federal license, tax receipt or
other permit entitling, authoring or allowing such licensee to sell liquor or
alcoholic drinks other than nonintoxicating beer;
      (9)   For any licensee to obstruct the view of the interior of his or her
premises by an enclosure, lattice or drapes or any means which would prevent
plain view of the patrons occupying such premises. The interior of all licensed
premises shall be adequately lighted at all times; provided, that provisions of
this division (A)(9) shall not apply to the premises of a Class B retailer, the
premises of a private club licensed under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60,
Art. 11 or the premises of a private wine restaurant licensed under the
provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8;
      (10)   For any licensee to manufacture, import, sell, trade, barter,
possess or acquiesce in the sale, possession or consumption of any alcoholic
liquors on the premises covered by such license or on premises directly or
indirectly used in connection therewith; provided that the prohibition
contained in this division (A)(10) with respect to the selling or possessing or
to the acquiescence in the sale possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors
shall not be applicable with respect to the holder of a license to operate a
private club issued under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, nor
shall the prohibition be applicable to a private wine restaurant licensed under
the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8 insofar as such private wine
restaurant is authorized to serve wine;
      (11)   For any retail licensee to sell or dispense nonintoxicating beer,
as defined in state law, purchased or acquired from any source other than a
distributor, brewer or manufacturer licensed under the laws of this state;
      (12)   For any licensee to permit loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct
of any kind upon his or her premises or to permit the use of loud musical
instruments if either or any of the same may disturb the peace and quietude of
the community wherein such business is located; provided, that no licensee
shall have in connection with his or her place of business any loud speaker
located on the outside of the licensed premises that broadcasts or carries
music of any kind;
      (13)   For any person who license been revoked, as in this section
provided, to obtain employment with any retailer within the period of one year
from the date of such revocation, or for any retailer to employ knowingly any
such person within such time;
      (14)   For any distributor to sell, possess for sale, transport or
distribute nonintoxicating beer except in the original container;
      (15)   For any licensee to knowingly permit any act to be done upon the
licensed premises, the commission of which constitutes a crisis under the laws
of this state;
      (16)   For any Class B retailer to permit the consumption of
nonintoxicating beer upon his or her licensed premises;
      (17)   For any Class A licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents
or employees, or for any licensee by or through such servants, agents or
employees, to allow, suffer or permit any person less than 18 years of age to
loiter in or upon any licensed premises; except, however, that the provisions
of this division (A)(17) shall not apply where such person under the age of 18
years is in or upon such premises in the immediate company of his or her parent
or parents, or, where and while such person under the age of 18 years is in or
upon such premises for the purpose of and actually making a lawful purchase of
any items or commodities therein sold, or for the purchase of and actually
renewing any lawful service therein rendered, including the consumption of any
item of food, drink or soft drink therein lawfully prepared and served or sold
for consumption on such premises;
      (18)   For any distributor to sell, offer for sale, distribute or deliver
any nonintoxicating beer outside the territory assigned to such distributor by
the brewer or manufacturer of such nonintoxicating beer or to sell, offer for
sale, distribute or deliver any such nonintoxicating beer to any retailer whose
principal place of business or licensed premises is within the assigned
territory of another distributor of such nonintoxicating beer; provided, that
nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit sales of convenience between
distributors licensed in this state wherein one such distributor sells,
transfers or delivers to another such distributor a particular brand or brands
for sale at wholesale; and
      (19)   For any licensee or any agent, servant or employee of any such
licensee to knowingly violate any rule or regulation lawfully promulgated by
the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 29a (§§
29A-1-1 et seq.).
   (B)   Nothing in this section nor any rule or regulation of the Commissioner
shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any licensee from employing any person
who is at least 18 years of age to serve in such licensee’s lawful employ,
including the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer as defined in state law.
With the prior approval of the Commissioner, a licensee who principal business
is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of recreational
activities including, but not limited to, nationally franchised fast food
outlets, family-oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores, discount
stores, grocery stores and convenience stores, may employ persons who are lees
than 18 years of age but at least 16 years of age; provided, that such person’s
duties shall not include the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer or
alcoholic liquors; provided, however, that the authorization to employ such
persons under the age of 18 years shall be clearly indicated on the licensee’s
license.
(Ord. passed 5-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-18
§ 111.051  UNLAWFUL ACTS OF PERSONS.
   (A)   Any person under the age of 21 years who, for the purpose of
purchasing nonintoxicating beer, misrepresents his or her age, or who for such
purpose presents or offers any written evidence of age which is false,
fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or who illegally attempts to
purchase nonintoxicating beer, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish
nonintoxicating beer to anyone under the age of 21 to whom he or she is not
related by blood or marriage is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 5-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-19
SALE OF ALCOHOL ON SUNDAY
§ 111.065  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ON-PREMISES LICENSE. The following State Alcohol Beverage Control
Administration Class A licenses:
      (1)   Private club (less than 1,000 members) - liquor, wine and
nonintoxicating beer;
      (2)   Private club (1,000 or more members) - liquor, wine and
nonintoxicating beer;
      (3)   Fraternal club (non-profit) - liquor, wine and nonintoxicating
beer;
      (4)   Fraternal club (non-profit) - nonintoxicating beer;
      (5)   Tavern - nonintoxicating beer;
      (6)   Private wine restaurant - wine only;
      (7)   Private wine restaurant - wine and nonintoxicating beer only;
      (8)   Private wine spa - wine only;
      (9)   Private wine bed and breakfast - wine only;
      (10)   Brew pub;
      (11)   Special events (fairs and festivals) - wine and nonintoxicating
beer;
      (12)   Special events (fairs and festivals) - wine only;
      (13)   Special events (fairs and festivals) - nonintoxicating beer only;
and
      (14)   Growler.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability company or other entity, regardless of its form,
structure or nature.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-7-2017)
§ 111.066  SALE OF ALCOHOL.
   Notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in the West Virginia Code,
the Code of State Rules of West Virginia or the city code, any entity or person
possessing on-premises licenses shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages
for on-premises consumption on any Sunday, beginning at 10:00 a.m. All other
terms and conditions imposed by state law or by the State Alcohol Beverage
Control Administration on entities or persons possessing an on-premises Class A
license shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-7-2017)  Penalty, see §
111.999
ALCOHOL POLICY
§ 111.080  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The Elkins Recreation and Event Center, the Darden House and the Kump
House are not licensed facilities. Beer, wine and alcoholic beverages are
allowed under certain specific conditions and upon prior written permission.
   (B)   All uses of these facilities described in this chapter will be subject
to the following regulations and restrictions.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016)
§ 111.081  USE OF ALCOHOL GENERAL POLICIES.
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages are prohibited and shall not be permitted in or on
any municipal facilities operated by the city and/or the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission, except beer, wine and alcoholic beverages may be served
for special event occasions at the Elkins Recreation and Event Center, the
Darden House and the Kump House in accordance with the city alcohol policy.
Beer, wine and alcoholic beverages may only be served at the Elkins Recreation
and Event Center, the Darden House and the Kump House, if the organization,
association or a non-profit obtains a special event, festival or fair permit
through the state’s Alcohol Beverage Commission (ABC) when done in compliance
with the state’s Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) regulations and approved in
writing by the Council for an event at the Darden House and the Kump House or
of the city’s Parks and Recreation Commission for an event at the Elkins
Recreation and Event Center.
   (B)   The use of alcoholic beverages is by written permission only and must
be requested at the time the facility use request is submitted. The city and/or
the city’s Parks and Recreation Commission reserves the right to place
restrictions on the use of alcoholic beverages in accordance with state law and
these guidelines. ALCOHOL USE means the presence of any beverage that contains
any amount of alcohol.
   (C)   Alcohol is not allowed when an event is designated for minors such as
school age award programs, birthday parties and/or receptions.
   (D)   When alcohol is served, a city and/or Commission employee or city and/
or Commission representative shall be present. The Police Department shall be
notified in advance of the event when alcohol is served.
   (E)   No alcoholic beverage shall be served to any person less than 21 years
of age. Injuries caused to any person as a result of alcoholic beverages being
served to or consumed by someone under the age of 21 while on the city’s
premises, shall be the sole responsibility of the organization or individual
renting the facility.
   (F)   The distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be in
compliance with all applicable laws, including regulations of the ABC. Any
organization using city facilities shall be solely responsible for obtaining
all permits or licenses relating to the distribution and consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   (G)   Alcohol may only be served by an adult 21 years of age or older. If
evidence is found that alcohol is being served that was not authorized by the
city and/or the Commission or to a minor, the police will be notified and the
event will be terminated immediately and all fees and deposits will be
forfeited.
   (H)   The city shall require the applicant to carry general liability
insurance. The city shall require evidence of full liquor liability insurance
in addition to general liability insurance when alcohol is available. The cost
of the required liability insurance shall be borne by the applicant.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016)  Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.082  RENTERS.
   Renters which consist of a business, non-profit, education or government
organization must provide proof of general liability/property damage insurance
coverage with a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
a minimum $1,000,000 aggregate. All renters serving alcohol shall provide
commercial general liability insurance and liquor liability insurance.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016)
§ 111.083  INSURANCE.
   (A)   General liability/property damage insurance coverage with a minimum
combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence and a minimum of $1,000,000
aggregate will be required from individuals utilizing the Darden House, the
Kump House, Elkins Recreation and Event Center facility if any of the following
applies:
      (1)   The general public is invited to attend, observe and/or
participate; and/or
      (2)   Sales of merchandise and/or food will take place.
   (B)   If an event held at the Darden House, the Kump House or the Elkins
Recreation and Event Center does not meet one of the above criteria and is
intended for the sole use of the individual conducting the event, no insurance
will be required, unless the city and/or the city’s Parks and Recreation
Commission determines that such event dictates the need for additional
insurance protection because of the amount of people attending or nature of
event.
   (C)   For the Darden House and the Kump House, the insurance certificate
shall show the city as additional insured. For the Elkins Recreation and Event
Center, the insurance certificate shall show the city and the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission as additional insured. Only insurance written by a
company with an A.M. Best rating of no less than a B+ and in good standing with
the state shall be acceptable to the city.
      (1)   The certificate holder to read for the Darden House or the Kump
House:
 
City of Elkins
401 Davis Avenue
Elkins, WV 26241
 
      (2)   The certificate holder to read for the city’s Parks and Recreation
Center:
 
City of Elkins
Elkins Parks and Recreation Commission
401 Davis Avenue
Elkins, WV 26241
 
   (D)   Additional insurance is not required by for events sponsored by the
city or its political entities and/or subdivisions.
   (E)   Beer, wine and alcoholic beverages may only be served at the Darden
House, the Kump House or the Elkins Recreation and Event Center if the
organization, association or a non-profit obtains a special event, festival or
fair permit through the state’s Alcohol Beverage Commission (ABC).
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016)
§ 111.084  SPECIAL EVENTS LICENSE.
   (A)   Special event liquor licenses through the state’s ABC administration
are available to an organization, association or a non-profit corporation.
Note: individuals are not eligible to obtain a ABC special events license;
hence, individuals may not serve alcohol at the Darden House, and the Kump
House or the Elkins Recreation and Event Center.
   (B)   This license allows the holder to sell or to provide alcoholic
beverages to the public or event attendees.
   (C)   To obtain these licenses, the following must be completed:
      (1)   Step one. Complete reservation request. Obtain permission from the
Council for the Darden House and the Kump House or the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission for the Elkins Recreation and Event Center to serve
alcohol as required by the state’s ABC administration;
      (2)   Step two.
         (a)   Apply for and obtain a special events, fairs and festival
nonintoxicating beer license through the state’s ABC Commission. Application
can be found at:
http://www.abca.wv.gov/licensing/Documents/
Special%20Events%20Fair%20and%20Festival%20App%20Web%20Pk.pdf.
         (b)   Note that all applications must be submitted 30 days prior to
event.
      (3)   Step three. The applicant agrees to abide by city and state liquor
laws. The applicant must obtain and provide proof of general liability
insurance and liquor liability/dram shop insurance coverage as specified in
this policy.
   (D)   Special provisions apply to any organization that charges to attend
their event or wants to benefit from the sale of alcohol at their event:
      (1)   All alcohol must be purchased through a licensed distributor
according to the regulations of the West Virginia ABC Commission;
      (2)   Donated alcohol/beer/wine cannot be used; and
      (3)   All permits must be on file with the city or the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016)
§ 111.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person authorized by the state to sell alcoholic liquors pursuant
to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, who shall do so within the
corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a city license
therefor shall, upon conviction of such violation of this chapter, be punished
by a fine in an amount set by Council from time to time, or by imprisonment for
a period not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
Municipal Court of the city shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all
cases brought hereunder. For the purposes of this division (B), a LICENSEE
shall be deemed to include any agent, employee or member of such licensee who
shall, on such licensee’s premises, sell alcoholic liquors, as provided by the
W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, without having obtained a city license as
hereinbefore provided.
(1991 Code, § 3-14)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
111.050 including, but not limited to, any provision of §
111.050 or who commits any of the acts herein declared to be unlawful, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished for each offense by a fine in an
amount set by Council from time to time, or imprisoned in jail for not less
than 30 days or more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
   (D)   (1)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
111.051(A), such person shall be fined in an amount set by Council from time to
time or shall be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed 72 hours, or
both such fine and imprisonment, or, in lieu of such fine and imprisonment,
may, for the first offense, be placed on probation for a period not exceeding
one year.
      (2)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
111.051(B), such person shall be fined in an amount set by Council from time to
time or shall be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed ten days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. passed 6-1-1967; Ord. passed 5-19-1994)
CHAPTER 112:  SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Vendors at the Mountain State Forest Festival
Solicitors and Canvassers
   
112.15   Definition
   
112.16   Registration
   
112.17   Issuance, term and display of permit
   
112.18   Prohibited acts
   
112.19   Exceptions
Street Vendors
   
112.35   Definitions
   
112.36   Scope of subchapter
   
112.37   Categories for street vending
   
112.38   Street sales
   
112.39   Compliance with guidelines
   
112.40   Licensing; operation without license unlawful: failure to display
license unlawful
   
112.41   Application and issuance of vendor’s license; general liability
insurance required; procedures
   
112.42   Revocation
   
112.43   Appeal of revocation
   
112.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city by ordinance to provide for the adoption and enforcement
of local police and similar regulations, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-2(a)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01  VENDORS AT THE MOUNTAIN STATE FOREST FESTIVAL.
   (A)   The city recognizes the need to control vendors during the Mountain
State Forest Festival (hereafter “MSFF”), does direct and ordain that the MSFF
and the city together determine an appropriate method for the control of
vendors during said festival to regulate, license and supervise vendors for the
mutual protection of the public and MSFF.
   (B)   The city does authorize the MSFF to control vendors, subject to the
terms and conditions hereof, during the time from the official opening of the
MSFF until the close thereof, each year, pursuant to the following.
      (1)   The city does grant to MSFF, acting in a manner approved by its
Board of Directors, the right to authorize, approve and control public vendors
selling any manner of goods, including, but not limited to, food and drink for
public consumption, purchased or delivered to vendors selling said products
from booths, stands, trailers or other locations on a temporary basis, as
opposed to those stores and places of sale that are a permanent outlet for
products located within the city. Said vendors shall only be allowed to sell in
compliance with the terms and provisions hereof.
         (a)   All vendors shall register with the MSFF for a license to sell
as here defined. MSFF shall have, at the headquarters of the MSFF, application
forms for a license, which shall be available at least seven days prior to the
opening of the festival. The fee shall be paid at the time of the application
and license issued not later then two working days following the license
application.
         (b)   A license shall be issued approving said vendor, which shall be
placed in a conspicuous location at the vending site, at all times available
for inspection by officials of the MSFF or city officials.
         (c)   The vendor shall carry liability insurance in the minimum amount
set forth by Council from time to time, and have, at the location of the
vendor, available for inspection upon request, a declaration page or proof of
insurance for general liability. The city or MSFF may, in its sole discretion,
also cause the city or MSFF to be added as an additional insured on any such
policy.
         (d)   All vendors handling food shall comply with all city and state
health and sanitation regulations, including food handlers’ permits. There will
be no dumping of grease or foreign substances within the city limits.
         (e)   MSFF shall, in compliance with this section, collect an
appropriate fee to be determined by officials of the MSFF for a ten-day
business license for each vendor, which shall expire at midnight on Sunday
following the grand feature parade. The city and MSFF shall require a non-
profit entity to meet all the requirements of this section, except the city or
MSFF may waive fees for non-profit organizations.
         (f)   City police shall enforce the regulations herein provided and,
upon request to the Chief of Police by a designated director of the MSFF, the
Chief of Police shall take any such action as is authorized pursuant to this
section, including, but not limited to, enforcement of the provisions of this
section.
         (g)   The MSFF shall provide an accounting to the city of all receipts
obtained from the sale of licenses to vendors pursuant to this section,
excluding the license fees collected from vendors located in the city park, on
Church Lane and in the MSFF craft show. The MSFF shall remit to the city 50% of
the amount of all license fees collected pursuant to this section. Submission
of license fees and accounting of license sales shall be submitted to the city
within 45 days of the end of the festival.
      (2)   City police may, for good cause, terminate the right of any vendor
not bearing a license meeting the terms and provisions hereof; or may terminate
any vendor’s license who violates any city ordinance, rule or statute, or
otherwise creates a hazard to the safety of the public.
(Ord. 005, passed 9-18-2003; Ord. 206, passed 4-7-2016)  Penalty, see §
112.99
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
§ 112.15  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from door to door, visiting multi-family or
single-family dwellings or places of business for the following purposes:
      (1)   To sell goods, wares, merchandise or services or accept
subscriptions or orders therefor; and
      (2)   To accept or request donations for any purpose.
(1991 Code, § 17-1)
§ 112.16  REGISTRATION.
   All persons, before entering into or upon a residential or business premises
within the city for the purpose of soliciting, shall register with the City
Clerk and furnish the City Clerk with the following information:
   (A)   The name, local and permanent addresses, age, weight, height, color of
hair and eyes and any other distinguishing physical characteristics of the
applicant;
   (B)   The nature or purpose for which solicitations will be made and the
nature of the goods, wares, merchandise and services offered for sale; and
   (C)   The name and permanent address of the employer or organization
represented.
(1991 Code, § 17-2)
§ 112.17  ISSUANCE, TERM AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon furnishing the information required under §
112.16, the applicant shall be issued a permit 24 hours from the date of
submission of the application.
   (B)   A permit issued under this subchapter shall be valid for one year from
the date of issuance.
   (C)   Every solicitor shall carry his or her permit with him or her at all
times while engaged in soliciting, and shall display such permit to any person
who shall demand to see such permit while he or she is so engaged.
(1991 Code, § 17-3)
§ 112.18  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Enter into or upon a residential or business premises in the city
under false pretenses, to solicit for any purpose;
   (B)   Remain in or on any residential or business premises after the owner
or occupant, or his or her agent or employee, has requested any such person to
leave;
   (C)   Enter upon any residential or business premises for soliciting, when
the owner or occupant, or his or her agent or employee, has displayed a “No
Soliciting” sign on such premises;
   (D)   Engage in the practice of soliciting in the city without a permit, as
provided by this subchapter and
   (E)   Knowingly give false information or withhold correct information in
obtaining a permit.
(1991 Code, § 17-5)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.19  EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter, except §
112.18, shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any person who visits any residence or business at the request or
invitation of the owner or occupant, or his or her agent or employee;
   (B)   Newsboys soliciting subscriptions to any newspaper for home delivery
within the city; and
   (C)   Route delivery persons who make deliveries at least once a week to
regular customers and whose solicitation is only incidental to their regular
deliveries.
(1991 Code, § 17-6)
STREET VENDORS
§ 112.35  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STREET VENDOR.  Any person, except itinerant vendors, who engages in or
conducts, either as principal or agent, a business selling goods, wares,
merchandise, food, confectionery or drink upon any street, sidewalk or public
park and includes food trucks.
   VENDING.  Permitted in any zoned districts as established by the Municipal
Planning and Zoning Code.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.36  SCOPE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of this suchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Sales governed by other sections of this chapter or sales made to
dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of
business;
   (B)   Bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchandise by samples for future
delivery;
   (C)   Sales at trade shows or conventions, expos, arts and crafts fairs, and
other similar events, or sales by entities at events at Phil Gainer Community
Center;
   (D)   Special sidewalk sales, festivals, or other special events allowed by
special permit or ordinance;
   (E)   Any city-sponsored event; or
   (F)   Any business or trades that are vending on private property.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019; Ord. 267, passed 11-7-2019)
§ 112.37  CATEGORIES FOR STREET VENDING.
   The types of businesses or activities that are permitted shall be defined by
the following classifications:
   (A)   Classification A. All non-food items such as t-shirts, sweatshirts,
arts/crafts, flowers and any miscellaneous items that are not food products.
   (B)   Classification B. All food products that do not require cooking, such
as whole fruits, vegetables and non-perishable food items that are pre-packaged
by the manufacturer.
   (C)   Classification C. All food products that require cooking or heating or
a health permit.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.38  STREET SALES.
   (A)   No person licensed as a vendor shall demonstrate, sell or offer for
sale or barter any goods, wares, merchandise, food, confection or drink upon
any street or sidewalk or any other city-owned property within the city except
in accordance with all of the following provisions:
      (1)   No merchandise shall be displayed or sold except in the locations
designated in the rules and regulations of the City Clerk or the designee.
      (2)   No merchandise shall be displayed or sold in a manner that blocks,
obstructs, or restricts the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles in the
lawful use of the sidewalks, streets or public places or ingress or egress to
the abutting property.
      (3)   All merchandise shall be displayed or sold from portable tables,
carts or containers as approved by the City Clerk or the designee. Each vendor
shall remove all merchandise, packaging, paper, display tables, carts or
containers or other materials brought to the location at the termination of
sales for the day.
      (4)   No vendor’s table, cart, container or other appurtenances,
paraphernalia, merchandise, supplies or signage shall occupy an area more than
three feet in width and eight feet in length. Food truck vendors must vend onto
the sidewalk or open space which is not within the street.
      (5)   Each vendor during the period of selling shall keep the area within
ten feet of the location where the vendor sells or displays merchandise free
from all litter and debris arising from the operations, including the litter
which arises from action of customers in disposing of wrapping or packaging
materials of merchandise sold by the vendor.
      (6)   Vendors shall at all times exercise reasonable care that their
merchandise, packaging material, display equipment and other paraphernalia
shall not create a safety or health hazard to customers or other persons using
the public streets, sidewalks or public places, or to persons on or in abutting
property.
      (7)   The hours of operation shall be from 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. Any
other ordinance prescribing more restrictive hours shall prevail.
      (8)   No items of a pornographic nature shall be sold or displayed by
street merchants.
      (9)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument or
device in such a manner or with such a volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet
comfort and repose of store owners, employees, patrons or residents is
prohibited pursuant to other provisions of the codified laws of the city.
      (10)   No vending shall be permitted on Davis Avenue from Fifth Street to
Second Street.
      (11)   No vendor is permitted to connect to or use any public utility
without the specific permission of the Operations Department.
      (12)   No vendor is permitted to occupy more than two designated parking
spaces.
      (13)   All vendors must maintain a minimum distance of 800 feet from any
fair, festival or other city sanctioned event.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
distribution or the sale of newspapers on the sidewalks.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.39  COMPLIANCE WITH GUIDELINES.
   The City Clerk and the Treasurer or their designees may conduct site checks
to determine if vendors are in compliance with the guidelines. Upon inspection,
if a violation is found, vendors are immediately issued site check forms which
indicate specific regulation violations. Vendors will be given no more than 24
hours to correct cited violations. Upon the receipt of three cited violations
within 90 days, the Treasurer’s Office may issue a notice terminating the
license for the remainder of the current licensing period.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019; Ord. 267, passed 11-7-2019)
§ 112.40  LICENSING; OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE UNLAWFUL; FAILURE TO DISPLAY
LICENSE UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall engage in the business or trade of street vendor without
first obtaining a license from the Treasurer’s Office. The license shall be
displayed conspicuously at all times upon the vendor’s table, cart, container
or truck. Any and all additional licenses or permits required pursuant to law
shall be displayed conspicuously at all times upon the vendor’s table, cart,
container or truck. Each day’s operation for such business without a license
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.41  APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF VENDOR’S LICENSE; GENERAL LIABILITY
INSURANCE REQUIRED; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Each applicant for a vendor’s license shall file an application with
the City Treasurer in such form as prescribed the Treasurer’s Department with
an application fee of $10. The applicant may be an individual or a firm or
corporation on behalf of an individual. In the case where a person, firm or
corporation applied for the license on behalf of an individual, the license
shall be issued in the name of the applicant; and the license shall also bear
the name of the vendor on whose behalf the license is issued.
   (B)   All food vendor applicants under Classification C shall submit with
their application a valid permit from the County Health Department and shall be
inspected by the Fire Department to ensure compliance with all National Fire
Codes.
   (C)   No license shall be issued or shall remain in effect unless such
vendor can demonstrate to the City Clerk or the designee proof of general
public liability insurance in the aggregate sum of $1,000,000, naming the city
as additional insured and further indicating that any insurance carried by the
city is excess and in no way contributory or quota share, with assurance that
the city will be advised by the insurance carrier if the insurance is canceled.
In addition, such vendor, as consideration for the city granting a license to
the vendor, enters into a hold-harmless with the city by submission of the
application and licensing process.
   (D)   All street vendor applicants shall be given a copy of the rules and
regulations for street vendors and are charged with knowledge of such rules and
regulations. If the vendor is using a vehicle licensed and regulated by the
State Department of Motor Vehicles, proof of registration and insurance must be
presented at the time the application for a vendor’s license is submitted to
the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.42  REVOCATION.
   The violation of any requirement of this subchapter or of any rule or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, or of any ordinance or law
shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the vendor’s license by the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.43  APPEAL OF REVOCATION.
   Any vendor who feels aggrieved by the revocation of the vendor’s license or
other adverse action taken by the City Clerk or the designee, or by the
Treasurer or the designee may, by filing a written request with the City Clerk
or the designee within ten days, obtain reconsideration by the City Clerk or
the designee. If requested, the vendor shall be entitled to a formal hearing
before the City Clerk or a hearing examiner designated by the City Clerk in
order to provide the vendor with an opportunity to show that the action taken
was incorrect or contrary to law, in whole or in part, after which hearing, the
City Clerk shall, within a reasonable time, give notice in writing of his
decision. Such appeal, unless and until the ruling of the City Clerk is
modified and rescinded, shall not affect any stay of the action taken which is
being appealed. Further appeal may be taken by the vendor to the Circuit Court
of the county by certiorari in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to any penalties or sanctions provided in §§
112.35 through
112.43, the violation of any requirement of §§
112.35 through
112.43 shall constitute an offense punishable in Municipal Court with a civil
penalty for violation and a fine not to exceed $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 113:  FARMERS’ MARKET
Section
   
113.01   Establishment authorized
   
113.02   Sale of products; restrictions on commissions
   
113.03   Market compliance with local and state laws generally
   
113.04   Sellers and growers; compliance with regulations required
   
113.05   Location
   
113.06   Schedule of operation
   
113.07   Administration
   
113.08   Permits generally
   
113.09   Sale of fruits, vegetables, baked goods and wild edibles
   
113.10   Suspension of permit
   
113.11   Permittee of suspended permit; restrictions
   
113.12   Trespassing; violation; penalty
   
113.13   Appeal of permit denial or suspension; hearing
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01  ESTABLISHMENT AUTHORIZED.
   The establishment of a farmers’ market in the city for the sale of fresh
fruits, vegetables, baked goods and wild edibles by the growers or producers
thereof within a 30-mile radius of the city is hereby authorized. Said market
shall be known as the Farmers’ Market of the city.
(1991 Code, § 7A-1)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.02  SALE OF PRODUCTS; RESTRICTIONS ON COMMISSIONS.
   Farm products may be sold or offered for sale at said market only by the
grower thereof or by members of his or her immediate family or by his or her
salespeople. No commission shall be paid by the growers or received by other
persons involved in the transactions occurring at said market, except such
commissions as are paid to the Elkins Farmers’ Market Association for the
privilege of selling at the market. There shall be no resale made at said
market.
(1991 Code, § 7A-2)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.03  MARKET COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL AND STATE LAWS GENERALLY.
   Said market and all products sold or disposed of or offered for sale in said
market shall be subject to inspection under, and shall comply with, and be
subject to all local ordinances and regulations and all state laws governing
the marketing of such products or governing the inspection, quality,
standardization, weights, measures, quarantine, sanitation, marketing and sale
of such products offered for sale by private individuals, firms or
corporations.
(1991 Code, § 7A-3)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.04  SELLERS AND GROWERS; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   All federal, state laws and regulations, as well as all local ordinances and
regulations applicable to said market and the products offered for sale therein
shall be complied with by the sellers, and growers utilizing the facilities of
said market, shall keep the premises used by them in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall remove all fruit and vegetables, cuttings, trimmings and
wrappings and containers at the close of each day.
(1991 Code, § 7A-4)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)  Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05  LOCATION.
   The Farmers’ Market shall be located within the municipal parking lot at the
corner of Third Street and Railroad Avenue, or at such other place as the
Council may determine by resolution.
(1991 Code, § 7A-5)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.06  SCHEDULE OF OPERATION.
   The Farmers’ Market shall operate between July 1 and November 1 of each year
and shall operate on the following days during the following hours: Wednesday
and Saturday between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
(1991 Code, § 7A-6)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984; Ord. passed 8-1-1985)
§ 113.07  ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The administration of said Farmers’ Market when established shall be
administered by the city’s Farmers’ Market Association. Supervision of the
administration of said Farmers’ Market shall be undertaken by the Building
Inspector of the city.
   (B)   The city’s Farmers’ Market Association is hereby authorized to make
such rules and regulations as it shall deem proper for the conduct of said
market and for the maintenance of sanitary conditions therein and for the
identification of persons offering products for sale in said market, which said
rules shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, but shall
be in furtherance thereof. Said rules and regulations shall be subject to
approval of the Council prior to taking effect.
(1991 Code, § 7A-7)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.08  PERMITS GENERALLY.
   Permits to use the market facility shall vest in the permittee the privilege
of entering on the market premises and making use of the market facilities only
upon the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   Participation will be granted upon the proper filing of application
with the City Treasurer which meets the requirements thereof, for which there
will be no permit fee required;
   (B)   The granting of a written permission by the permittee, given
concurrently with the application for a permit to use and enjoy the market
facilities, for the duly authorized representative of the association to enter
on land owned or possessed in whole or in part, by the permittee at all
reasonable times for the purpose of determining what fruits or vegetables,
other than wild edibles, have been produced on such land. Such license to enter
on the land of the permittee shall be given expressly in consideration of the
granting of the permit applied for and shall be irrevocable during such period
that the permit is in full force and effect;
   (C)   Compliance with the requirements of all ordinances relating to the
operation, use and enjoyment of the facilities of the market premises;
   (D)   Compliance with all rules and regulations of the Association regarding
use of the market facilities; and
   (E)   Permits shall be prominently displayed on the permittee’s vehicle on
market days.
(1991 Code, § 7A-8)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984; Ord. passed 8-1-1985)
§ 113.09  SALE OF FRUITS, VEGETABLES, BAKED GOODS AND WILD EDIBLES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep for sale or offer to sell fruits,
vegetables, baked goods or wild edibles except under the authority of a duly
issued and validly subsisting permit and pursuant to the terms and conditions
thereof.
   (B)   No permittee nor any of his or her agents or employees shall bring
onto the market premises, keep in his or her possession, offer to sell or sell
any fruits and vegetables, other than wild edibles, which have not been
produced on land owned or possessed by the permittee.
   (C)   Persons acting under a duly issued, valid and subsisting permit may
bring into the market premises, keep in their possession, offer to sell or sell
only such fruits and vegetables, other than wild edibles which has been
produced on land owned or possessed by the permittee. Whenever a permittee,
either by himself or herself or through his or her agents and employees, brings
onto the market premises, or has in his or her possession on said premises, or
sells or offers to sell fruits and vegetables which, except for wild edibles,
had not been produced on land belonging to that permittee, the City Building
Inspector may immediately suspend the permittee’s permit to use the market
premises for a period of not less than seven days and no more than 14 days
thereafter.
(1991 Code, § 7A-9)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)  Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.10  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   Whenever a permittee refuses permission to the duly authorized
representative of the Association to enter on land owned or possessed, in whole
or in part by said permittee, in breach of the license to enter as provided in
§
113.08(B), the City Building Inspector, upon being so advised, may indefinitely
suspend the permit belonging to said permittee.
(1991 Code, § 7A-10)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.11  PERMITTEE OF SUSPENDED PERMIT; RESTRICTIONS.
   A permittee of a suspended permit shall not enter onto market premises for
any purpose during such period of time as the permit is suspended. A permittee
whose permit has been suspended shall be ineligible to apply for a new permit
during such period as his or her permit is under suspension. Upon a second
violation of this chapter, the permittee’s permit shall be suspended for the
remainder of the year.
(1991 Code, § 7A-11)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)  Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.12  TRESPASSING; VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person entering the market premises in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, any permittee entering the market area while his or her permit is
suspended, and any person remaining on said premises after being ordered to
leave by the duly authorized representative of the Association, is hereby
declared to be a trespasser and is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 7A-12)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)  Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.13  APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR SUSPENSION; HEARING.
   (A)   Any applicant denied a permit or any permittee whose permit has been
suspended may immediately file an appeal with the Municipal Court. The
Municipal Court shall set a time for hearing that appeal, which shall be within
five days of the date of filing thereof.
   (B)   The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the time and place of
said hearing in advance thereof, and shall be entitled to appear at the hearing
and be heard. After such hearing, the Municipal Court may concur to the action
of suspension by the city, or he or she may overrule the suspension and order
that the permit be immediately granted or restored.
(1991 Code, § 7A-13)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Upon arrest and conviction of §
113.12, such person shall be punished by a fine in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 7A-12)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
CHAPTER 114:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
Sexually Oriented Businesses
   
114.01   Purpose and intent
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Classification
   
114.04   Permit and/or license required
   
114.05   Issuance of permit and/or license
   
114.06   Fees
   
114.07   Inspection
   
114.08   Expiration of permit and/or license
   
114.09   Suspension
   
114.10   Revocation
   
114.11   Transfer of permit and/or license
   
114.12   Locational restrictions
   
114.13   Pre-existing locations
   
114.14   Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses
   
114.15   Signage
   
114.16   Persons younger than 18 prohibited from entry; attendant required
   
114.17   Notices
   
114.18   Injunction
Nude Dancing
   
114.30   Findings of fact
   
114.31   Application of other provisions
   
114.32   Definitions
   
114.33   Employee conduct
   
114.34   Manager, owner, operator conduct
   
114.35   Hours of operation
 
   
114.99   Penalty
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§ 114.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this subchapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this subchapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protect by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this subchapter to condone or legitimize the distribution
of obscene materials.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments
from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as
one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas. A principal business purpose need not
be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based
upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   DIRECTOR. The Chief of Police and any such employee(s) of the Police
Department as he or she may designate to perform the duties of the DIRECTOR
under this subchapter.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSED DAY CARE CENTER. A facility licensed by the state, whether situated
within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody,
treatment or supervision for four or more children under 18 years of age, where
such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or
operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether
or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it
offers.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus,
male genitals, female genitals or female breast without a frilly opaque
complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the human
bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast without a
fully opaque complete covering of a breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort agency,
nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal
and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. The increase in
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist
on February 1, 2004.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the
business whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.03  CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores; and
   (C)   Adult motion picture theaters.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.04  PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit and/or license, issued by the Director.
   (B)   An application for a permit and/or license must be made on a form
provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
subchapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with the law by the Health Department, Fire Department and Building Official.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit and/or license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit and/or license as
applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business
or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having
a 10% or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a
permit and/or license as applicant.
   (E)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit and/or license.
   (F)   Application for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to
the Director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be
submitted by hand delivery to the office of the Director or the Director’s
designee during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by
the Director. The intended operator shall be required to give the following
information on the application form:
      (1)   (a)   The name, street address (and mailing address if different)
and West Virginia driver’s license number of the intended operator; and
         (b)   The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of
the owner(s).
      (2)   The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a
general description of the services to be provided;
      (3)   The telephone number of the establishment;
      (4)   The address, and legal description of the tract of land on which
the establishment is to be located;
      (5)   If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner
(s) acquired the establishment for which the permit is sought, and the date on
which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the
location for which the permit is sought; and
      (6)   If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date
(which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the
permit). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the
date of issuance of the permit, then a detailed explanation of the
construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay
and a statement of the owner’s time schedule and plan for accomplishing the
same.
   (G)   The application shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Payment of the application fee in full;
      (2)   If the establishment is a West Virginia corporation, a certified
copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments, thereto;
      (3)   If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of
the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with
all amendments thereto;
      (4)   If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws
of West Virginia, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership,
together with all amendments thereto;
      (5)   If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified
copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents,
together with all amendments thereto;
      (6)   Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which
the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
      (7)   If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land
in division (G)(6) above are not also the owners of the establishment, then the
lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or
other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or
proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession
of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for
the purpose of the operation of the establishment; and
      (8)   Any of items in divisions (G)(2) through (G)(7) above shall not be
required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents
previously furnished the Director with the original application or previous
renewals thereof remain correct and current.
   (H)   The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
      (1)   The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained
in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished
therewith is true and correct; and
      (2)   The applicant has read the provisions of this subchapter.
   (I)   A separate application and permit shall be required for each sexually
oriented business.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE.
   (A)   The Director shall approve the issuance of a permit and/or license to
an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he or she
finds one or more of the following to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in his or her
payment to the city, the state or the United States government of taxes, fines
or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation
to a sexually oriented business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the permit and/or license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
and/or license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the
preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department or Building Official as
being in compliance with applicable laws or ordinances;
      (6)   The permit and/or license fee required by this subchapter has not
been paid; and/or
      (7)   An application of the proposed establishment is in violation of or
is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The permit and/or license, if granted, shall state on its face the
name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and
the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit and/or license shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
   (C)   The Health Department, Fire Department and Building Official shall
complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Director. The
certification shall be promptly presented to the Director.
   (D)   In the event that the Director determines that an applicant is not
eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given in writing of the reasons
for the denial within 45 days of the receipt of its application by the
Director, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period
be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days at any time
before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply
with this subchapter.
   (E)   An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director regarding a
denial to Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within 15 days after the applicant is given notice of the Director’s decision.
The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing
setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support
thereof. The Director may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum
filed by the applicant on appeal to Council. After reviewing such memoranda, as
well as the Director’s written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the
Director, the Council shall vote to either uphold or overrule the Director’s
decision. Such vote shall be taken within 21 calendar days after the date on
which the City Clerk receives the notice of appeal. However, all parties shall
be required to comply with the Director’s decision during the pendency of the
appeal.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.06  FEES.
   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit and/or license is an
amount set forth by Council from time to time$. This fee is to be used to pay
for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.07  INSPECTION.
   An applicant or permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives of
the Police Department, municipal, county and State Health Departments, Fire
Department, or other city or state departments or agencies to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the licensure/permitting and regulatory provisions of this subchapter, at
any time it is occupied or open for business.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.08  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE.
   (A)   Each permit and/or license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in §
114.04. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before
expiration date; the expiration of the permit and/or license will not be
affected.
   (B)   When the Director denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a permit and/or license for one year from the date of denial. If
subsequent to denial, the Director finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal permit and/or license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may
be granted a permit and/or license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the
date denial became final.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.09  SUSPENSION.
   The Director shall suspend a permit and/or license for a period not to
exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a permittee and/or licensee or an
employee of a permittee and/or licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this subchapter;
   (B)   Became impaired or intoxicated through the use of alcoholic beverages
while on the sexually oriented business premises;
   (C)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this subchapter; or
   (D)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.10  REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Director shall revoke a permit and/or license if a cause of
suspension in §
114.09 occurs and the permit and/or license has been suspended within the
proceeding 12 months.
   (B)   The Director shall also revoke a permit and/or license if he or she
determines that:
      (1)   A permittee and/or licensee gave false or misleading information in
the material submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s and/or
licensee’s permit and/or license was suspended;
      (5)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed an
act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other
sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted and/or licensed premises;
      (6)   A permittee and/or licensee is delinquent in payment to the city,
state or federal governments for any taxes for fees past due;
      (7)   The owner or operator of the permitted establishment knowingly
allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the establishment; or
      (8)   There was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer
application was not timely filed.
   (C)   When the Director revokes a permit and. or license, the revocation
shall continue for one year, and the permittee and/or licensee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented permit and/or license for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Director finds
that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a permit and/or license if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
   (D)   After denial of an application by the Director and Council, or denial
of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a permit and/or
license by the Director, the applicant or licensee or permittee may seek prompt
judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court
as in extraordinary remedy proceedings.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.11  TRANSFER OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE.
   A permittee and/or licensee shall not transfer his or her permit and/or
license to another, nor shall a permittee and/or licensee operate a sexually
oriented business under the authority of a permit and/or license at any place
other than the address designated in the application.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.12  LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in any area of the
city provided that the sexually oriented business may not be operated within
1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship;
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;
      (3)   A boundary of any primarily residential area;
      (4)   A public park;
      (5)   A licensed day-care center; or
      (6)   Another sexually oriented business.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building,
structure or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business.
   (C)    For the purpose of this subchapter, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or
private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an
affected public park, primarily residential area, residential lot, or licensed
day care center.
   (D)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any two
sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the structure in which each business is located.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.13  PRE-EXISTING LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of this
subchapter that is in violation of the locational requirements of this
subchapter shall be deemed a pre-existing location. The pre-existing location
will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two years, unless
sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30
days or more. Such pre-existing location shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended or altered except that it may be changed to a non-sexually oriented
business. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of
one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business that was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the permissible location and the later-established business(es) is
the pre-existing location.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a permissible
location is not rendered a pre-existing location by the location, subsequent to
the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit and/or license,
of a church, synagogue, or regular place of religious worship, public or
private elementary or secondary school, licensed day-care center, public park,
or primarily residential area within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or
license, and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is
submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.14  EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from a point outside the establishment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent
permitted by the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually
oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted
any color other than a single achromatic color.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if
the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center;
and
         (b)   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted
the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multi-unit center.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require the painting
of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.15  SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code or regulation to the
contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually
oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign
for the sexually oriented business other than one primary sign and one
secondary sign, as provided herein.
   (B)   (1)   Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces.
      (2)   Each such display surface shall:
         (a)   Not contain any flashing lights;
         (b)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
         (c)   Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
         (d)   Not exceed ten feet in height; ten feet in length; nor ten feet
in height distance from the ground to the lowest or bottom portion of the sign.
   (C)   Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the
enterprise.
   (D)   Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color,
and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The
background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall
be of a uniform and solid color.
   (E)   (1)   Secondary signs shall have only one display surface.
      (2)   Such display surface shall:
         (a)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
         (b)   Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
         (c)   Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width; and
         (d)   Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
   (F)   The provisions of divisions (B)(2)(a), (C) and (D) above shall also
apply to secondary signs.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.16  PERSONS YOUNGER THAN 18 PROHIBITED FROM ENTRY; ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of
age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time
that the sexually oriented business is open for business.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to
the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented
business’ regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to
prohibit any person under the age of 18 years from entering the sexually
oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was
under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
      (1)   A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s or chauffeur’s driver’s
license; or
      (2)   A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state
reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.17  NOTICES.
   (A)   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Director or any
other city office, division, department or other agency under this subchapter
to any applicant, operator or owner of an establishment may be given either by
personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the
application for the permit, or transfer application that has been received by
the Director, or any notice of address change that has been received by the
Director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in
the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned
by the postal service, the Director or his or her designee shall cause it to be
posted at the principal entrance to the establishment.
   (B)   Any notice required or permitted to be given to the Director by any
person under this subchapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the Director.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit
application and each operator to furnish notice to the Director in writing of
any change of residence or mailing address.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.18  INJUNCTION.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid permit and/or license or otherwise violates this subchapter is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations
as provided herein, all in addition to the suspension and revocation powers of
the Director for noncompliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see §
114.99
NUDE DANCING
§ 114.30  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   Based on public input and other evidence and information before it, the
Council makes the following findings of fact:
   (A)   Certain conduct occurring on premises offering nude dancing is
detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the city and therefore, such conduct must be regulated as provided herein; and
   (B)   Regulation of the nude dancing industry is necessary because in the
absence of such regulation the said nude dancing industry will: encourage
prostitution; increase sexual assaults; increase sexually transmitted diseases;
and attract other criminal activities.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)
§ 114.31  APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to supersede the
provisions of any other regulation of the city or law of the state. The
provisions of this subchapter are in addition to any other law or regulation.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)
§ 114.32  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and
independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly
related to, the operation of an adult entertainment premises.
   ENTERTAINER. Any person who on any occasion provides adult entertainment
within an adult entertainment premises as defined in this section, whether or
not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment, or whether or not the
entertainer is paid.
   ENTERTAINMENT. Any exhibition or dance of any type, pantomime, modeling or
any other performance.
   MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the
affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult
entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment premises.
   NUDE DANCING or DANCE NUDE. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type
conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance or dance involves a
person who:
      (1)   Is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to
view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of
the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals; or
      (2)   Touches, caresses or fondles the breast, buttocks, anus, genitals
or pubic region of a patron, or permits the touching, caressing or fondling of
their own breast, buttocks, anus, genitals or pubic region by a patron, with
the intent to sexually arouse or excite the patron.
   NUDE DANCING PREMISES or ADULT ENTERTAINMENT PREMISES. Any premises to which
the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an
entertainer provides nude dancing or provides adult entertainment to a member
of the public, a patron or a member.
   OPERATOR. Any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult
entertainment business or premises.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture or other entity or
group of persons however organized.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any area generally visible to public view and includes
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots and
automobiles whether moving or not.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)
§ 114.33  EMPLOYEE CONDUCT.
   The following standards of conduct upon the premises must be adhered to by
employees of any adult entertainment premises.
   (A)   No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than
opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any
portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic
region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage where
entertainer shall wear at least pasties, G-string or similar item of clothing
to at least cover the areola, genitals and anal cleft.
   (B)   No employee or entertainer mingling with any person or the patrons
shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or
clothing as described herein.
   (C)   No employee or entertainer shall knowingly permit any person upon the
premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of
any other person.
   (D)   No employee or entertainer shall touch, caress or fondle the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person.
   (E)   No employee or entertainer shall wear or use any device or covering
exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva
or genitals, anus, buttocks or any portion of the pubic region.
   (F)   No employee or entertainer shall use artificial devices or inanimate
objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this
subchapter.
   (G)   No entertainer of any adult entertainment premises shall be visible
from any public place during the hours of his or her employment, or apparent
hours of his or her employment, on the premises.
   (H)   No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or
gratuity from any patron for any act prohibited by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.34  MANAGER, OWNER, OPERATOR CONDUCT.
   The stage shall be at least 24 inches above the immediate floor level and
removed at least ten feet from the nearest patron or person.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.35  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to cause any nude dancing premises or adult
entertainment premises to remain open to the public, or to conduct or operate
business, whether for adult entertainment or otherwise, between the hours of 2:
00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
114.01 through
114.18 shall in addition to any other actions which may be taken by the
Director hereunder, be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time
or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of
§§
114.30 through
114.35; and whoever violates any provision of §§
114.30 through
114.35 shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time. A
person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under §§
114.30 through
114.35, shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor or manager to
operate or own an adult entertainment establishment or nude dancing premises at
such time as any violation of §§
114.30 through
114.35 occurs.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993; Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   MINORS
CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   Abandoning refrigerators and the like
   
130.002   Assault; battery
   
130.003   Damaging and the like markers or tombstones
   
130.004   Damaging and the like property
   
130.005   Giving false alarms and reports
   
130.006   Bathing in Tygarts Valley River
   
130.007   Firearms; shooting in city or police jurisdiction
   
130.008   Fireworks
   
130.009   Indecent exposure
   
130.010   Interfering and the like with city personnel
   
130.011   Intoxication in public
   
130.012   Loitering
   
130.013   Petit larceny
   
130.014   Poolrooms, bowling alleys and the like; closing time; allowing minors
   
130.015   Posting without consent; interfering with posted notices
   
130.016   Shoplifting
   
130.017   Spitting in public
   
130.018   Street carnivals, parades or exhibitions
   
130.019   Shopping carts; removing
   
130.020   Trains; exceeding speed limit
   
130.021   Watercourses, wells, drains and the like
   
130.022   Failure to obey officially posted signs
   
130.023   Disabling of communication devices being used to contact emergency
personnel
   
130.024   Public urination
   
130.025   Failure to appear
Adoption of State Code Criminal Offenses
   
130.040   Adoption of State Code Criminal offenses
Weapons
   
130.055   Furnishing minor with dangerous weapons
   
130.056   Brandishing or exposing; threatening or causing breach of peace
   
130.057   Carrying without license or other authorization
Hunting
   
130.070   Hunting within city or police jurisdiction
   
130.071   Bow fishing within city or police jurisdiction
Nuisance Properties
   
130.085   Drug and gang houses, houses of prostitution and other disorderly
houses
   
130.086   Order of abatement
   
130.087   Securing vacant or open buildings
Unauthorized Camping
   
130.100   Definitions
   
130.101   Unauthorized camping
 
   
130.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.001  ABANDONING REFRIGERATORS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside any
dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned
dwelling, building or other structure under his or her control, in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, which may
not be released from the inside and having an interior space large enough to
permit a child or other person to be locked or entrapped therein, without first
removing the door or lid therefrom; or, being the owner, tenant, occupant,
manager or person in control of the place where such ice box, refrigerator or
other container has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of, to
knowingly permit such discarded, abandoned or unattended ice box, refrigerator
or other container to remain on premises owned, leased, occupied, managed or
controlled by him or her without removing its door or lid so as to make such
container unusable or ineffective, as set forth above.
(1991 Code, § 13-1)  (Ord. passed 10-16-1958)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Requiring doors to be removed from abandoned appliances, and penalty for
violation, see W.Va. Code § 61-2-26
§ 130.002  ASSAULT; BATTERY.
   (A)   Assault. If any person unlawfully attempts to commit a violent injury
to the person of another or unlawfully commits an act which places another in
reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Battery. If any person unlawfully and intentionally makes physical
contact of an insulting or provoking nature with the person of another or
unlawfully and intentionally causes physical harm to another person, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 13-1.1)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-2-9
§ 130.003  DAMAGING AND THE LIKE MARKERS OR TOMBSTONES.
   No person shall injure, mutilate, deface, remove or destroy any tombstone or
monument in any cemetery, nor on any land or lot corner or line mark, without
the consent of all persons interested therein.
(1991 Code, § 13-2)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to removal, injury to or destruction of property, or
monuments designating land boundaries, and penalty for violations, see W.Va.
Code § 61-3-30
§ 130.004  DAMAGING AND THE LIKE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority, use, tamper
with, render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or otherwise
interfere with any personal property of another, whether public or private.
   (B)   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority, destroy,
damage, deface, molest or otherwise interfere with, or trespass upon, any real
property of another, whether public or private.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass, injure, mutilate,
injure or destroy any fruit, ornamental or shade tree standing upon or along
any street or sidewalk or within any park, cemetery, public square or ground
within the city.
(1991 Code, § 13-3)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to enact ordinances to protect property, see Char. §
28, subsec. (54)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to crimes against property generally, see W.Va. Code Ch.
61, Art. 3
§ 130.005  GIVING FALSE ALARMS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
fire or catastrophe.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
explosion or impending danger of explosion.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for police protection, assistance or investigation, or any false
report to the Police Department.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for an ambulance or medical assistance.
(1991 Code, § 13-4)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   False alarm of fire, and penalty for violation, see W.Va. Code § 29-3-21
   False reports concerning bombs and other explosive devices, and penalty for
violation, see W.Va. Code § 61-6-17
§ 130.006  BATHING IN TYGARTS VALLEY RIVER.
   No person shall bathe at any time in that part of the Tygarts Valley River
which is above the intake of the city waterworks, nor below that intake between
the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(1991 Code, § 13-5)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.007  FIREARMS; SHOOTING IN CITY OR POLICE JURISDICTION.
   No person, except officers of the law in the discharge of their official
duty, shall shoot or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the city
or its police jurisdiction without the consent of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 13-5.1)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Cross-reference:
   Weapons, see §§
130.055 through
130.057
§ 130.008  FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use shoot or discharge consumer
fireworks within the city limits.
   (B)   Consumer fireworks are defined in W.Va. Code § 29-3E-2(5) as follows:
      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Small fireworks devices that are designed to produce
visible effects by combustion that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition and labeling regulation promulgated by the
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and
1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1. CONSUMER FIREWORKS do not
include  sparkling devices, novelties, toy caps or model rockets;
(1991 Code, § 13-5.2)  (Ord. 214, passed 6-30-2016)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks generally, see W.Va. Code § 29-3E-10
§ 130.009  INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   No person shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or any part
of his or her person, upon any street, alley, road or other public place, or in
any private place to the annoyance of another.
(1991 Code, § 13-5.3)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Indecent exposure, see W.Va. Code § 61-8B-10
§ 130.010  INTERFERING AND THE LIKE WITH CITY PERSONNEL.
   No person shall carelessly or willfully interfere with, hinder or obstruct
any officer or employee of the city who is engaged in, en route to or returning
from the performance of official duty, whether such interference, hinderance or
obstruction be by threat, assault or other means.
(1991 Code, § 13-6)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Obstructing officer, and penalty for violation, see W.Va. Code § 61-5-17
§ 130.011  INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall appear upon any street, alley, road or other public place in
a state of intoxication.
(1991 Code, § 13-6.1)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.012  LOITERING.
   (A)   Any person, individually or as part of a group of persons, on public
property, including streets, sidewalks and curbs, or on private property which
is regularly open for business to the public, regardless of whether it is open
for business at the time, or on or in a vehicle that is on public property or
on private property which is regularly open for business to the public,
regardless of whether it is open for business at the time, who loiters in a
manner which is prohibited by division (B) below, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   LOITERING which is prohibited is defined as conduct which:
      (1)   Creates a nuisance, disturbance or annoyance to the comfort or
safety of any person;
      (2)   Obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
      (3)   Causes obstruction or interference with any person or vehicle
lawfully in any public place or on any private property which is regularly open
for business to the public (regardless of whether it is open for business at
the time); or
      (4)   Involves the making of unsolicited remarks or gestures of any
offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are intended to annoy or
disturb any person in whose hearing or sight they are made.
(1991 Code, § 13-7)  (Ord. 098-10, passed 9-17-1998)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.013  PETIT LARCENY.
   If any person shall commit simple larceny of goods or chattels the value of
which is less than an amount set forth by Council from time to time, such
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, designated petit larceny.
(1991 Code, § 13-7.1)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-3-13
§ 130.014  POOLROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS AND THE LIKE; CLOSING TIME; ALLOWING
MINORS.
   All poolrooms and bowling alleys shall be closed not later than 12:00
midnight. It shall be unlawful for any owner or manager of any poolroom,
bowling alley or similar tables and games to allow any person under the age of
16 years to be in or loiter around his or her place of business.
(1991 Code, § 13-8)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.015  POSTING WITHOUT CONSENT; INTERFERING WITH POSTED NOTICES.
   (A)   No person shall, without the consent of the owner of the property
involved, post any notice, advertisement, picture or other thing upon any
bridge, building, fence, window, wall, pole, post or other place.
   (B)   No person shall tear down, mutilate or destroy any notice,
advertisement, sign or other representation which was legally and properly
posted.
(1991 Code, § 13-9)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Charter reference:
   Authorizing Council to enact this section, see Char. §
28, subsec. (27)
§ 130.016  SHOPLIFTING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MERCHANDISE. Includes goods and wares.
      OWNER OF MERCHANDISE. Includes the owner and any other person, firm or
corporation having the right to offer the same for sale as agent, consignee or
in other capacity under any agreement with the owner of such merchandise.
      SHOPLIFTING. Consists of any one or more of the following acts:
         (a)   For any person willfully to take possession of any merchandise
offered for sale by any store with the intention of converting the same to the
use of such person without paying to the owner the value thereof;
         (b)   For any person willfully to conceal upon his or her person or
otherwise any merchandise offered for sale by any store with the intention of
converting the same to the use of such person without paying to the owner the
value thereof;
         (c)   For any person willfully to alter any label, price tag or
marking upon any merchandise offered for sale by any store with the intention
of depriving the owner of all or some part of the value thereof; and/or
         (d)   For any person willfully to transfer any merchandise offered for
sale by any store from the container in or on which the same shall be displayed
to any other container with intent to deprive the owner of all or some part of
the value thereof.
      STORE. Any store or mercantile establishment in which merchandise is
displayed for sale in such manner as to be readily accessible to persons
shopping therein.
      VALUE OF MERCHANDISE. The sale price of any merchandise which a person
shall convert to his or her own use in committing an act of shoplifting defined
in either divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for shoplifting, or in the
event a person shall commit an act of shoplifting defined in either divisions
(c) or (d) of the definition for shoplifting, then the VALUE OF MERCHANDISE
shall mean the sale price of that part of the merchandise of which the owner
has been deprived in consequence of the commission of such act of shoplifting.
   (B)   Concealment of merchandise. If any person shall willfully conceal upon
his or her person or otherwise merchandise belonging to any store and for which
such person has not paid the purchase price in full, either upon or away from
the store premises, there shall be a prima facie presumption that such person
has concealed such merchandise with the intent of converting the same to his or
her own use within the meaning of the definition of shoplifting contained in
division (A) above.
   (C)   Shoplifting to constitute breach of peace; detention.
      (1)   An act of shoplifting as defined herein, is hereby declared to
constitute a breach of the peace and any owner of merchandise, his or her agent
or employee, or any law enforcement officer, except a constable, who has
reasonable ground to believe that a person has committed shoplifting, may
detain such person in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time
not to exceed 30 minutes, for the purpose of investigating whether or not such
person has committed or attempted to commit shoplifting.
      (2)   Such reasonable detention shall not constitute an arrest nor shall
it render the owner of merchandise, his or her agent or employee, liable to the
person detained.
(1991 Code, § 13-9.1)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to shoplifting, see W.Va. Code §§ 61-3A-1 et seq.
§ 130.017  SPITTING IN PUBLIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any sidewalk in the city or
upon the floor or other portion of any public conveyance used and operated
within the city for the purpose of conveying passengers, or to expectorate in
or about any public place of building, to the annoyance of any person
rightfully there, or so as to endanger the health of any person, or upon any
steps, hallways or other part of any hotel, store, office building or other
place of business, entertainment or worship where guests or the public are or
have the right to go.
(1991 Code, § 13-10)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.018  STREET CARNIVALS, PARADES OR EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Permit required. No street carnival shall be permitted to exhibit upon
the streets or elsewhere within the city without having first obtained a permit
from the city and having paid the license fee as required in Title XI of this
code of ordinances.
   (B)   Permission of Council. No street parade, advertising or other
exhibition or the exhibition of natural or artificial curiosities shall be
conducted within the city without first having obtained permission from the
Council, and, in all such cases when permission is given by the Council, the
parade, advertising or other exhibition, shall be done in conformity to the
directions of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 13-11)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to enact this section, see Char. §
28, subsec. (13)
§ 130.019  SHOPPING CARTS; REMOVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a grocery or shopping cart
from the premises or business place wherein such cart is provided and used,
without written consent of the owner or manager of such premises or business
place.
(1991 Code, § 13-12)  (Ord. passed 8-16-1973)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.020  TRAINS; EXCEEDING SPEED LIMIT.
   No person shall run any locomotive or train in the city at a greater rate of
speed than four mph without, at the same time, ringing a bell thereon or giving
some similar signal.
(1991 Code, § 13-13)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.021  WATERCOURSES, WELLS, DRAINS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Changing, diverting or obstructing stream, sewer, drain and the like.
No person shall, without the consent of the Council and the consent of all
persons affected thereby, change the natural course of any stream of water or
the natural course of any drainage, nor shall any person obstruct or divert any
gutter, watercourse, drain, sewer, water pipe, sink, catch basin, drain pipe or
other thing used to conduct water within the city.
   (B)   Contaminating wells, streams and the like. No person shall cast any
dead animal or any unwholesome or poisonous thing of any kind into any spring,
well, cistern, reservoir, running stream or river within the city.
(1991 Code, § 13-14)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.022  FAILURE TO OBEY OFFICIALLY POSTED SIGNS.
   Failure for any person to obey any sign, officially posted by the city, by
or through the authority of any agency, commission or department of the city,
which has been posted and approved by an authorized agent of the city, shall be
a violation of the city code.
(Ord. O-034, passed 8-4-2005)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.023  DISABLING OF COMMUNICATION DEVICES BEING USED TO CONTACT EMERGENCY
PERSONNEL.
   No person shall willfully disable a communication device of another,
including, but not limited to, telephones, cellphones, radios or any other type
of communication device, when such device is being used for the purpose of
contacting emergency personnel, for purposes including, but not limited to,
reporting a crime or seeking assistance. For the purposes of this section,
emergency personnel include, but are not limited to, police, fire, ambulance or
hospital authorities.
(Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.024  PUBLIC URINATION.
   No person shall urinate or defecate in or on public property, or urinate or
defecate upon private property within the view of another.
(Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.025  FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   Any person, who, having been released upon his or her personal recognizance
or having been otherwise admitted to bail and released who shall willfully and
without just cause fail to appear as and when it may be required of him or her,
shall be guilty of the offense as hereinafter prescribed, and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 098, passed 5-7-2009)  Penalty, see §
130.999
ADOPTION OF STATE CODE CRIMINAL OFFENSES
§ 130.040  ADOPTION OF STATE CODE CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code to the
same extent as if the same were copied verbatim herein all provisions of W.Va.
Code Ch. 20, Art. VII and W.Va. Code Ch. 61, as amended or as may hereafter be
amended by the legislature of the state, to the extent that the same may be
legally applicable within the corporate limits of the city. In case of conflict
between the provisions of the adopted portions of the West Virginia Code and
the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the former shall be binding
and controlling and the provisions of this chapter shall be considered modified
and amended to include the conflicting state code provisions. Any violations of
the West Virginia Code provisions, which are not specifically made violations
of this chapter, may be pleaded in warrants as violations of this chapter under
this section.
(Ord. 096-10, passed 9-19-1996)
WEAPONS
§ 130.055  FURNISHING MINOR WITH DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   No person shall sell, give or furnish to any minor any revolver, pistol,
dirk, Bowie knife, razor, slung shot, billy, metallic or other false knuckles
or any gunpowder or other high explosive of similar character.
(1991 Code, § 13-15)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.056  BRANDISHING OR EXPOSING; THREATENING OR CAUSING BREACH OF PEACE.
   Any person who, in a public or private place, disturbs the peace, order,
decency or decorum of others by violent, profane, indecent or boisterous
conduct or language or by making of unreasonable loud noise that causes
annoyance or alarm to another person, and who persists is such conduct after
being requests to desist by a law enforcement officer, acting in his or her
lawful capacity, is guilty of breach of peace, a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 13-16)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1981; Ord. O96-11, passed 10-17-1996;
Ord. 061, passed 3-15-2007; Ord. 242, passed 8-3-2017)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-10
§ 130.057  CARRYING WITHOUT LICENSE OR OTHER AUTHORIZATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without a state license therefor or
except as provided in W.Va. Code Ch. 61, Arts. 7, §§ 3, 4, 5 and 6, to carry
about his or her person any revolver or pistol, dirk, Bowie knife, slung shot,
razor, billy, metallic or other false knuckles, or other dangerous or deadly
weapon of like kind or character.
(1991 Code, § 13-17)  (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)  Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-1
HUNTING
§ 130.070  HUNTING WITHIN CITY OR POLICE JURISDICTION.
   No person shall hunt for, take, kill, wound or shoot at wild animals or wild
birds by any means, including, but not limited to, firearms, bow and arrow,
slingshot, BB gun, pellet gun and darts within the corporate limits of the city
or the city police jurisdiction. However, it shall be lawful for a resident,
landowner, or tenant to trap rodents or other animals which pose a serious
health, sanitation or nuisance problem on the premises which such resident,
landowner or tenant, owns, manages or resides.
(Ord. passed 1-17-1991)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.071  BOW FISHING WITHIN CITY OR POLICE JURISDICTION.
   No person shall hunt or fish for, take, kill, wound or shoot at fish by bow
and arrow, within the corporate limits of the city or the city police
jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1993)  Penalty, see §
130.999
NUISANCE PROPERTIES
§ 130.085  DRUG AND GANG HOUSES, HOUSES OF PROSTITUTION AND OTHER DISORDERLY
HOUSES.
   (A)   Any premises used for prostitution; illegal gambling; illegal
possession, storage or delivery of or trafficking in controlled substances, or
other illegal drug activity or other illegal activity, is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance; provided that no public nuisance or violation of this
section shall be deemed to exist unless:
      (1)   The property is used for two or more such offenses or incidents
within any 12-month period; or
      (2)   The offense for which the property is used is punishable by
imprisonment for one year or more.
   (B)   Any person who owns, manages or controls any premises and who:
      (1)   Encourages or permits an illegal activity described in division (A)
above to occur or continue on such premises; or
      (2)   Fails to implement reasonable and warranted abatement measures
identified in the notice issued pursuant to §
130.086, or subsequently agreed to, or other abatement measures which
successfully abate the nuisance within the 30-day period following the notice,
or within any other agreed upon period, shall be subject to a fine according to
the schedule set forth in §
130.999(K).
(Ord. 223, passed 11-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.086  ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or other authorized representative of the city
may bring an action to abate a public nuisance described by §
130.085 in a Municipal Court.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, or other authorized representative of the city
shall issue an order of abatement upon a finding of liability under this
section.
   (C)   The order of abatement shall require the defendant to take measures
reasonably calculated to prevent the recurrence of the illegal activity.
   (D)   The order of abatement may also authorize the issuance of search
warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been
abated or whether the order of the court has been obeyed.
(Ord. 223, passed 11-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.087  SECURING VACANT OR OPEN BUILDINGS.
   Any person or persons owning, maintaining, operating, collecting rents for,
or having any legal or equitable interest in any vacant and open building, or
any uncompleted abandoned building, or any vacant boarded-up building must be
secured by methods approved by the Police Department.
(Ord. 227, passed 12-15-2016)  Penalty, see §
130.999
UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING
§ 130.100  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMP or CAMPING. To temporarily stay, reside or dwell in a place, using a
nonpermanent shelter, while conducting activities of daily living such as
eating, sleeping or the storage of personal possessions in such, or around, a
nonpermanent shelter.
   NONPERMANENT SHELTER. Includes, without limitations, any tent, shack, house
trailer, travel trailer, motor home, camper trailer, automobile or any form of
cover or protection from the elements other than clothing and not considered a
permanent residence.
(Ord. 252, passed 3-1-2018)
§ 130.101  UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING.
   (A)   Unauthorized camping on public property.
      (1)   Except as may be permitted within parks by the City Parks and
Recreation Commission, no person shall camp or squat upon any public property
owned by the city, including, without limitation, streets, easements, parks,
dump sites, creek beds, utility substations or parking lots.
      (2)   No person shall leave at any such place any nonpermanent shelter to
be used, or that could be used for the purpose of camping.
   (B)   Camping on private property.
      (1)   Except as may be permitted within campgrounds or trailer parks
designed and approved for camping, no person shall camp or squat within the
city for a period to exceed more than 14 days.
      (2)   The days need not be consecutive days.
(Ord. 252, passed 3-1-2018)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in the codified ordinances or in any ordinance of the city,
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided,
whoever violates any such provision shall be fined an amount set forth by
Council from time to time. Each day any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. All other fines, penalties or punishments for
offenses against, or violations of, the codified ordinances of the city or any
ordinances of the city shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
130.001 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in an amount set
forth by Council from time to time or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days
or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 13-1)
   (C)   Any person found guilty of any offense under §
130.008 shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 13-5.2)
   (D)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
130.012, such person shall be fined in an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
   (E)   (1)   If any person shall commit an act of shoplifting as defined in §
130.016, for the first offense he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the city jail for
not more than 30 days or by fine in an amount set forth by Council from time to
time, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   If any person shall commit an act of shoplifting as defined in §
130.016, for the second or subsequent offenses he or she shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in
the city jail for not more than 30 days or by fine in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(1991 Code, § 13-9.1)
   (F)   A violation of §
130.022 shall be declared a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in an amount set
forth by Council from time to time and/or incarceration for a period of up to
one year.
   (G)   Any person who fails to abide by §
130.023 shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in the
county or regional jail for not more than one year.
   (H)   Any person who fails to abide by §
130.024 shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in the
county or regional jail for not more than 30 days.
   (I)   (1)   If any such person was admitted to bail or released after being
arrested for, charged or convicted of a misdemeanor and shall thereafter be
convicted for a violation of the provisions of §
130.025, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for failure to appear and
shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in
the county or regional jail for not more than one year, or both such fine and
confinement.
      (2)   If any such person was a material witness and shall thereafter fail
to appear when and where it shall have been required of him or her, such person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in the county or
regional jail not more than one year, or both such fine and confinement.
   (J)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
130.056, such person shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to
time or shall be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed three days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
   (K)   (1)   Each day that a violation of §§
130.085 and
130.086 continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
         (a)   No person shall be found in violation of §
130.085(B)(2) unless the city proves by a preponderance of the evidence that
the abatement measures were reasonable and warranted, and that the defendant
knowingly failed to implement them.
         (b)   A person may be found in violation of §
130.085(B)(1) or (B)(2) or §
130.085 regardless of whether an order of abatement is issued under §
130.086 or in violation of §
130.085(B)(1) regardless of whether a notice has been given under §
130.086. A fine in accordance with division (J)(2) below may be assessed by the
Municipal Court.
      (2)   Upon a finding of liability under §§
130.085 or
130.086, the defendant shall be fined not an amount set forth by Council from
time to time.
   (L)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
130.087 shall be punished by a fine in an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
      (2)   A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of §
130.087.
   (M)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
130.101, the offender shall, within 48 hours after such conviction, remove or
cause to be removed, any such item or items, in violation of §
130.101 and his or her failure to do so shall constitute a second offense
against the provisions of §
130.101. The continued failure or refusal of such offender to comply with the
provisions of §
130.101 shall constitute a separate distinct and additional offense for each
successive 48-hour period of such failure and refusal, and upon conviction of
such second offense such offender shall be fined an amount set forth by Council
from time to time for each offense with the cost of removing and disposing of
said item/items to be charged to the offender.
(Ord. passed 10-16-1958; Ord. passed 5-21-1981; Ord. O96-11, passed 10-17-1996;
Ord. 098-10, passed 9-17-1998; Ord. O-034, passed 8-4-2005; Ord. O-53, passed
7-20-2006; Ord. 061, passed 3-15-2007; Ord. 098, passed 5-7-2009; Ord. 214,
passed 6-30-2016; Ord. 219, passed 11-3-2016; Ord. 223, passed 11-3-2016; Ord.
227, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 242, passed 8-3-2017; Ord. 252, passed 3-1-2018)
CHAPTER 131:  MINORS
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Contributing to delinquency or neglect of a child
Curfew
   
131.15   Definitions
   
131.16   Curfew imposed; exceptions
   
131.17   Unlawful acts; by persons having charge of public places
   
131.18   Unlawful acts; by parent, guardian, custodian and the like
   
131.19   Sponsors of evening functions may notify police of such functions
   
131.20   Violations by minor; authority and duties of police
Tobacco
   
131.35   Legislative intent
   
131.36   Sale or gift of cigarette, cigarette paper, pips, cigar, snuff or
chewing tobacco to persons under 18
   
131.37   Use of possession of tobacco or tobacco products by persons under the
age of 18 years
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01  CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OR NEGLECT OF A CHILD.
   (A)   A person who by any act or omission contributes to, encourages or
tends to cause the delinquency or neglect of any child, including, but not
limited to, aiding or encouraging any such child to habitually or continually
refuse to respond, without just cause, to the lawful supervision of such
child’s parents, guardian or custodian or to be habitually absent from school
without just cause, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parent, guardian
or custodian who fails or refuses, or allows another person to fail or refuse,
to supply a child under the care, custody or control of such parent, guardian
or custodian with necessary medical care, when such medical care conflicts with
the tenets and practices of a recognized religious denomination or order of
which such parent, guardian or custodian is ah adherent or member.
(Ord. passed 9-16-1993)  Penalty, see §
131.99
CURFEW
§ 131.15  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTODIAN. Any person over the age of 18 years who is in loco parentis to a
minor.
   GUARDIAN. Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a
minor.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   PARENT. A natural or adopted parent of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground,
parking area or lot, business or place to which the general public has access
and a right to resort for business attendance or other lawful purposes. PUBLIC
PLACE shall include, but not be limited to, any street, shop, restaurant,
tavern, café, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center or any other place
devoted to business, amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall
also include the front, rear and sidewalk areas of the above.
(1991 Code, § 13-18)  (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)
§ 131.16  CURFEW IMPOSED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, loiter,
stroll, play or be in or at or upon any public place, either on foot or,
without a set destination, in any motor vehicle or on any bicycle or other
conveyance in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day unless:
      (1)   Accompanied by parents, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having legal custody or control of such minor;
      (2)   Unless the minor is on an emergency errand;
      (3)   Unless the minor is returning to his or her place of residence from
attendance at a school, church, athletic or recreational function or activity
at which the minor’s attendance is authorized by his or her parents, guardian,
custodian or other adult person having legal custody or control of such minor;
or
      (4)   Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by
some lawful employment, trade, profession or occupation.
   (B)   All minors shall be required to leave and not be on or about any
public place within one-half hour of the termination of any of the functions or
activities herein mentioned.
(1991 Code, § 13-19)  (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)  Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.17  UNLAWFUL ACTS; BY PERSONS HAVING CHARGE OF PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any public place to
knowingly permit or suffer the presence therein of minors between the hours as
designated and set forth in §
131.16 herein except as may be authorized and permitted by the provisions
thereof.
(1991 Code, § 13-20)  (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)  Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18  UNLAWFUL ACTS; BY PARENT, GUARDIAN, CUSTODIAN AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, custodian or other adult
person having legal custody or control of any minor to suffer, permit or allow,
or be inefficient or ineffective in the control of minors so as to permit or
allow such minor to be on any street or sidewalk or on or in or about any
public property or public place within the city, except as provided in §
131.16, in violation of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 13-21)  (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)  Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.19  SPONSORS OF EVENING FUNCTIONS MAY NOTIFY POLICE OF SUCH FUNCTIONS.
   To facilitate in the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter and to
enable minors not to be stopped by police, the sponsor of any special function,
activity or entertainment of any church, school, club or other organization
that requires minors to be out past the curfew hour may register the event in
advance with the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The registration shall
state the time the function, activity or entertainment shall be expected to
end. Minors who attend the function, activity or entertainment shall be
required to be off the streets, sidewalks or public places within one-half hour
after the function, activity or entertainment is ended.
(1991 Code, § 13-22)  (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)  Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.20  VIOLATIONS BY MINOR; AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF POLICE.
   (A)   Any police officer, upon finding a minor to be in or on any public
place as hereinbefore defined in violation of this subchapter, shall ascertain
the name and address of such minor, advise the minor that he or she is in
violation of this subchapter and direct the minor to proceed at once to his or
her home or place of abode. The police officer shall further immediately
report, or attempt to report, such action to the parents, guardian, custodian
or person having legal custody or control of such minor by either telephoning
or personally contacting them.
   (B)   If such minor refuses to heed such a warning by any such police
officer or refuses to give such police officer his or her correct name and
address, or if the minor has been the subject of a prior curfew warning that
same night, then the minor shall be taken to his or her place of residence, if
the same can be determined; otherwise to the Police Department and the parents,
guardian, custodian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of
such minor shall be notified to come to the Police Department and take charge
of the minor. If the parents, guardian, custodian or other person having the
legal care and control of such minor cannot be located or fails to come and
take charge of the minor, the minor shall be dealt with in accordance with the
juvenile laws of the state, but in no event shall be placed in confinement or
jail for violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 13-23)  (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)
TOBACCO
§ 131.35  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   The legislature hereby declares it to be the policy and intent of this state
to discourage and ban the use of tobacco products by minors. As basis for this
policy, the legislature hereby finds and accepts the medical evidence that
smoking tobacco may cause lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and other
serious health problems while the use of smokeless tobacco may cause gum
disease and oral cancer. It is the further intent of the legislature in banning
the use of tobacco products by minors to ease the personal tragedy and
eradicate the severe economic loss associated with the use of tobacco and to
provide the state with a citizenry free from the use of tobacco.
(Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996)
§ 131.36  SALE OR GIFT OF CIGARETTE, CIGARETTE PAPER, PIPS, CIGAR, SNUFF OR
CHEWING TOBACCO TO PERSONS UNDER 18.
   No person, firm or corporation may sell, give or furnish, or cause to be
sold, given or furnished, to any person under the age of 18 years:
   (A)   Any cigarette, cigarette paper or any other paper prepared,
manufactured or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco or tobacco product;
or
   (B)   Any cigar, pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product, in any
form.
(Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.37  USE OF POSSESSION OF TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY PERSONS UNDER THE
AGE OF 18 YEARS.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall have on or about his or her person
or premises for use any cigarette, cigarette paper or any other paper prepared,
manufactured or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco products, in any
form; or, any pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product.
(Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
131.01, such person shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to
time, or imprisoned for a period not exceeding one year, or both fined and
imprisoned.
      (2)   In addition to any penalty provided under division (B)(1) above and
any restitution which may be ordered by the court, the court may order any
person convicted under the provisions of §
131.01 to pay all or any portion of the cost of medical, psychological or
psychiatric treatment of the child resulting from the act or acts for which the
person is convicted, whether or not the child is considered to have sustained
bodily injury.
   (C)   (1)   Any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the
legal custody and control of a minor who is guilty of any violation of the
provisions of §§
131.15 through
131.20, or any person operating or having charge of any public place who
knowingly permits or suffers the presence of minors on his or her premises in
violation of the provisions of §§
131.15 through
131.20, shall be subject to a fine in an amount set forth by Council from time
to time or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than 30
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   Any minor who violates any provision of §§
131.15 through
131.20 shall be dealt with and proceeded against in such manner as may be
authorized by the juvenile laws of the state.
(1991 Code, § 13-24)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
131.36 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (E)   Any parent, guardian, or person responsible for, or having control
over, a person under the age of 18 who violates the provisions of §
131.37 will be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-6-1980; Ord. passed 9-16-1993; Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996;
Ord. 219, passed 11-3-2016)
TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150:  BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Office of Building Official
   
150.002   Office of Building Inspector
   
150.003   Inspection of buildings while under construction; stop work orders
   
150.004   Refund of building permit fee; water and sewer tap fees; imposition
of processing fee
   
150.005   Building projects which do not alter existing exterior structures;
permit issuance authority
Building Permits
   
150.020   Required; exceptions
   
150.021   Application; plans and specifications; application for variance
   
150.022   Fees
   
150.023   Fees; prior payment
   
150.024   Issuance; denial; form; expiration
Building Code
   
150.035   Adopted
   
150.036   Administration and enforcement
   
150.037   Enforcement of external sanitation and common nuisance violations
   
150.038   Authority of city to file liens on real property for costs incurred
in abating exterior sanitation and common nuisance violations and for costs
incurred in repairing, relaying or constructing sidewalks
Repair, Closing, Demolition and the Like
of Buildings Unfit for Human Habitation
   
150.065   Enforcement agency; created; composition; officers and the like
   
150.066   Enforcement agency; powers generally
   
150.067   Inspections and reports
   
150.068   Order to owner and tenant
   
150.069   Hearing; order to repair, alter, demolish and the like, building;
repair, demolition and the like, by city; lien
   
150.070   Appeals
Signs and Similar Structures
   
150.085   Scope
   
150.086   Definitions
   
150.087   Procedures and permits
   
150.088   Permit exemptions
   
150.089   Measurement of individual sign area
   
150.090   Prohibited permanent and temporary signs
   
150.091   General sign regulations
   
150.092   On-premises signs
   
150.093   Nonconforming signs
   
150.094   Maintenance; abandonment
   
150.095   Permit fees
   
150.096   Revocation of registration or permit
   
150.097   Inspections and enforcement
   
150.098   Continuing violations
   
150.099   Appeals
Certification of Electricians
   
150.110   Generally
Rental Housing
   
150.125   Purpose
   
150.126   Scope
   
150.127   Definitions
   
150.128   Illegal conditions
   
150.129   Application for certificate of use and occupancy
   
150.130   Filing deadlines
   
150.131   Fees and conditions
   
150.132   Inspections
   
150.133   Certificate of use and occupancy, display, transfer, expiration
   
150.134   Notice of violation
   
150.135   Right of appeal
   
150.136   Applicability of other laws
   
150.137   Waiverability
   
150.138   Applicability of other codes and ordinances
Vacant Structures
   
150.150   Adoption
   
150.151   Purpose
   
150.152   Definitions
   
150.153   Inspection
   
150.154   Corrective action
   
150.155   Registration generally
   
150.156   Right of appeal
   
150.157   Amending information
   
150.158   Reinspection
   
150.159   Nonpayment of fees/liens
   
150.160   Relation to other codes and laws
Unsafe Structures
   
150.175   Purpose
   
150.176   Definitions
   
150.177   Closing and removal of unsafe structures
   
150.178   Inspection
   
150.179   Correction of unsafe conditions
   
150.180   Relief from order for corrective action
   
150.181   Owner responsibility for costs
   
150.182   Civil action for corrective action and recovery of costs
   
150.183   Notices
Means of Appeal
   
150.195   Purpose
   
150.196   Membership
   
150.197   Procedures and duties
   
150.198   Remedies
 
   
150.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to regulate the construction, alteration and repair of
dwellings, buildings and other structures, etc, within the city, see Char. §
28, subsec. (45) and, see also subsecs. (11), (12), (47), (49) and (50)
   Authority of Council to regulate the construction and inspection of new
buildings and the alteration and repair of all buildings and the like, and to
require building permits, plans and specifications and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (51)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for elimination of health and safety
hazards, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(23)
   Authority of city to provide for the regular building of houses and other
structures, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(28) and 8-15-1
   Authority of Council to enact building regulations, require building permits
and make inspections of construction work and the like, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-
13 through 8-12-15
   Authority of Council to provide for the regular building of houses and other
structures, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(28)
   Authority to regulate the construction, repair and alteration of structures
of every kind within the city and to regulate electric wiring and plumbing, see
W.Va. Code § 8-12-13
   Ordinances regulating repair, closing and the like of buildings unfit for
human habitation, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-16
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001  OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The office of Building Official is hereby created, to be headed by the
Building Official and having such other personnel as may, from time to time, be
authorized by the Council. The Chairperson of the Building Committee shall
serve as ex officio Building Official.
(1991 Code, § 5-2)
§ 150.002  OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Appointment; delegation of authority. The office of Building Inspector
is hereby created to be headed by the Building Inspector who shall be appointed
by the Council and who shall hold such office at the pleasure of Council and
shall receive such compensation as Council may determine from time to time. He
or she may delegate the authority vested in him or her to such deputies,
assistants, inspectors and other personnel as may, from time to time, be
assigned to his or her office or, with the approval of the Mayor, to other city
officers and employees.
   (B)   Administrative duties. The Building Inspector shall receive
applications for all permits and certificates required by this chapter, unless
otherwise provided; and to enable him or her to enforce compliance with law,
remove illegal conditions, secure the necessary safeguards during construction
or require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he or she
shall issue such orders or notices as may be necessary. He or she shall keep
comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued and of certificates,
orders and notices issued. He or she shall retain, on file, copies of required
plans and all documents relating to building work for as long as the work may
continue and for a reasonable time thereafter. All such records shall be open
to public inspection, for good and sufficient reason, at the office hours
observed by the city, but shall not be removed from the City Hall.
   (C)   Duties as an inspecting officer. The Building Inspector shall examine
premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary
inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that
construction is prosecuted safely. He or she shall, when requested by proper
authority or when the interest of the city so requires, make investigations in
connection with matters referred to in this chapter or
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances and render written reports thereon. He
or she shall make the inspections required under the provisions of the Building
Code and other technical codes adopted by this chapter. He or she shall have
the authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable
hour, upon proper identification and in compliance with all applicable
provisions of law.
(1991 Code, § 5-1.1)  (Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of city to provide for entering and inspecting
private premises in the enforcement of city ordinances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-
15
§ 150.003  INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS WHILE UNDER CONSTRUCTION; STOP WORK ORDERS.
   (A)   The Building Inspector or his or her representative shall inspect all
construction of buildings and the performance of the work described in the
building permit application.
   (B)   If at any time he or she finds that the construction or the work does
not comply with any provision of this code or other pertinent laws, or he or
she finds that the construction or the work being done differs from the
description of the construction or work contained in the building permit
application, or he or she finds that the cost of the construction or work being
performed exceeds the estimated cost set forth in the building permit
application, he or she may order that the construction or work be stopped until
compliance has been satisfactorily made or an amended building permit approved
and additional fee, if any, paid, as the case may be.
(1991 Code, § 5-6.1)  (1-4-84.)
§ 150.004  REFUND OF BUILDING PERMIT FEE; WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; IMPOSITION
OF PROCESSING FEE.
   (A)   Upon request for the withdrawal of any application for a building
permit, water tap or sewer tap, whether or not such application has been
approved, and request for a refund of the fee paid therefor, the City Collector
and Treasurer shall make refund of such fee previously paid by the applicant;
provided, however, that an administrative fee of an amount set forth by Council
from time to time shall be withheld and not refunded to cover the cost of
processing the application.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to making the refund provided for in division (A) above,
the City Treasurer and Collector shall ascertain that no work has been
commenced under such building permit and that no water or sewer tap has been
made.
      (2)   The City Treasurer and Collector shall advise the Building
Inspector, the Water Department and/or the Sewer Department, as the case may
be, of such refund having been made.
(1991 Code, § 5-6.2)  (Ord. passed 7-19-1984)
§ 150.005  BUILDING PROJECTS WHICH DO NOT ALTER EXISTING EXTERIOR STRUCTURES;
PERMIT ISSUANCE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city’s Building Inspector is hereby given authority to issue
building permits on proposed projects which do not alter, in any manner,
existing exterior structures of buildings or which do not, in any way impact
upon existing zoning laws or regulations.
   (B)   Further, no building permit shall be issued by the city’s Building
Inspector unless all other laws, ordinances and requisitions are complied with.
   (C)   In the event the city’s Building Inspector refuses to issue a building
permit on a proposed project, the owner of such project may appeal to the
Council within ten days from such refusal or at the next regular scheduled
meeting of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 5-6.3)  (Ord. passed 8-4-1988)
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.020  REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall, within the city, move any house or other building from one
location to another, or demolish any building or other structure or erect,
construct, install, repair, alter or enlarge any building or other structure or
any electrical wiring, apparatus or appliance, any gas system, apparatus or
appliance or any plumbing system or fixture which is or is to become a part of
any building or structure, except pursuant to a city building permit first
issued to him or her for such purpose; provided, that minor repairs, the total
estimated cost of which does not exceed an amount set forth by Council from
time to time for both materials and labor and which do not constitute an
alteration of the things repaired may be made without such permit; and provided
further, that such repairs without such permit shall conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and any other applicable technical code
adopted by this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 5-3)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require building permits, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-14
§ 150.021  APPLICATION; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE.
   (A)   Applications for building permits shall be submitted in writing, on
forms provided by the city, to the Building Inspector. Each such application
shall state the location of the proposed project, the character, design and
purpose thereof, the materials proposed to be used and the manner in which the
work shall be done; and the Building Inspector may require that detailed plans
and specifications be submitted, in duplicate, with the application. The
Building Inspector may require such other information as may be necessary to
enable him or her to determine whether the proposed project meets all
requirements of state law, this code and other ordinances.
   (B)   When detailed plans and specifications are submitted, one set thereof
shall be retained by the Building Inspector and the other set shall be kept at
the location of the work being done pursuant thereto.
   (C)   No application for a variance, as provided in
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances, shall be made until after an
application for a building permit in accordance with this section shall have
first been made.
(1991 Code, § 5-4)  (Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
§ 150.022  FEES.
   The Council may, by ordinance, establish and, from time to time, amend
schedules of fees for permits, certificates and inspections required by this
chapter or by the Building Code or any other technical code adopted by this
chapter; and until such a schedule is adopted pursuant to this section, the
fees in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this code are hereby
continued in full force and effect.
(1991 Code, § 5-4)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1960)
§ 150.023  FEES; PRIOR PAYMENT.
   No building permit shall be issued until the fee prescribed therefor, if
any, shall have been paid; nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until
the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the
building or structure, shall have been paid.
(1991 Code, § 5-5)
§ 150.024  ISSUANCE; DENIAL; FORM; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Upon a determination by the Building Inspector that the proposed
project, if undertaken and completed according to the statements contained in
the application and in accordance with the plans, specifications and other
papers accompanying the application, would meet all requirements of state law,
this code, the Building Code or other technical codes adopted by this chapter,
and upon a determination that the application has been properly filed and the
required fee has been paid, the Building Inspector shall so advise and
recommend to the Building Committee that the permit be issued. The Building
Inspector shall recommend that a permit be denied when he or she has determined
that the above requirements would not be met; provided, that the Building
Inspector may permit any application to be amended by the applicant so as to
meet such requirements.
   (B)   The Building Committee shall review the application for building
permits and the recommendations of the Building Inspector and shall finally
approve such permits for issuance.
   (C)   Building permits shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the
Building Inspector, unless otherwise provided by the Council. The application
for a building permit, as well as its accompanying plans, specifications and
other papers, if any, as approved by the Building Inspector, shall be deemed to
be an integral part of the permit.
   (D)   (1)   If the performance of the work authorized by the building permit
has not commenced prior to the expiration of six months from the date of
issuance, the building permit becomes automatically null and void. Upon a
permit becoming void, a refund of the applicable building permit fees may be
obtained upon the request of the applicant, pursuant to the restrictions and
provisions of §
150.004.
      (2)   Application tor an extension of time to commence work may be made
at anytime within the six-month time period. Approval of said extension shall
be made by the Building Inspector or his or her representative, but only for
good cause shown. Each extension shall be limited to a period of 90 days, with
the total extension time not to exceed 360 days from the issue date of the
original permit.
(1991 Code, § 5-6)  (Ord. passed 4-1-1982; Ord. 096-02, passed 3-11-1996; Ord.
159, passed 9-20-2012)
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.035  ADOPTED.
   (A)   The city adopts the following codes which currently comprise the State
Building Code, as if the same were fully written out herein:
      (1)   2015 International Building Code;
      (2)   International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings,
with the following exceptions:
      4.1.h.1 The 2015 edition of the International Residential Code for One-
and Two- Family Dwellings, Seventh Printing, entitled “Energy Efficiency”, is
exempt from this rule.
      4.1.h.2Section G2415.12 Minimum Burial Depth. Underground piping systems
shall be installed a minimum depth of 12 inches below grade. If the minimum
depth cannot be maintained, the piping system shall be installed in conduit or
shielded in an approved manner.
      Section R311.7.5 Stair Treads and Risers
         311.7.5.1 Riser Heights. The maximum riser height shall be eight and
one-quarter (8-1/4) inches.
         311.7.5.2 Tread Depth. The minimum tread depth shall be nine (9)
inches.
      (3)   2015 International Existing Building Code;
      (4)   2015 International Plumbing Code;
      (5)   2015 International Mechanical Code;
      (6)   2015 International Fuel Gas Code;
      (7)   2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code;
      (8)   2015 NFPA Life Safety Code;
      (9)   2009 International Energy Conservation Code;
      (10)   2009 ICC/ANSI A 117.1 Accessible and Useable Buildings;
      (11)   The ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1 - 2010 Edition for commercial
buildings;
      (12)   2015 International Property Maintenance Code; and
      (13)   2014 National Electric Code (NFPA 70).
   (B)   The city also adopts as part of the Code(s), the following:
      (1)   § 87-4-5, Fire Protection of Floors in Residential Buildings.
   5.1 New one and two family dwellings over one level in height, new one and
two family dwellings containing a basement, and one and two family dwellings
containing a crawl space containing a fuel burning appliance below the first
floor, shall provide for one of the following methods for fire protection of
floors: (1) A 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard membrane, 5/8-inch (16 mm)
wood structural panel membrane, or equivalent on the underside of the floor
framing member; (2) Wood floor assemblies using dimensional lumber of
structural composite lumber equal to or greater than 2-inch by 10-inch (50.8 mm
by 254 mm) nominal dimension, or other approved floor assemblies demonstrating
equivalent fire performance; or, (3) An Automatic Fire Sprinkler System as set
forth in section R313.2 of the 2015 edition of the International Residential
Code for One and Two Family Dwellings: Provided, that floor assemblies located
directly over a space protected by an automatic sprinkler system as set forth
in section R313.1 or R313.2 of the 2015 edition of the International
Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings are exempt from this
requirement.
   Townhouses meeting the Fire Resistant Construction Standard R302.2 will be
treated a New One and Two Family Dwellings and shall comply with Section 5.1
above.
      (2)   International Property Maintenance Code.
   Section 112.4. Any person who shall continue any work after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, and in violation of the
International Property Maintenance Code shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $100.00 dollars.
   Section 302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 8 inches. All noxious weeds shall
be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   Section 304.14. Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to November 1
every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where
products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and
every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in
good working condition.
   Section 602.3. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms,
either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a minimum
temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
   Section 602.4. Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall
be supplied with heat during the period from November 1 to April 1 to maintain
a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
   2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
(1991 Code, § 5-7)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1965; Ord. O-041, passed 5-18-2006; Ord.
140, passed 1-19-2012; Ord. 181, passed 8-21-2014; Ord. 189, passed 3-19-2015;
Ord. 196, passed 7-2-2015; Ord. 215, passed 7-21-2016; Ord. 271, passed 3-4-
2020)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt a building code by reference, see W.Va. Code §
8-11-4(b)
§ 150.036  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Building Official may designate an agent, representative or an employee
of the city to exercise the powers granted to him or her by the provisions of
the city code.
(1991 Code, § 5-8)  (Ord. 134, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 150.037  ENFORCEMENT OF EXTERNAL SANITATION AND COMMON NUISANCE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide additional and
alternative methods and processes to enforce the municipal code provisions
regarding exterior sanitation and common nuisances related to property located
within the city in a fair, speedy and inexpensive manner, and to improve
compliance with such provisions.
      (2)   This section shall be in addition to those methods and processes
otherwise contained in the city code and shall be applied at the discretion of
the enforcement official enforcing the provisions of this section in compliance
with the current version of code enforcement protocol.
      (3)   This section shall apply to the following exterior sanitation and
common nuisance violations contained in the State Building Code and the
International Property Maintenance Code incorporated in the city code:
         (a)   Sanitation (IPMC 302.1 or any corresponding section to the
extent amended);
         (b)   Drainage (IPMC 302.2 or any corresponding section to the extent
amended);
         (c)   Sidewalks in disrepair (IPMC 302.3 or any corresponding section
to the extent amended);
         (d)   High weeds/grass (IPMC 302.4 or any corresponding section to the
extent amended);
         (e)   Graffiti (IPMC 302.9 or any corresponding section to the extent
amended); and
         (f)   Exterior garbage accumulation (IPMC 307.1 or any corresponding
section to the extent amended).
      (4)   Any and all planning, zoning, building and law enforcement officers
shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this section and shall be
referred to herein collectively as “enforcement officials”.
   (B)   Investigations. Upon receipt of information or observation of
circumstances indicating the likelihood of a violation of any provision of the
city code regarding external sanitation or common nuisance, the enforcement
official shall investigate the facts and may, to the extent permitted by law,
make an inspection of the premises.
   (C)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   (a)   If an enforcement official determines that a code violation
exists, the enforcement official shall provide written notice of such violation
to the person having either ownership or control of any land, building,
structure, sign, property, licensed or permitted business or operation which is
in violation, and shall order that the violation be corrected. Notice of the
violation shall be served in accordance with the law of the state concerning
the service of process in civil actions, except that a method of service
effectuated by a mailing by the clerk of a court (e.g., service pursuant to
West Virginia Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D)) shall be deemed to be
effectuated by a mailing by an enforcement official.
         (b)   If service is made by certified mail pursuant to West Virginia
Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D) and delivery of the notice of the violation
is refused, the enforcement official, promptly upon the receipt of the notice
of such refusal, shall mail to the person or entity being noticed, by first
class mail, postage prepaid:
            1.   A copy of the notice of the violation(s);
            2.   A notice that despite such refusal, the notice of the
violation(s) is valid; and
            3.   Advising that the city will proceed to enforce the notice of
violation(s).
         (c)   So long as such first class mailing is not returned as
undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service, service of the notice of violation(s)
will be conclusively presumed to have been effectuated. Proof of service shall
be made at the time of service by a written declaration, under oath, executed
by the enforcement official effecting service and shall declare the time, date
and manner by which service was made.
      (2)   Any notice of violation(s) under this section shall be in writing
and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The date the notice of violation is given;
         (b)   The name and address of the person(s) charged with the
violation;
         (c)   The section of the ordinance being violated;
         (d)   The nature of the violation;
         (e)   A statement of the action required to be taken in order to
correct the violation;
         (f)   The time period allowed for the violation to be corrected prior
to the issuance of a citation. When determining the time period allowed for
correction, the enforcement official shall take into consideration the threat
posed by the violation to the health, safety and welfare of the public and the
nature of the work required to correct the violation, provided that no such
time period for correction shall be less than five days;
         (g)   The maximum fines that may be assessed if the violation is not
corrected; and
         (h)   The name, address and telephone number of the enforcement
official issuing the notice of violation.
   (D)   Issuance of citations.
      (1)   If the violation has not been corrected within the period
established in the notice of violation, or is a repeat violation as set forth
in division (G) below, the enforcement official may issue a citation to the
violator. The citation shall be in writing and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The date the citation is issued;
         (b)   The name and address of the person(s) charged with the
violation;
         (c)   The section of the ordinance that has been violated;
         (d)   The nature of the violation;
         (e)   The place and time the violation occurred;
         (f)   The date the notice of violation was given;
         (g)   The amount of the fine imposed for the violation;
         (h)   The name, address and telephone number of the enforcement
official issuing the citation; and
         (i)   The name, address and telephone number of the office of the
Municipal Court Clerk, where fines are to be paid, and of the Municipal Court,
where citations may be appealed.
      (2)   (a)   A citation shall be in accordance with the law of the state
concerning the service of process in civil actions, except that a method of
service effectuated by a mailing by the clerk of a court (e.g., service
pursuant to West Virginia Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D)) shall be deemed
to be effectuated by a mailing by an enforcement official.
         (b)   If service is made by certified mail pursuant to West Virginia
Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D) and delivery of the citation is refused, the
enforcement official, promptly upon the receipt of the notice of such refusal,
shall mail to the person or entity being noticed, by first class mail, postage
prepaid:
            1.   A copy of the citation;
            2.   A notice that despite such refusal, the citation is valid; and
            3.   Notice that the city will proceed to enforce the citation; so
long as such first class mailing is not returned as undeliverable by the U.S.
Postal Service, service of the citation will be conclusively presumed to have
been effectuated.
         (c)   Proof of service shall be made at the time of service by a
written declaration, under oath, executed by the enforcement official effecting
service and shall declare the time, date and manner by which service was made.
   (E)   Penalties. Any person issued a citation pursuant to division (D) above
shall be punished by a fine as follows:
      (1)   Within any 12-month period, $100 for the first citation;
      (2)   Two hundred dollars for the second citation;
      (3)   Three hundred dollars for the third citation; and
      (4)   Five hundred dollars for the fourth citation and each citation
thereafter.
   (F)   Nonpayment of fines. All fines imposed by citations under this section
shall be due within ten days of service of the citation except as otherwise set
forth herein. The failure to pay when due any fine imposed under this section
shall constitute a failure to appear or otherwise respond under W.Va. Code § 8-
10-2b(c) and may result in notification to the DMV.
   (G)   Repeat violations. If a person has been previously served with a
notice of violation for a violation contained in division (A)(3) above, whether
or not the violation is timely corrected or a citation is issued, he or she
shall not be entitled to receive an additional notice(s) of violation for the
same category of violation if the same category of violation is repeated within
a six-month period of the issuance of either a notice of violation or a
citation, the enforcement official may proceed in accordance with division (D)
above without further notice to the violator.
   (H)   Appeal.
      (1)   Any person who is issued a citation shall pay the fine indicated
for the violation, as set forth in division (E) above, in full to the office of
the Municipal Court Clerk within ten days of service of the citation. Any
person alleging he or she was improperly issued such citation may, within ten
days of service of such citation, file a petition for appeal of the citation,
along with the required bond, with the Municipal Court Clerk in accordance with
the following.
         (a)   In order to properly and timely appeal his or her citation,
within ten days of service of the citation, the recipient of the citation shall
pay the required amount of the applicable fine in full to the Municipal Court
Clerk, which amount will be held by the Municipal Court as bond pending hearing
and resolution of the case by the Municipal Court and the Municipal Court Clerk
shall issue a receipt to the recipient of the citation showing the amount of
the bond paid. In addition to the bond, the recipient of the citation shall
file with the Municipal Court Clerk a petition for appeal of the citation. If
any petition for appeal filed in accordance with this section is not timely
filed or is not accompanied with the required bond, the recipient of the
citation shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to appeal the
citation, and such petition shall be summarily denied as untimely filed;
provided, however, that nothing set forth hereinabove shall prevent the
Municipal Court Judge from finding, upon a proper application and showing, that
the recipient of the citation suffers from financial hardship, and, as a
result, waiving the requirement that the bond be posted.
         (b)   Any petition for appeal filed with the Municipal Court Clerk
must be in writing, on the form to be provided by the Municipal Court Clerk,
and must be signed by the recipient of the citation affirming that the contents
of the petition are true and accurate to the best of the recipient of the
citation’s knowledge at that time. Such petition for appeal shall state the
facts and reasons in support of the petition. Upon filing any such petition for
appeal with the Municipal Court Clerk, the recipient of the citation shall
serve a copy of the petition and receipt showing proof of bond, or application
for waiver thereof, upon the City Attorney.
      (2)   Upon filing of a petition for appeal with the Municipal Court
Clerk, the Clerk or his or her designee shall place the case on the Municipal
Court docket, set the case for hearing within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the petition for appeal, provide a notice of hearing to the recipient
of the citation, and forward a copy of the petition to the enforcement official
who issued the citation. Upon receipt of the petition, the enforcement official
shall cause a copy of the citation at issue to be forwarded to the Municipal
Court Clerk who shall file it as the original complaint alleging the violation
indicated therein.
      (3)   (a)   The Municipal Court shall treat the citation itself as the
original complaint before the court.
         (b)   At the close of all of the evidence presented at the hearing on
the petition for appeal, should the Municipal Judge find against the recipient
of the citation, the bond posted by the recipient of the citation shall be
applied as payment for the fine imposed for the violation.
         (c)   In the event the Municipal Court Judge finds that the recipient
of the citation suffers from financial hardship, the Municipal Court Judge may
permit alternative sentencing.
         (d)   Should the court find in favor of the recipient of the citation,
the bond, if applicable, shall be refunded to the recipient of the citation by
the Municipal Court Clerk, and the citation shall be dismissed.
(Ord. 216, passed 8-4-2016)
§ 150.038  AUTHORITY OF CITY TO FILE LIENS ON REAL PROPERTY FOR COSTS INCURRED
IN ABATING EXTERIOR SANITATION AND COMMON NUISANCE VIOLATIONS AND FOR COSTS
INCURRED IN REPAIRING, RELAYING OR CONSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The city may file a lien on real property for costs incurred in
abating exterior sanitation and common nuisance violations, which include, but
are not limited to, those violations set forth in §
150.037(A)(3), and when the following occurs:
      (1)   A property owner, after receiving lawful notice pursuant to §
150.037(C) or pursuant to any other applicable provision of the city code,
fails to abate the violation;
      (2)   The enforcement official lawfully enters said property and performs
the work necessary to abate the violation; and
      (3)   A notice of the costs of abatement is sent to the property owner
and those costs are not remitted within a time satisfactory to the city.
   (B)   The city may file a lien on real property for costs incurred in
repairing, relaying, or constructing sidewalks in accordance with the city
code.
(Ord. 216, passed 8-4-2016)
REPAIR, CLOSING, DEMOLITION AND THE LIKE OF
BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
§ 150.065  ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; CREATED; COMPOSITION; OFFICERS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   There is hereby created a board to be known as the enforcement agency,
the members of which shall be the Mayor, the Town Engineer or Building
Inspector and one member at large, to be selected by and to serve at the will
and pleasure of the Mayor.
   (B)   The ranking health officer and Fire Chief shall be ex officio members
of the enforcement agency.
   (C)   The Mayor shall be the Chairperson of the enforcement agency, and the
members shall select a clerk to keep a complete record of the business thereof
including minutes of all meetings, hearings, notices, complaints and orders.
   (D)   A majority vote of the members shall decide all questions arising.
(1991 Code, § 5-10)  (Ord. passed 10-17-1963)
§ 150.066  ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; POWERS GENERALLY.
   The enforcement agency as a body or such of its members as may be designated
shall have authority to investigate dwellings and building conditions and
conduct hearings; provided, that any entrance upon premises for the purpose of
making examinations shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession.
(1991 Code, § 5-11)  (Ord. passed 10-17-1963)
§ 150.067  INSPECTIONS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Upon complaint of any citizen of the city that any dwelling or
building within the city is unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation,
defects increasing the hazard of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or any other condition prevailing in
any building, whether used for human habitation or not, which would cause such
buildings to be unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public
welfare, the property against which the compliant is issued shall be inspected
by the Board hereinafter created and to be known and designated as the
enforcement agency.
   (B)   If, upon inspection by the enforcement agency of the property against
which a complaint is made, it is its finding that the property is unsafe,
unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public welfare, the enforcement
agency shall cause its findings as to the conditions of such property and its
recommendation as to whether the dwelling or building should be repaired or
demolished to be made in writing and filed with the records of the enforcement
agency.
(1991 Code, § 5-12)  (Ord. passed 10-17-1963)
§ 150.068  ORDER TO OWNER AND TENANT.
   If the report of the findings of the enforcement agency shows that the
dwelling or building is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the
public welfare and the recommendation of the enforcement agency is that the
dwelling or building should be repaired or demolished, the enforcement agency
shall immediately cause to be served on the owner of the premises, or his or
her agent, and the tenant an order requiring the owner to appear before the
enforcement agency, at the time and place fixed in the order, to show cause, if
they can, why the dwelling or building against which the complaint is made
should not be repaired or demolished, as the case may be, stating the reason
therefor; provided, that a copy of such order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint and order; provided, further,
that in the event the owner of the building is unknown or a nonresident of the
state or it is impossible to get personal service on the owner or his or her
agent, the enforcement agency shall cause such order to be published in a
newspaper published and of general circulation in the city once a week for two
successive weeks, which publication shall have the same effect as if personal
service was had on the owner of the dwelling or building.
(1991 Code, § 5-13)  (Ord. passed 10-17-1963)
§ 150.069  HEARING; ORDER TO REPAIR, ALTER, DEMOLISH AND THE LIKE, BUILDING;
REPAIR, DEMOLITION AND THE LIKE, BY CITY; LIEN.
   A civil proceeding may be brought in Circuit Court by the city against the
owner or owners of the private land which is the subject matter of the order of
the city enforcement agency to subject the private land which is the subject
matter of the order of the city enforcement agency to subject the private land
in question to a lien for the amount of the contractor’s costs in making these
ordered repairs, alterations or improvements, or ordered demolition, removal or
clean up, together with any daily civil monetary penalty imposed and reasonable
attorney fees and court costs and to order and decree the sale of the private
land in question to satisfy the lien, and to order and decree that the
contractor may enter upon the private land in question at any and all times
necessary to make improvements, or ordered repairs, alterations or
improvements, or ordered demolition, removal or clean up. In addition, the city
shall have the authority to institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction against the landowner or other responsible party for all costs
incurred by the city with respect to the property and for reasonable attorney
fees and court costs incurred in the prosecution of the action.
(1991 Code, § 5-14)  (Ord. passed 10-17-1963; Ord. 031, passed - -2005)
§ 150.070  APPEALS.
   Any owner of a dwelling or building who is proceeded against under and by
virtue of this subchapter shall have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court
for a temporary injunction restraining the enforcement agency pending final
disposition of the cause, and hearings shall be had by such courts within 20
days, or as soon thereafter as possible.
(1991 Code, § 5-15)  (Ord. passed 10-17-1963)
SIGNS AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES
§ 150.085  SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to create the legal framework for a
comprehensive and balanced system of signs that will preserve the right of free
speech and expression, provide an easy and pleasant communication between
people and their environment, and avoid the visual clutter that is potentially
harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business
opportunities and community appearance.
   (B)   With these purposes in mind, it is the intent of this subchapter to
authorize the use of signs that are:
      (1)   Compatible with their surroundings;
      (2)   Appropriate to the activity that displays them;
      (3)   Expressive of the identity of individual activities and the
community as a whole; and
      (4)   Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.086  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AWNING. An architectural feature or projection that provides weather
protection, identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to
which it is attached. An AWNING is comprised of a light weight rigid skeleton
structure over which a rigid covering is attached.
   BANNER SIGN. Any sign intended to be hung, with or without frames,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to
paper, plastic or fabric of any kind.
   BARBER POLE. A sign which is specifically painted or striped to advertise a
barbershop.
   CANOPY. An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is supported by the building to which it is attached
and at the outer end by not less than two stanchions. A CANOPY is comprised of
a rigid structure over which a rigid covering is attached.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A permanent sign which may or may not be illuminated
with electrical lights and which has letters which may change to advertise
events, business openings and sales, among other things.
   CHANGEABLE LETTER FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign designed to be temporary and
portable in nature which may or may not be illuminated with electrical lights
and which has letters which may be changed to advertise events, business
openings and sales, among other things.
   CLEAR-VISION AREA. The triangular area formed at the intersection of any
street right-of-way lines by a straight drawn between the right-of-way lines at
a distance along each line of ten feet from their point of intersection.
   COMMERCIAL SIGN. Any sign advertising a business or a good being offered by
another party.
   COMMUNITY FACILITIES. Any public building or service focused upon serving
particular neighborhoods or areas.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. Any sign erected or affixed to a building used to
announce the names of the architect, engineer, contractors or financiers of a
building under construction, alteration or repair to a building where such
construction is occurring.
   DOOR SIGN. Any sign painted or lettered directly on the surface of any
window or door of a building or other structure.
   DYNAMIC SIGN. Any sign designed for outdoor use that is capable of
displaying a video signal, including, but not limited to, cathode-ray tubes
(CRT), light-emitting diode (LED) displays, plasma displays, liquid-crystal
displays (LCD) or other technologies used in commercially available televisions
or computer monitors.
   ELECTRONIC CHANGING MESSAGE SIGN. An electronically activated sign whose
message content, either in whole or in part, may be changed by means of
electronics or digital programming.
   EMERGENCY NON-ADVERTISING SIGN. Any emergency non-advertising sign which is
approved by the operations manager or the City Building Inspector.
   GROUND SIGN. Any sign supported by structures or supports in or upon the
ground and independent of support from any building.
   HOURS OF OPERATION SIGN. A sign which contains no moving parts and which
exclusively advertises, indicates or states the business hours of an
establishment or entity.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign lit in any manner by an artificial light source.
   INTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed in the inside of a building and not visible
from outside the building.
   IMBEDDED BUILDING SIGN. Any sign which is imbedded or set into a building
and which is so constructed and erected as to become an integral and permanent
part of the building.
   KIOSKS. A small stand-alone sign used to advertise events or other on-site
activities.
   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure including attached objects or
decorations, attached to and supported by the building.
   MARQUEE SIGN. Any sign attached to and made part of any marquee, canopy,
awning or porte-cochere which is defined as a permanent roof-like structure
projecting beyond a building wall and designed to provide protection against
the weather.
   MONUMENT SIGN. Any sign which is supported by a base of at least 75% of the
sign width and is independent from any building.
   MULTI-TENANT SIGN. Any sign which designates a multi-tenant development
whether designated as a business park, business center, strip mall, shopping
center, whether professional, retail, industrial or otherwise, which consists
of one large sign that advertises or designates the business park, center or
mall and incorporates or provides a location for the individual signs of the
members or individual establishments within said business park, center or mall.
   NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN. Any sign expressing opinions or commentary related to
ideas and values and refrains from conveying any message soliciting goods or
services.
   OFF-SITE ADVERTISING SIGN or BILLBOARD. Any sign the subject matter of which
relates to products, accommodations, goods, services or activities which are
sold or offered from a site, parcel of real estate, location or premises other
than that upon which the sign is located.
   OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign which identifies or advertises the
existence or location of any entity or establishment and which sign is located
on a site, parcel of real estate, location or premises other than that upon
which the entity or establishment is located.
   ON-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign which identifies the entrance or exit to
an entity, establishment, business or other site or which may be necessary for
the convenience and safety of vehicles and pedestrians utilizing the site.
   POLE SIGN. Any sign erected on a single or multi-post or column placed in
the ground.
   POLITICAL SIGN. Any sign which identifies or is indicative of any candidate
seeking nomination or election to any national, state or local office.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Local governments created by the state to help
fulfill their obligations.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign that is capable of being moved by one person without
machinery from one location to another for the purpose of advertisement or
announcement for business or other purposes.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any on-premises sign that is wholly or partly dependent
upon a building for support and projects in whole or in part a determined
distance beyond the surface of the building to which the sign is attached.
   PUBLIC BULLETIN BOARD. Any sign which identifies a governmental, charitable,
non-profit or religious institution and which is located on the premises of
such institution.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign which advertises the sale, rental or leasing of
existing commercial or residential buildings or structures or any portion
thereof and which is located on the premises being offered for sale, lease or
rent.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected or constructed upon the top portion of a roof
and supported solely by the roof structure.
   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. A two-part sign which is hinged at the top and
connected at the sides and is designed to be freestanding, portable and
temporary in nature.
   SCROLLING MESSAGE SIGN. A sign using a mode of message transition on an
electronic message sign where the message appears to move vertically or
horizontally across the display surface.
   SEASONAL SIGN. Any sign that is temporarily displayed in correlation with a
current season or occasion.
   TABLET. Any sign constructed of bronze, brass, stone, or other
incombustible, permanent material which shall be permanently affixed or
attached to the walls of a building or other structure and which bears the name
of the owner, the name of the building, the date of erection of the building or
contains reading matter commemorating a person or an event.
   TEMPORARY NON-PROFIT EVENT SIGN. Any sign that advertises a one time non-
profit, charitable, religious or government sponsored event.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign that has plastic film, paper, cloth or similar
material and its associated message area that is designed to be fastened to a
building or displayed behind a window and visible from outside a business
building for a limited period of time.
   TRAFFIC SIGN. Any sign which has been designated, established and or erected
by the federal, state or local government which directs, controls or regulates
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or identifies or locates, highways,
streets, alleys or any other public rights-of-way.
   VEHICLE SIGN. Any sign that is attached to a vehicle.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign painted or attached parallel to the face of the building
wall and confined therein and supported by such wall and displaying only one
advertising surface.
   WARNING SIGN. Any sign which warns of or indicates a dangerous, perilous or
hazardous condition.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign placed inside or upon a window facing the outside.
   YARD SALE SIGN. Any sign advertising the temporary sales of household items.
Also known as garage or moving sales.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.087  PROCEDURES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter or
relocate any sign or sign structure without first obtaining a permit from the
Building Inspector, except as provided in §
150.088.
   (B)   (1)   The application for the permit for a sign shall be made upon
forms provided by the Building Inspector. All applications shall at a minimum
be accompanied by accurate sketches and scaled drawings showing the proposed
sign or sign structure, its content, and the location of the proposed sign upon
the premises. All applications shall be accompanied by the requisite
application fee which shall be established by the Building Inspector. All
applications shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or his or
her designated agent of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected or
his or her designated agent.
      (2)   No application shall be accepted for review unless it is complete,
accompanied by the appropriate fee and signed by the applicant. The Building
Inspector may require that the location of a proposed sign be based on a survey
by a registered land surveyor or engineer, at the expense of the applicant. The
Building Inspector shall endeavor to complete a review of the completed
application within ten working/business days.
   (C)   At any time and at his or her sole discretion, the Building Inspector
may inspect existing signs to determine if they are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare. If they are detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare, they shall be removed or repaired within five working/
business days following the determination by the Building Inspector. At the
determination of the Building Inspector, more time may be granted to repair or
replace the sign if the property owner can demonstrate a good faith effort of
working toward compliance with this subchapter. If a nonconforming sign is
determined by the Building Inspector or owner to require repair, it must be
brought into compliance with these regulations within a period of time
determined by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.088  PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   A permit shall not be required for the following signs and activities.
   (B)   Except where noted otherwise, the types of signs listed below are
allowed in addition to the maximum number and square footage of regulated signs
as permitted in other sections of this subchapter:
      (1)   Servicing, repainting or cleaning an existing sign, except where
such activity requires structural alterations either of the sign pole or the
structure supporting the sign face;
      (2)   House number or nameplate identifying the occupant or address of a
structure and not exceeding two square feet in area;
      (3)   Real estate sign which is six square feet or less in surface area
and is five feet or less in height, provided that there shall be no more than
one such sign for any street frontage and such sign shall not project beyond
the property line. The sign shall advertise the building or property on which
the sign is located, and must be located so as not to obstruct or interfere
with view of drivers on public roads or those accessing the property;
      (4)   The name of the building and date of erection, when cut into any
masonry surface or tablet sign;
      (5)   One banner advertising a particular event for a business shall be
allowed, provided that such sign shall be placed no more than seven days prior
to the event and removed no later than seven days after the event;
      (6)   Any noncommercial flag bearing the official seal of the United
States, other recognized country or this state;
      (7)   Traffic or other official government sign, such as legal notice,
railroad crossing, danger or other emergency sign;
      (8)   Yard, garage or moving sale signs that are placed no more than
seven days prior to the sale and removed within two days after the conclusion
of the sale;
      (9)   Traffic-control signs on private residential property which contain
no commercial message of any sort;
      (10)   Public warning signs for trespassing or danger area;
      (11)   Temporary non-profit event sign which does not exceed 16 square
feet, and is only permitted when used to advertise a specific event. These
signs shall only be permitted for the period of not more than 14 days prior to
the event and five days after the specific event has ended;
      (12)   Noncommercial seasonal signs;
      (13)   Drive-through menu signs;
      (14)   One banner advertising the opening of new businesses shall be
allowed as an alternative to a permitted permanent wall sign provided that:
         (a)   Such signs for new businesses shall be limited to a duration of
30 days within the first 60 days after issuance of the first business license
for that business in that location or from the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for that location, whichever is later; and
         (b)   Such signs shall be attached to and parallel with a wall of the
building on which wall signs are permitted and shall not exceed 32 square feet
in surface area.
      (15)   (a)   Temporary commercial signs placed by businesses or the State
Division of Highways during the construction of any road improvement project.
         (b)   To be exempted from the permitting process, a business may
either:
            1.   Relocate its permanent sign out of the construction zone to a
temporary location on-site; or
            2.   Replace the permanent sign with a temporary new sign no larger
than the maximum height and size limits permitted in the zoning district.
         (c)   In any case, once the road improvements are completed in front
of the business, any sign placed temporarily during the construction period
must be removed within seven days.
      (16)   The changing of an approved copy or message of a sign specifically
designed for the use of replaceable or changeable copy;
      (17)   Construction signs which are 32 square feet and non-illuminated
placed on the building site only;
      (18)   Sandwich board. Such sandwich board signs shall be permitted for
the purpose of announcing activities and specials with a total area, inclusive
of all structural support, not greater than six square feet per side and
located on the property or on the sidewalk adjacent to where the business is
located, and must be taken inside daily at the end of business hours. Sandwich
board signs are not permitted in residential districts; and
      (19)   Temporary and banner signs.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.089  MEASUREMENT OF INDIVIDUAL SIGN AREA.
   This section explains how a sign is to be measured in order to determine its
size.
   (A)   The permitted maximum size of a sign shall apply to the entire area
enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or figure,
together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of
the display or used to differentiate a sign from the background against which
it is placed. Necessary supports or uprights on which a sign is placed are
excluded from the measurement of sign area.
   (B)   The permitted actual size of a sign shall apply to each facing of a
sign structure; however, where signs are double-faced, placed back-to-back, or
in a V-type construction, only one side of the sign shall be counted when the V
is at a 45 degree angle or less. Back-to-back signs must be enclosed within the
same cabinet or affixed to the same pole and not separated by more than 18
inches to qualify under this section.
   (C)   If a sign is painted on a wall, and includes background colors and/or
graphics, and if the sign is an integral part of the overall graphic scheme,
the entire wall shall be considered a sign and its measurement computed as
such. If a sign is painted on a wall, and the sign can be logically separated
and measured separately from the background graphics, the background graphic
scheme shall not be computed in the sign size.
   (D)   The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base
of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the
sign. No filling, berming, mounding or excavating for the purpose of locating
the sign is permitted.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.090  PROHIBITED PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited in the city, except as otherwise noted
herein:
   (A)   A flashing sign or an animated sign which incorporates in any manner
flashing or moving lights or any other visible moving or revolving part;
   (B)   Signs which resemble any traffic sign or traffic-control device on a
public street or road, by reason of size, shape, location, color or
illumination and/or which make use of such words as “STOP”, “LOOK”, “DANGER” or
other similar words, phrases, symbols or characters, in such a manner as to
imply the need or requirement of stopping or the existence of danger.
   (C)   Signs which obstruct free ingress or egress from a door, window, fire
escape or other exitway;
   (D)   Vehicle signs which are displayed for the purpose of exhibiting
commercial advertising, identifying an on-site business or supplying
directional information to an off-site business, by means of any of the
following:
      (1)   The absence of a current, lawful license plate affixed to the
vehicle on which the sign is displayed;
      (2)   The vehicle being inoperable;
      (3)   The vehicle on which the sign is displayed is not parked in a
lawful or authorized location, or is parked in a manner that is distinct or
different from the pre-determined parking area; or
      (4)   A vehicle that utilizes a sign that is not an integral piece of an
automobile is not permitted. No additional materials can be added to a vehicle
for the purpose of using it as a sign.
   (E)   Off-site directional sign, except as permitted by this subchapter;
   (F)   Changeable letter freestanding signs or portable signs;
   (G)   Signs determined by the Building Inspector to contain subject matter
defined within this subchapter related to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas;
   (H)   Signs now or hereafter existing which no longer advertise a bona fide
business, activity, campaign, service or product;
   (I)   Any sign located in a public right-of-way, except as permitted by the
State Department of Transportation or the city and in compliance with all local
regulations. Any sign placed in the public right-of-way in violation of this
code shall be prohibited and may be seized by the enforcement official or other
representative of the city, and the person owning or placing the sign may be
charged both with a violation of this subchapter and with the cost of removing
and disposing of the sign;
   (J)   Signs attached to utility poles and State Division of Highways or city
sign poles;
   (K)   All off-site advertising sign or billboard except as permitted by this
subchapter;
   (L)   Signs or banners placed on fabric not intended to be used for such
purpose; and
   (M)   Dynamic signs as defined in this subchapter.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.091  GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Regulations by type of sign.
      (1)   Electronic changing message sign. Political subdivisions may be
permitted these types of signs upon approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (2)   Kiosks. Kiosks shall be permitted for the purpose of announcing
activities, and the like, scheduled to occur in such buildings. One square foot
per one lineal foot of street frontage shall be permitted with the total
aggregate sign area not exceeding 40 square feet. Such kiosks shall not be
closer than ten feet to the curb nor more than ten feet in overall height above
grade
      (3)   Monument signs. All monument signs shall stand in a bed of
cultivated landscaping. This area shall contain low-growing materials such as
vegetative ground cover, perennials and shrubs and shall be bordered by
acceptable curbing such as wood or concrete. Such curbing shall be located in
such a manner so as to prevent automobiles from contacting the sign when
maneuvering. The perimeter of the landscaped area shall extend outward from the
monument sign by at least four feet.
      (4)   Projecting signs. Shall be governed by the following regulations.
         (a)   A projecting sign shall not extend over more than one-half of a
public sidewalk nor be lower than nine feet above ground level.
         (b)   They shall be attached at least six inches away from the wall,
and angular projection at the corner of a building is prohibited.
         (c)   Shall project from the wall at an angle of 90 degrees.
         (d)   Shall not extend vertically beyond the window sill of the second
story.
      (5)   Imbedded building signs. Shall be no more than 20 square feet in
size and shall only bear the name of the owner, the name of the building or the
date of erection of the building.
      (6)   Permanent window signs. Shall be regulated by the following
stipulations.
         (a)   All window signs shall consist of high quality durable
materials. Floating neon, applied vinyl, etched glass and painted images with
appropriate design features shall be considered.
         (b)   Borders around or adjacent to and backgrounds behind window sign
lettering shall count toward the total sign area. All window signs shall be
included in the total allowable sign area.
         (c)   All window lettering/window signs shall require issuance of an
appropriate sign permit.
   (B)   General regulations applicable to all signs.
      (1)   No sign shall be permitted within the clear-vision area as defined.
      (2)   The back of any permitted sign structure must be shielded from
public view by a building, other structure, high planting or another sign of
the same size (where permitted), unless such back is painted a neutral color or
is enclosed in a solid metal backing that is treated or painted against
corrosion.
      (3)   All signs shall be maintained in good and safe structural
condition.
      (4)   The general area in the vicinity of a sign must be kept clear of
weeds, debris, trash and other refuse by the property owner.
      (5)   In no case shall any sign cast light directly upon any part of an
adjacent residential property at any time of the day or night.
      (6)   Lots fronting two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign
size for each street frontage. The square footage permitted for each street
frontage cannot be combined and used on one frontage. In no case shall the
maximum aggregate sign area for the respective zoning district be exceeded
unless expressly permitted by this subchapter.
      (7)   All signs, except where noted, must be placed on the property
containing the business which is being advertised. In no case shall any part of
the sign be placed within five feet of a private or public right-of-way. Unless
otherwise restricted in this subchapter, a sign shall comply with the height
regulations for structures in the zoning district where the sign is located or
unless otherwise specifically regulated in this subchapter.
      (8)   Signs must be placed on the frontage side which was used to
calculate the size of the sign. An exception to this requirement may be made by
the Building Inspector in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.
         (a)   Such additional sign location shall be necessitated by the
exceptional physical conditions of the applicant’s parcel of real estate, which
may include the fact that the parcel is exceptionally narrow, shallow or steep.
         (b)   The location of the sign shall not cause or permit an increase
in the applicable maximum permitted aggregate signage.
         (c)   If the proposed conditional location is adjacent to any property
classified, used or occupied as residential, whether single-family or multi-
tenant, such sign shall not be illuminated by any artificial means.
         (d)   No such sign shall be of such a nature as to be detrimental or
injurious to any adjacent property; the neighborhood or the public welfare.
         (e)   Any such sign must be placed in a location that is in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this subchapter.
      (9)   No sign or sign structure shall be erected or placed at any
location where, by reason of the position, shape, size or color of the sign it
may interfere with, obstruct or prevent the free ingress, egress and regress to
or upon any sidewalk, street or alley of the city.
      (10)   Any sign not specifically mentioned is prohibited.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.092  ON-PREMISES SIGNS.
   (A)   Residential districts. Mobile home park, general residential and
neighborhood residential, as follows, except as noted under division (E) below:
      (1)   One non-illuminated nameplate sign or non-illuminated noncommercial
message are permitted, provided the surface area does not exceed two square
feet and the sign is set back at least five feet from the front property line.
The maximum height of the sign shall be six feet;
      (2)   One or more wall or monument signs shall be permitted for the
conditional uses where permitted: church, school, museum, other community
facility, other use or nonresidential principal use. One square foot per one
lineal foot of street frontage shall be permitted with the total aggregate sign
area not exceeding 40 square feet. Such sign shall be solely for the purpose of
identifying the use and its services or activities, or identifying the
building, and may be illuminated by means which directs light onto sign face
only. No illuminated or flood lights are permitted. Changeable copy signs may
also be permitted provided that they do not exceed 50% of the total area of the
sign;
      (3)   One kiosk shall be permitted for the following conditional uses
where permitted: church; school; museum; or other community facility, as
defined by the city code;
      (4)   For major subdivision development: one permanent identification
sign not exceeding 40 square feet in area. The Building Inspector may approve
additional subdivision entrance signs where he or she finds affirmatively to at
least one of the following criteria:
         (a)   The subdivision has principal entrances from two or more major
streets;
         (b)   The subdivision is physically divided by an existing major
street; and/or
         (c)   Major entrances from the same street are separated by at least
330 feet.
      (5)   Multi-family residential complexes may be permitted one sign
identifying a rental office which shall not exceed four square feet if the sign
is visible from a public right-of-way.
   (B)   Commercial. On-premises permanent signs shall be permitted as follows.
      (1)   Area limit. The aggregate area for all permanent signs shall be
limited to one square foot per one lineal foot of street frontage with a
maximum aggregate area of 100 square feet per frontage per place of business
unless otherwise expressly permitted in this subchapter.
      (2)   Height limit. The overall height limit of the entire sign structure
shall be ten feet from normal grade.
      (3)   Permitted signs. The following signs are permitted and shall be
regulated as follows in regard to number, size and type of on-premises signs.
         (a)   Monument signs.
            1.   Monument signs shall be limited to a total of one per street
frontage.
            2.   To provide an incentive for business to erect monument signs
in business districts, the maximum size for monument signs may be increased to
one-and-one-quarter square feet per one linear foot of street frontage or a
maximum of 125 square feet. In no case shall a business be permitted both a
pole sign and a monument sign. The following example is provided to illustrate
the incentive. Example: a business has 100 linear feet of frontage may elect to
have a 50 square foot wall sign, and a monument sign as large as 62.5 square
feet including the 25% bonus allowed for monument signs.
         (b)   Marquee signs. No more than one marquee sign shall be permitted
per place of business. No part of the sign shall extend beyond the outer edge
of the marquee. The roofs of all marquees shall be properly guttered and
connected by downspouts so that the water therefrom will not drip or flow onto
public property.
         (c)   Wall signs. An identification sign on an awning or canopy shall
be considered a wall sign. Under no circumstances shall a permitted wall signs
cover more than 33% of a side of a building. A wall sign shall not extend
further than 12 inches above or from the building to which the sign is
attached.
         (d)   Kiosks. No more than one kiosk shall be permitted for the
following uses where permitted: church; school; museum; or other community
facility, as defined by this city code.
         (e)   Pole signs. No more than one pole sign shall be permitted per
place of business, unless total lineal frontage exceeds 200 feet.
         (f)   Changeable copy signs. Signs with changeable copy are permitted
provided that the changeable copy area does not exceed 50% of the total
permitted area of the sign. Changeable copy area is calculated in relation to
the maximum aggregate sign area permitted in the zoning district.
         (g)   Projecting signs. A maximum sign size of 20 square feet and a
height of 15 feet is permitted.
   (C)   Industrial. On-premises permanent signs shall be permitted as follows.
      (1)   Area limit. The maximum aggregate area for all permanent signs is
300 square feet per place of business unless expressly permitted otherwise by
this subchapter. One square foot per one lineal foot of street frontage shall
be permitted.
      (2)   Height limit. The overall height limit of the entire sign structure
shall be 20 feet from grade.
      (3)   Permitted signs. The following signs are permitted and shall be
regulated as follows in regard to number, size and type of on-premises signs.
         (a)   Monument signs. Monument signs shall be limited to a total of
one per street frontage. To provide an incentive for businesses to erect
monument signs in industrial zoning districts, the maximum size for monument
signs shall be increased to one and one-quarter square feet per one linear foot
of street frontage. In no case shall a business be permitted both a pole sign
and a monument sign.
         (b)   Marquee signs. No more than one marquee sign shall be permitted
per place of business. No part of the sign shall extend beyond the outer edge
of the marquee. The roofs of all marquees shall be properly guttered and
connected by downspouts so that the water therefrom will not drip or flow onto
public property.
         (c)   Wall signs. An identification sign on an awning or canopy shall
be considered a wall sign. Permitted wall signs shall not cover more than 33%
of a side of a building. A wall sign shall not extend further than 12 inches
above or from the building to which the sign is attached.
         (d)   Kiosks. No more than one kiosk shall be permitted for the
following uses where permitted: church; school; museum; or other community
facility, as defined by this city code.
         (e)   Roof signs.
            1.   One roof sign shall be permitted per place of business. The
height of a roof sign shall not exceed three feet above the average height of
the roof parapet. The size of a roof sign shall not exceed 75% of the lot
frontage (i.e., 0.75 square feet for every one linear foot). No roof sign shall
project over a public right-of-way. In no case shall it exceed the applicable
district height limit for primary structures.
            2.   The supporting members of roof-mount signs shall appear to be
free of any extra bracing, angle irons, guy wires or cables. Supports shall
appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building. Supporting
columns of round, square or shaped steel members may be erected if the required
bracing which is visible to the public is minimized or covered.
         (f)   Pole signs. No more than one pole sign shall be permitted per
place of business, unless total lineal frontage exceeds 200 feet.
         (g)   Changeable copy signs. Signs with changeable copy are permitted
provided that the changeable copy area does not exceed 50% of the total area of
the sign. The changeable copy sign area is calculated in the maximum aggregate
sign area permitted in the zoning district.
         (h)   Projecting signs. A maximum sign size of 20 square feet and a
height of 15 feet is permitted.
   (D)   Parking areas. On-premises signs for parking areas shall be regulated
as follows in all districts.
      (1)   Directional signs and pavement markings may be used to control
vehicular movement in a parking area. Signs shall be limited to six square feet
each with an overall height limit of four feet.
      (2)   Parking or driveway area signs are permitted for the purpose of
indicating entrances, exits, name of establishment to which such parking area
is accessory or conditions of use. The actual business occupying the site. No
additional advertising on such signs may be permitted.
   (E)   Unique land uses.
      (1)   Hospitals. Hospitals shall be permitted one monument sign at each
entrance which shall not exceed 120 square feet in area or ten feet in height.
Hospitals also shall be permitted one building- mounted sign for each building
entrance for the purpose of identifying a hospital function. No such sign shall
exceed 50 square feet in area.
      (2)   Gasoline stations/convenience stores. In addition to other sign
regulations contained in this subchapter, these establishments which sell
gasoline may have the following signs.
         (a)   Signs identifying only gasoline prices and/or the location of
full-service and self-service areas may be located at and secured to each pump
island and shall not be calculated in the maximum aggregate sign area.
Temporary signs, attached to the pumps and no larger than one square foot each,
shall not be computed in the maximum aggregate sign area permitted for the
business by this subchapter.
         (b)   Where the establishment provides inspection services, a state
inspections sign may be erected on the property, provided that the sign does
not exceed a surface area of eight square feet per side.
         (c)   Signs informing the general public of employee certifications
and the use of special brand name products used in the conduct of general daily
business may be erected if placed flush against the building and shall be
exempt from this regulation.
         (d)   Signs which may be required by local, state or federal law in
the interest of public health and safety shall be exempted from this
regulation. These signs may include, but not be limited to, “no smoking” and
“turn off engines while fueling” signs.
      (3)   Multi-tenant developments. Multi-tenant developments shall include
shopping centers, multi-tenant complexes and multi-tenant office buildings.
         (a)   The project is allowed one monument sign per street frontage
with a maximum of height of ten feet and a maximum size of one square foot per
one linear foot of frontage with an overall maximum size of 100 square feet.
The monument sign shall denote the name of the development; major anchor
tenants for the project also may be listed on the sign.
         (b)   Additionally, the project is allowed a maximum of one wall sign
per tenant. The following scale shall be used in determining which formula
shall be used to calculate the permitted sign size for each tenant:
 
Store frontage of < 21 feet  Ratio of 2 square feet per 1 lineal foot of store
                             frontage
Store frontage of 21—50 feeRatio of 1.75 square feet per 1 lineal foot of
                             store frontage
Store frontage > 50 feet     Ratio of 1.5 square feet per 1 lineal foot of
                             store frontage with a maximum of 100 square feet
End units shall be permitted a maximum of one wall sign for each exterior side
for a maximum of two signs. Each sign is not to exceed one square foot per
lineal foot width for the wall where the sign is attached.
 
         (c)   Kiosks shall be permitted for the purpose of announcing
activities, and the like, scheduled to occur in such buildings. One square foot
per one lineal foot of street frontage shall be permitted with the total
aggregate sign area not exceeding 40 square feet. Such kiosks shall not be
closer than ten feet to the right-of-way nor more than ten feet in overall
height above grade.
         (d)   Out parcels are permitted two wall signs, with each sign not to
exceed one square foot per lineal foot of width for the wall where the sign is
attached.
      (4)   Theaters. One sign which carries the name of the theater is
permitted. Additionally, one marquee sign not to extend 24 square feet per
movie screen is permitted. Such sign shall project no more than eight feet from
the building face to which it is attached and shall have a minimum clearance of
eight feet. The total sign area of the marquee sign shall not be included in
the maximum aggregate of 300 square feet.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.093  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   In the event a nonconforming sign is structurally damaged in any
matter, it may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before, if such repair
or reconstruction is complete within 30 days of the date of such damage, unless
30% or more of the sign and/or its structure is damaged. If 30% or more of the
sign and/or its structure is damaged or the repair or reconstruction is not
completed within 30 days, the entire sign and its structure shall be removed
and a new sign which conforms to the requirements of this subchapter may be
erected, if otherwise permitted by this subchapter, except as provided in §
150.090.
   (B)   In the event a nonconforming sign is structurally altered in any
manner, the entire sign and sign structure shall be removed and a new sign
which conforms to the requirements of this subchapter may be erected, if
otherwise permitted by this subchapter.
   (C)   Any temporary or portable sign erected or displayed prior to the
effective date of the amendment of this subchapter, and which is determined to
be nonconforming shall be removed.
   (D)   The burden of establishing a sign to be legally nonconforming rests
upon the person, firm or corporation claiming legal status for the sign.
   (E)   Nonconforming signs or sign structures must be completely removed or
replaced with signs which fully comply with the regulations of this subchapter
when one or more of the following situations occur:
      (1)   The name or ownership of a business changes; provided however, that
upon application to the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector may
authorize the substitution of one name or owner for another so long as no
structural alterations to the nonconforming sign are made; and/or
      (2)   A new sign is desired, whether or not the name of the business or
use changes.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.094  MAINTENANCE; ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Every sign or sign structure, whether or not a permit is required,
shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all
times, including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting,
cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of such sign.
      (2)   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
premises, owned or controlled by him or her, any sign or sign structure which
is in a dangerous or defective condition. No sign painted or printed on paper
or fabric shall be posted or otherwise secured directly to the surface of any
awning, canopy, utility service pole, building or structure not intended for
signs.
   (B)   Surrounding area. The owner of any property on which a sign is located
and those responsible for maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible
for the conditions of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall be
required to keep this area clean, sanitary and free from noxious or offensive
substances, rubbish and flammable waste materials.
   (C)   Abandonment.
      (1)   Any sign or sign structure, including temporary signs or sign
structures, that is located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied
for a period of 120 days shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
      (2)   Abandoned signs and sign structures are prohibited and upon
abandonment, as defined in division (C)(1) above, the sign shall be removed
within 30 days by the owner or person, firm or corporation responsible for the
sign or owner of the premises or the person, firm or corporation responsible
for the premises.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.095  PERMIT FEES.
   The following fees shall be charged for permits to erect and various types
of signs and any other similar type of outdoor display regulated by this
subchapter:
 
Type of Sign                                Fee
All signs or other similar types of outdoor $25 + $0.50 per square foot, $25
displays regulated by this subchapter       reinspection
Exempt signs                                No fee
 
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.096  REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION OR PERMIT.
   The City Building Inspector or his or her designate is hereby authorized and
empowered to revoke any permit issued by the city under this subchapter upon
failure of the holder thereof to comply with any of the provisions of this
subchapter or any state applicable, local or national code. They are also
authorized and empowered to revoke a permit for the erection of any sign or
similar structure which violates the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.097  INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The City Building Inspector or his or her designee shall make an
inspection of any sign or structure regulated by this subchapter at the time of
sign erection.
      (2)   The Inspector shall cause to be removed any sign that violates any
provision of this subchapter or a sign or structure for which no permit has
been issued.
      (3)   The owner of the property on which the sign or structure is located
or the owner or person, firm or corporation responsible for the sign or
structure itself shall be notified in writing of the violation and if not
altered or removed to meet the requirements of this subchapter within 20 days
for structural deficiencies or 30 for type, size or location deficiencies, such
sign or other structure shall be removed by the city or designee and the cost
of such work shall be charged to the appropriate party and collected in the
manner provided by law.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, or if the sign or
structure is in danger of imminent collapse, is defective or poses a
substantial and present risk to persons or property, the Inspector may cause
the immediate removal of such sign or structure without notice.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.098  CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   The nonabatement of a violation of the provisions of this subchapter, after
due notice, shall be considered to constitute a separate violation for each day
that such violation is permitted to exist.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 150.099  APPEALS.
   Anyone violating any portion of this code shall have ten days to appeal to
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015)
CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRICIANS
§ 150.110  GENERALLY.
   (A)   No electrical work shall be performed within the jurisdictional limits
of the city by an electrical contractor or electrician, as those terms are
defined in division (B) below, unless such electrical work is performed by an
electrician holding an unexpired certificate of competency for the level of
electrical work in question issued by the State Fire Marshal in accordance with
the procedures of the State Fire Marshal relating thereto.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         ELECTRICAL. Pertains to the installation of wires and conduits for the
purpose of transmitting electricity, the installation of fixtures and equipment
in connection therewith, or both.
         ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person who engages in the business of or
employs others for the construction, alteration or repair of any electrical
wiring used for the purpose of furnishing heat, light or power.
         ELECTRICIAN. Any individual who, either on his or her own or as an
employee of an electrical contractor, is engaged in the construction,
alteration or repair of any electrical wiring used for the purpose of
furnishing heat, light or power.
      (2)   The terms “electrical contractor” and “electrician” shall not be
construed so as to apply to:
         (a)   Any electrician who performs electrical work with respect to any
property owned or rented by him or her;
         (b)   Any electrician who performs electrical work at any
manufacturing plant or other industrial establishment as an employee of the
person operating such plant or establishment;
         (c)   Any electrician who, while employed by a person engaged in the
business of selling appliances at retail, performs electrical work with respect
to installation and repair of appliances as part of his or her regular duties;
         (d)   Any electrician who, while employed by a public utility or any
of its affiliates, performs electrical work in connection with the furnishing
of public utility service; or
         (e)   Any electrician who, while employed as a member of a permanent
maintenance staff of an institution or business enterprise, as part of his or
her regular duties performs electrical work with respect to property owned by
his or her employer.
   (C)   No electrician holding an unexpired certificate of competency shall be
required to obtain any type of municipal electrician’ s license as a condition
precedent to performing electrical work within the city or pay any license fee
therefor.
   (D)   Every person or corporation who shall apply for a building permit for
the construction, repair or alteration of any structure within the city, which
construction, repair or alteration shall include electrical work as defined
herein, shall describe the nature of the electrical work to be performed, shall
provide the name of the electrician who shall perform it, and, if applicable,
shall provide evidence that such electrician holds an unexpired certificate of
competency for the level of electrical work to be performed. Compliance with
this section, if applicable, shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of
such building permit.
(1991 Code, § 5-28)  (Ord. passed 8-18-1978; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty,
see §
150.999
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 150.125  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote health and safety standards for
rental housing and to secure and preserve the integrity and character of
residential districts within the city. These standards relate to the condition,
maintenance and occupancy of rental dwelling units and are intended to ensure
that rental housing is safe, sanitary and suitable in accordance with
applicable provisions of the International Building Code and other regulations
as adopted by the city.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.126  SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all rental dwelling units within the city.
This subchapter shall not apply to owner occupied dwellings wherein roomers or
boarders are maintained in common living areas in accordance with other
applicable codes and ordinances. This subchapter shall not apply to hotels,
motels, dormitories, lodging and boarding houses and other transient
residential occupancies. Buildings housing business or commercial uses in
addition to rental dwelling units shall be subject to the provisions of the
State Building Code which apply to such mixed uses.
   (B)   Where a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued, in
accordance with the International Building Code for any building that has been
erected, altered or converted to a residential use, said dwelling shall not be
subject to reinspection for the purpose of this subchapter for rental
registration for three years following the date of issuance.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.127  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY. The certificate issued by the Code
Official which permits the use of a building and which certifies compliance
with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its
several parts together with any special stipulations or conditions.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the Building Code of the city, or a duly
authorized, licensed, bonded and certified representative appointed by the CODE
OFFICIAL to temporarily serve in that role.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   OWNER OCCUPIED. Occupied by the actual property owner or by any person or
persons related thereto by blood, marriage or adoption and where no
remuneration is received.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit which is offered in whole or part
for residential purposes and for which remuneration is received.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.128  ILLEGAL CONDITIONS.
   An owner or operator shall not rent or offer for rent any dwelling unit for
use in whole or in part for human habitation unless a written application for a
certificate of use and occupancy has been filed for said dwelling unit or a
valid certificate of use and occupancy has been issued for said dwelling unit
by the Code Official indicating that inspection found the premises to be in
substantial compliance with the International Building Code.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.129  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   Application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be submitted in
writing, on forms provided, to the Code Official and shall contain at least the
following information:
   (A)   For the dwelling:
      (1)   The address(es) of the dwelling units;
      (2)   The zoning district of the dwelling;
      (3)   The number of units in the dwelling;
      (4)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners, agent or
operator, and any other person to be notified in case of emergency or
nonconforming condition requiring notification; and
      (5)   Any other uses within the building.
   (B)   For each dwelling unit:
      (1)   The story on which the unit is;
      (2)   Maximum occupancy;
      (3)   Number of off-street parking; and
      (4)   Dwelling unit identification number.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.130  FILING DEADLINES.
   (A)   Initial application. Application for a certificate of use and
occupancy for a rental dwelling unit where none has previously been issued
shall be in accordance with §
150.129.
   (B)   Renewal application. An application for renewal of the existing
certificate of use and occupancy shall be filed at least 30 days before the
expiration date of the existing certificate of use and occupancy. Upon
receiving an application for renewal of the certificate and use and occupancy,
the Code Official shall inspect the dwelling and shall reissue a certificate of
use and occupancy within ten days following inspection if said unit is found to
be in substantial compliance with the State Building Code.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.131  FEES AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each property owner shall be charged a compliance inspection fee of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time per inspection per unit. If the
property is a multi-unit building, there shall be a maximum fee of an amount
set forth by Council from time to time charged for the compliance inspection
for that building, regardless of the number of units.
   (B)   Property owners missing scheduled inspections and failing to provide
24-hours’ notice shall be charged an additional fee in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
   (C)   All inspections shall be scheduled during regular business hours,
unless otherwise approved by the Code Official.
   (D)   Real estate pre-sale inspection fees of an amount set forth by Council
from time to time per man-hour with a one-hour minimum charge shall be assessed
where an inspection is requested to determine if a rental property is in
compliance with the State Building Code.
   (E)   Preparation and issuance of a duplicate certificate of use and
occupancy shall require a service charge in an amount set forth by Council from
time to time.
   (F)   Re-inspection fees of an amount set forth by Council from time to time
per unit shall be charged to the property owner for each inspection of property
requiring more than two inspections for compliance.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.132  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The Code Official shall inspect within six years of the
effective date of this subchapter all rental dwelling units constructed prior
to adoption of this chapter.
      (2)   The owner or authorized representative or agent, for purposes of
inspection under rental registration, shall provide the Code Official access to
all areas of any building containing rental dwelling units and the code shall
be accompanied by the owner or an agent of the owner during inspection.
   (B)   (1)   The housing authority of the city, Gateway Apartments and any
Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. § 1437f) housing are exempt
from this subchapter to the extent it is responsible for its own inspections.
      (2)   However, the housing authority of the city, Gateway Apartments and
any Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. § 1437f) housing must
provide the Code Official with the results of inspections performed by it
immediately after inspections are completed.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.133  CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY, DISPLAY, TRANSFER, EXPIRATION.
   (A)   If, upon inspection, the rental dwelling unit is found to conform to
the requirements of this subchapter, the Code Official shall issue a
certificate of use and occupancy within ten days.
   (B)   After the effective date of this subchapter, either upon an initial
application or a renewal application, a three-year certificate of use and
occupancy shall be issued for the dwelling unit after the Code Official finds
the unit in substantial compliance with this subchapter and the State Building
Code which has been adopted by the city.
   (C)   The certificate of use and occupancy shall be transferable to
subsequent owners of the respective dwelling unit(s).
   (D)   A copy of the certificate of use and occupancy shall be available for
inspection at the city code enforcement office during regular business hours.
   (E)   Certificates of use and occupancy issued after the effective date of
this subchapter shall expire three years from the date of issuance by the Code
Official unless sooner revoked.
   (F)   The owner/agent shall post a copy of the certificate of use and
occupancy in a conspicuous location in the interior of the premises or near the
interior electrical fuse or circuit box of each dwelling unit.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.134  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   When in the course of the inspection required under this
subchapter, violations are discovered on the premises which do not affect the
habitability or safety of a rental dwelling, such violations shall be cited in
accordance with the administrative provisions of the applicable code or
ordinance.
      (2)   Such violations shall not be construed as grounds to withhold or
revoke the certificate of use and occupancy.
   (B)   (1)   Where conditions exist which affect the habitability of the
dwelling but which do not pose an imminent hazard to the occupants, a
certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued along with a notice of
violation.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall be in writing, shall be served to the
owner or agent, shall contain a description of the property sufficient for
identification, and shall include:
         (a)   A statement of the reasonable time for which it was issued;
         (b)   A correction order specifying repairs to be made;
         (c)   A reasonable time not to exceed 60 days following the issuance
of the notice of violation in which repairs are to be completed; and
         (d)   A statement of the owners right of appeal.
      (3)   The owner shall, within the time period specified in the notice of
violation, correct all deficiencies cited in violation of the International
Building Code and city codes. The certificate of use and occupancy shall be
revoked and a notice to vacate issued if the dwelling unit is not in compliance
within the time specified in the notice of violation. However, the Code
Official may, upon written request, extend the period for compliance where the
work has been delayed despite good-faith efforts to comply and where such
extension presents no immediate threat to the health or safety of the occupants
of the dwelling unit or other units or properties. A notice of violation shall
not be construed to verify substandard housing except where conditions exist
which require the vacation of the dwelling or dwelling unit.
   (C)   (1)   Where violations are found which, in the judgment of the Code
Official, are sufficient to withhold or revoke the certificate of use and
occupancy, the Code Official shall issue a notice to vacate.
      (2)   The notice to vacate shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   Be served to the owner or owner’s agent;
         (c)   Contain a description of the property sufficient for
identification;
         (d)   State the reasons therefor;
         (e)   Include a copy of any relevant notice of violation; and
         (f)   Include notification of the owners right of appeal.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the Code
Official from ordering the immediate vacation of any dwelling or dwelling unit
where violations are discovered which pose an imminent threat to the health or
safety of the occupants. Appeal shall not stay an order to vacate under such
conditions.
   (E)   Occupancy of any rental dwelling unit in violation of a notice to
vacate shall subject the owner/agent and/or the occupants to the penalties
prescribed in §
150.999.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.135  RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   Any property owner or agent shall have the right to appeal to
the Board of Zoning Appeals from a decision of the Code Official where it is
alleged that the intent of this subchapter or the codes referenced herein have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this subchapter do not fully
apply, or an equivalent remedy to any violation may be employed.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be submitted to the Code Official within 20 days
of receipt of the notice of violation. Except where conditions warrant
immediate vacation of the dwelling, such appeal shall stay all action on the
part of the code official in furtherance of the notice of violation from which
the appeal was taken.
   (B)   Where a violation of the City Building Code is cited in a notice of
violation, appeal shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.136  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   This subchapter is not intended to abrogate any of the rights and
responsibilities normally ascribed to the tenant or the landlord under the laws
of the state whether set out by case law or by the West Virginia Code, or any
other applicable laws.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.137  WAIVERABILITY.
   The minimum requirement of this subchapter may not be waived either
intentionally or impliedly by either party to a rental agreement.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.138  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER CODES AND ORDINANCES.
   This subchapter is in addition to all housing requirements of other city
ordinances and the laws of the state, as the case may be.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
VACANT STRUCTURES
§ 150.150  ADOPTION.
   There is hereby adopted a Vacant Structure Code for the city.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.151  PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city has determined that an uninspected and unmonitored vacant
building may present a fire hazard, may provide temporary occupancy by
transients (including drug users and traffickers), may detract from private
and/or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings, and
that the health, safety and welfare of the public is served by the regulation
of such vacant buildings.
   (B)   Owners of uninspected and unmonitored vacant buildings shall register
such vacant buildings with the city, make payment of a fee for the registration
thereof, and otherwise conform to these vacant building regulations.
   (C)   This subchapter ensures that, through a registration, inspection and
monitoring process, vacant buildings will be kept weather-tight and secure from
trespassers, will provide safe entry to police officers and firefighters in
times of emergency, will not impede private and/or public efforts to
rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings and will not present otherwise a
public hazard.
   (D)   The city, by and through its departments, shall inspect and monitor
vacant buildings, shall assess the effects of the condition of those buildings
on nearby structures, and shall promote substantial efforts to rehabilitate and
develop such buildings when appropriate.
   (E)   These provisions will streamline and consolidate the existing
procedure (that is, complaint, research, notification, inspection, orders,
fines, liens, appeals and due process lien enforcement), by placing the
responsibility to register and maintain vacant structures on the building owner
before a building’s condition falls into disrepair or otherwise merits a
complaint.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.152  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARDED. A building or structure subject to the provision of this section
shall be deemed to be BOARDED if in place of one or more exterior doors, other
than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is a sheet or sheets of
plywood or similar material covering the space for such door or window.
      EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE AND MAJOR SYSTEMS. The safe and lawful maintenance
of the facade, windows, doors, roof and other parts of the exterior of the
building and the maintenance of its major systems consisting of the roof, the
electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply system, the sewer system, and
the sidewalk, driveway, if any, area of the lot, as applicable and as enforced
by the Code Enforcement Officer, particularly in connection with codes adopted
by the city as well as all applicable local, state and federal laws.
      OCCUPIED. Any building or structure shall be deemed to be OCCUPIED if one
or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any
part of the building as the licensed business occupant, or as the legal or
equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis,
or any combination of the same. For purposes of this section, evidence offered
to prove that a building is so OCCUPIED may include, but shall not be limited
to: the regular receipt of delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal
Service; proof of continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and sewer
services; a valid city business license, or the most recent, federal, state or
city income tax statements indicating that the subject property is the official
business or residence address of the person or business claiming occupancy; or
proof of bona fide pre-rental inspection.
      OPEN. A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to be OPEN if any one or more exterior doors other than a storm
door is broken, open and/or closed but, without a properly functioning lock to
secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not capable of being locked
and secured from intrusion, or any combination of the same.
      OWNER. An owner of the freehold of the premises or any lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation that
is directly or indirectly in control of a building subject to the provisions of
this subchapter, and as set forth herein.
      VACANT. A building or structure shall be deemed to be VACANT if no person
or persons actually, currently conducts a lawfully licensed business, or
lawfully resides, dwells or lives in any part of the building as the legal or
equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupant(s), or tenant(s) on
a permanent, non-transient basis. A building or structure shall be deemed
VACANT and subject to the registration and possible penalty provisions provided
herein if the exterior maintenance and major systems of the building and the
surrounding real property thereof, as defined in this section, are in violation
of the Building Codes or Health and Sanitation Codes and if there is not proof
of continual utility service evidencing actual use of electric, gas (i.e.,
applicable heating sources), water service and the like. CONTINUED is meant to
be without more than one 30-day interruption in any given 360-day period. In
order for such continual utility service to be considered as being actually in
use as described in this section, it must be more than merely registered to the
owner for purposes of billing and must be utilized, at a minimum, in order to
keep the property and the major systems of the building in compliance with
Building and Safety Codes. The person or entity asserting that there has been
continued utility service has the burden to produce actual bills evidencing
utility service for the relevant period.
   (B)   Criteria. All vacant structures shall also comply with the following
criteria.
      (1)   Exterior property areas are to be mowed regularly and non-
cultivated gardens maintained at no more than 17 inches of growth. All noxious
weeds are prohibited.
      (2)   Structure is to be broom swept and cleared of all contents, not
including building materials or components to be used in the future renovation
at that structure.
      (3)   Unstable interior and exterior surfaces and components are to be
removed. Unstable or unsound accessory buildings are to be razed or renovated.
      (4)   Using wood sheet goods, all loose, deteriorated and broken windows
and doors are to be covered to eliminate the danger of their falling and to
prevent the unwanted entry of trespassers. Such wood sheet goods are to be cut
and neatly fit, not just nailed over the opening.
      (5)   All loose or deteriorated trim, gutter or overhang extensions
(masonry or frame) are to be removed or reattached to prevent falling.
      (6)   Regular routine monitoring of the structure is to occur by the
owner to ensure that the building is being kept in compliance with the above
items.
      (7)   Utilities need to be connected to the structure.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   The requirements of this section shall be applicable to each owner
of any building that is found to be vacant pursuant to the language contained
herein. Each such owner shall cause to be filed a notarized registration
statement, which shall include the street address and parcel number of each
such vacant building, the names and addresses of all owners, as hereinafter
described, and any other information deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement
Officer. The registration fee(s) as required by this section shall be billed by
the city and shall be paid by last day of the month when the property has been
registered.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the following shall also be
applicable:
         (a)   If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall
provide the names and residence addresses of all officers and directors of the
corporation and shall be accompanied by a copy of the most recent annual
franchise tax report filed with the Secretary of State;
         (b)   If an estate, the name and business address of the executor of
the estate;
         (c)   If a trust, the name and address of all trustees, grantors and
beneficiaries;
         (d)   If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all
partners with an interest of 10% or greater;
         (e)   If any other form of unincorporated association, the names and
residence addresses of all principals with an interest of 10% or greater; and
         (f)   If an individual person, the name and residence address of that
individual person.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.153  INSPECTION.
   At the time of registration, the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer, Fire Chief and Police Chief shall determine whether it is necessary
for any or all of them to inspect the structure so as to identify any public
safety issues needing addressed. Inspections shall also be available to verify
the status of any property concerning occupancy, vacancy and the like. If an
internal inspection is deemed necessary, the owner will be notified of the same
and arrangements made for the same. If the owner fails or refuses to consent to
and arrange for an inspection, the city will seek an administrative search
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall include the
Municipal Court, to authorize inspection of the premises for the purpose of
determining the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to
ensure its structural integrity and that it will be safe for entry by
firefighters and police officers in time of emergency, and that the build in
and its contents do not present a hazard to the public during the time that the
building remains vacant.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.154  CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   The property owners shall be notified in writing of any corrective action
deemed necessary for Life, Safety and Building Code matters by city officials,
the applicable code provisions or regulations, and will be afforded a
reasonable time to the corrective action. Corrective action concerning the
occupancy of vacant structures is discussed later herein.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.155  REGISTRATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Generally. At the time of adoption of this subchapter, all owners of
realty within the city that contain a vacant structure, as defined above, shall
register the same with the office of code enforcement of the city. For those
structures that qualify as a vacant structure and after the adoption of this
subchapter, the owner thereof shall be required to register the structure with
the code enforcement office within 30 days after the structure is found to meet
the definition of a vacant structure. The registration form shall require
information from the registrant deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement
Officer, Building Inspector, Fire Chief and Police Chief of the city, so as to
ensure that the purpose of this subchapter is met. Specifically, the above-
named city officers shall have the authority to require that the property owner
provide a professional opinion (architect, engineer and the like) to determine
the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to ensure its
structural integrity and that it will be safe for entry by firefighters and
police officers in time of emergency, and that the building and its contents do
not present a hazard to the public during the time the building remains vacant.
The above- named officers shall have the authority to issue orders to the owner
for corrective action deemed necessary. The Building Inspector and Fire Chief
shall rely upon the State Building Code and Fire Code, as well as other
applicable law, for guidance during any such structural review.
   (B)   Registration statement and fees; local agent.
      (1)   If none of the persons listed, as above, is shown at an address
within the state, the registration statement also shall provide the name and
address of a person who resides within the state and who is authorized to
accept service of process on behalf of the owners and who shall be designated
as a responsible, local party or agent, both for purposes of notification in
the event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare and
for purposes of service of any and all notices or registration statements as
herein authorized and in connection herewith. Registration shall be required
for all vacant buildings, whether vacant and secure, vacant and open or vacant
and boarded, and shall be required whenever any building has remained vacant
for 45 consecutive days or more. In no instance shall the registration of a
vacant building and the payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate
the owner, agent or responsible party for compliance with any other Building
Code or Housing Code requirement. One registration statement may be filed to
include all vacant buildings of the owner so registering, but each structure
constitutes a separate fee. The owner of the vacant property as of the last day
of the month when the property has been registered of each calendar year shall
be responsible for the payment of the non-refundable registration fee.
      (2)   Said fee shall be billed by the city; and based on the duration of
the vacancy as determined by the following scale:
         (a)   No fee for properties that are vacant for less than one year;
         (b)   Two hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
one year but less than two years;
         (c)   Four hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
two years but less than three years;
         (d)   Six hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
three years but less than four years;
         (e)   Eight hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at
least four years but less than five years; and
         (f)   One thousand six hundred dollars for properties that are vacant
for at least five years, plus an additional $300 for each year in excess of
five years.
   (C)   Failure to register. If the owner fails to register the building, the
Code Enforcement Officer may register the building as herein. Upon registration
by the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner shall be notified of the
registration and billed by the city, if applicable and at the appropriate rate.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.156  RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Appeal rights. The owner shall have the right to appeal the imposition
of the registration fees to the Code Enforcement Officer upon filing an
application in writing to that Department no later than 15 calendar days after
the date of the billing statement. On appeal, the owner shall bear the burden
of providing satisfactory objective proof of occupancy as defined in this
subchapter specifically.
   (B)   One-time waiver of registration fee. A one-time waiver of the
registration fee, or an extension of a waiver for up to 90 days from the date
of the current billing statement, may be granted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designee upon application of the owner and upon review
and advice of the Building Inspector; if the owner:
      (1)   Demonstrates with satisfactory proof to the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designee that he or she is in the process of demolition,
rehabilitation or other substantial repair of the vacant building;
      (2)   Objectively demonstrates to the Code Enforcement Officer or his or
her designee a reasonable anticipated length of time for the demolition,
rehabilitation or other substantial repair of the vacant building;
      (3)   Provides satisfactory proof to the Code Enforcement Officer or his
or her designee that he or she was actively attempting to sell or lease the
property during the vacancy period; or
      (4)   Provides satisfactory proof to the Code Enforcement Officer, to be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis, that the vacancy is temporary and may be due
to illness of the owner, active military service, or some other reasonable
explanation believed to be short term in nature and documentable as necessary.
   (C)   Within 30 days, or as soon thereafter as possible, after the waiver
application is received, the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee
shall grant or deny the waiver, or request for extension, in writing, and
dispatch the written decision by mail to the owner. If the owner properly
submitted an application for a one-time waiver or request for extension to the
Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee, and the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designee rendered a decision which the owner seeks to
appeal to the Council, the owner must file an application in writing no later
than 30 calendar days from the date of the Code Enforcement Officer or his or
her designee’s decision. Council shall either grant or deny the appeal.
Thereafter, the decision of Council is final unless within 30 days of such
decision the owner appeals for injunctive relief to the Circuit Court of the
county.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.157  AMENDING INFORMATION.
   (A)   Duty to amend registration statement. If the status of the
registration information changes during the course of any calendar year, it is
the responsibility of the owner, responsible party or agent for the same to
contact the Department of Licenses and Inspections with 30 days of the
occurrence of such change and advise the Department in writing of those
changes.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any building owned by the
United States, the state, the city or any of their respective agencies or
political subdivisions.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.158  REINSPECTION.
   All vacant structures are subject to reinspection on an annual basis or as
deemed necessary pursuant to §
150.153.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.159  NONPAYMENT OF FEES/LIENS.
   (A)   Delinquent registration fees as a lien. After the owner is given
notice of the amount of the registration fee due, except for those owners that
have properly perfected an appeal pursuant to §
150.156, and the owner fails to pay the amount due, said amount shall
constitute a debt due and owing to the city and the city may commence a civil
action to collect such unpaid debt.
   (B)   Lien or liens, as used in this section, shall arise whenever the fees
and charges as described in this section are levied or imposed.
   (C)   If an owner fails to pay the registration fee as assessed and the city
begins the collection action to enforce its lien, then the Code Enforcement
Officer shall post the written notice on the property and send the written
notice to the owner(s) by certified and regular mail.
   (D)   (1)   The city may take action to sell the subject property by means
of forfeiture and the court ordered enforcement process to collect the debt
owed the city. Should the city take the steps necessary to sell the subject
property, the city shall do so, subject to all liens and real and personal
property taxes that are due.
      (2)   Purchasers of the subject property shall be similarly responsible
for registration pursuant to this section in the same manner as the prior owner
and must begin the registration process anew if said property remains vacant.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.160  RELATION TO OTHER CODES AND LAWS.
   It is to be understood that the intent and purpose of this subchapter are
separate and distinct from other parts and sections of the codified ordinances
of the city and the general laws of the state which may also be applicable. The
provisions of this subchapter are applicable to the owners of such vacant
buildings as set forth herein and are in addition to and not in lieu of any and
all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the Health and Sanitation
Code, and any other applicable provisions of the city’s municipal code.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
UNSAFE STRUCTURES
§ 150.175  PURPOSE.
   This subchapter provides a process for the identification, inspection,
correction and removal of unsafe structures within the city in a manner that
ensures adequate notice to the owners of such structures while protecting the
public from danger due to unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.176  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City of Elkins Code Enforcement Department, a
code enforcement department as defined by Title 87 West Virginia Code of State
Rules Section 7-2, as it may be amended.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OFFICIAL. Any lawful agent of the Code Enforcement
Agency.
   OWNER or LANDOWNER. A person who individually or jointly with others:
      (1)   Has legal title to the property, with or without actual possession
of the property;
      (2)   Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent of
the owner;
      (3)   Is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner;
      (4)   Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling
or collecting rents; or
      (5)   May control or direct the management or disposition of the
property.
   UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, DANGEROUS OR DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY OR
WELFARE.
      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of
egress that does not conform to the approved Building or Fire Code of the city
as related to the requirements for existing buildings;
      (2)   The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or
other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of egress;
      (3)   Any portion of a dwelling, building, structure or appurtenance that
has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect,
abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to an extent that it is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged;
      (4)   Any portion of a dwelling, structure or building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior that is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so
as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half
the original designed value;
      (5)   The dwelling, building or structure, or part of the building or
structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction,
the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the
support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely
collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or
structure is likely to fail or give way;
      (6)   The dwelling, building or structure, or any portion, is clearly
unsafe for its use;
      (7)   The dwelling, building or structure is neglected, damaged,
dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to
children, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, criminal activity or
enables persons to resort to the dwelling, building or structure for committing
a nuisance or an unlawful act;
      (8)   Any dwelling, building or structure constructed, exists or
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to any dwelling, building or structure provided by the approved Building or
Fire Code of the city or of any law or ordinance that presents either a
substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and
safety;
      (9)   A dwelling, building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
contamination by any hazardous substance or material including, but not limited
to, substance resulting from the illegal manufacture of drugs, damage, faulty
construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or
plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the Code Enforcement Agency to
be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely
to cause sickness or disease;
      (10)   Any dwelling, building or structure, because of a lack of
sufficient or proper fire resistance-rated construction, fire protection
systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing
system or other cause, is determined by the Code Enforcement Agency Official to
be a threat to life or health; or
      (11)   Any portion of a building or structure that remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.177  CLOSING AND REMOVAL OF UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Agency may order the repair, alteration,
improvement, closing, demolition or removal of any dwelling, building or
structure that is determined by a Code Enforcement Agency Official to be
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   In order to make a determination regarding the classification of a
structure as unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety
or welfare pursuant to this subchapter, and to determine and enforce the
appropriate remedy for any such structure, Code Enforcement Agency Officials
shall be entitled to make inspections, perform investigations, obtain search
warrants, issue notices, require corrective measures, present complaints to the
Municipal Judge, and exercise all other powers and duties authorized by W.Va.
Code § 8-12-16, as it may be amended.
   (C)   The powers and duties granted in this subchapter are in addition to
those otherwise granted by law and shall not be construed to limit any other
lawful powers of the city, including the power of Code Enforcement Agency
Officials to interpret and enforce the Building Code of the city.
   (D)   This subchapter shall be construed broadly so as to promote the
purpose of efficiently removing dangerous conditions that are harmful to the
community.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.178  INSPECTION.
   For purposes of inspections performed pursuant to this subchapter, the
following rules shall apply.
   (A)   When a Code Enforcement Agency Official enters the premises of the
property for investigating or inspecting any structure, dwelling or building,
the investigation shall be conducted in a way that minimizes the inconvenience
to the owner or persons in possession.
   (B)   Except in exigent circumstances and as permitted by law, the Code
Enforcement Agency shall provide reasonable advance notice of the inspection to
the owner and request permission from the owner to enter the property.
   (C)   If the owner cannot be located after reasonable inquiry by the Code
Enforcement Agency, or if the owner refuses entry, the Code Enforcement Agency
may obtain an administrative search warrant from either the Municipal Court or
the County Magistrate Court. Before obtaining an administrative search warrant,
a Code Enforcement Agency Official is required to make a sworn statement and
prima facie case showing that the Code Enforcement Agency was unable to gain
access to the structure, dwelling or building after reasonable and good faith
efforts, and that there is a legitimate and substantial safety concern
involving the structure, dwelling or building that supports the requested
entry.
   (D)   (1)   If the administrative search warrant is granted by the court,
and if the owner can be located, the Code Enforcement Agency shall provide the
owner a copy of the administrative search warrant five days before entering the
property.
      (2)   If there is a tenant or other person in possession of the structure
who is not the owner, and if such person(s) can be located, the Code
Enforcement Agency shall also provide such person(s) a copy of the
administrative search warrant five days before entering the property.
   (E)   Any entry pursuant to this section shall be made for the sole purpose
of inspection of the structure, dwelling or building for unsafe or unsanitary
conditions and not for the purpose of criminal prosecution or gathering
evidence for use in any criminal charge or proceeding unrelated to the unsafe
or unsanitary condition of the structure, dwelling or building.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.179  CORRECTION OF UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Upon a determination by the Code Enforcement Agency that a dwelling,
structure or building is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the
public safety or welfare, the city may take corrective action by causing it to
be vacated, closed, removed or demolished, either directly or by the use of
third party agents, without either the agreement of the owner or a court order,
pursuant to the following conditions:
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Agency undertakes reasonable efforts to seek
agreement from the owner;
      (2)   The corrective action may only be taken as to a dwelling, structure
or building that is either:
         (a)   Defined in divisions (3), (5) or (8) of the definition for
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare in
§
150.176; or
         (b) Defined in divisions (6), (7), (9) or (11) of the definition for
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare in
§
150.176; and
            1.   Is vacant, abandoned or has been lawfully declared unfit for
human habitation; and
            2.   The reasonable estimated cost of repair, rehabilitation or
corrective action exceeds the fair market value of the dwelling, building or
structure.
      (3)   Prior to undertaking the correction, the city will meet the
following procedural requirements:
         (a)   The Code Enforcement Agency shall produce a written notice
containing a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, the
date of the last inspection, the name of the inspector, a reasonable
description of the unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental condition(s),
the corrective measures required, the allotted time to correct the substandard
condition(s), a statement of the city’s right to file a lien, a statement of
the right to appeal to Board of Appeals under the State Building Code and the
allotted time the owner has to apply to the Circuit Court for a temporary
injunction or other similar relief restraining action by the enforcement
agency.
         (b)   The notice shall be served upon the owner or landowner by
conspicuously posting and attaching a copy of the notice to the subject
property, and by serving the notice on the owner or landowner in the same
manner as service of a complaint as set forth in §
150.183.
         (c)   If the Code Enforcement Agency cannot effect personal service on
the owner, a Code Enforcement Agency Official shall subscribe a written
affidavit, to be maintained for a minimum of two years, that demonstrates the
structure, dwelling or building falls within one of the categories set forth in
divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above and sets forth the basis in reasonable
detail including documentation of same, and memorializes the Code Enforcement
Agency Official’s efforts to contact or get permission for entry and corrective
action from the owner; and the Code Enforcement Agency shall publish notice of
its intent to enter the property for the purpose of demolition or correction,
along with the address of the property, the name of the owner(s), and the date
of the proposed action, as a Class II legal advertisement consistent with the
requirements of W.Va. Code § 59-3-2, the first of which shall run at least 30
days before the date of the proposed action by the Code Enforcement Agency, and
the last being no later than 20 days before the date of the proposed action by
the enforcement agency
      (4)   If there is no response to the notice by the owner or landowner in
the time specified in the notice, then the city shall have the authority to
proceed in correction or demolition of the subject dwelling, building or
structure.
   (B)   It shall be an absolute defense to any civil action by an owner,
landowner or tenant for damages resulting from the closure, demolition or other
corrective action taken by the city under this section that the city followed
the procedures set forth herein; provided, that the city acted in good faith,
can demonstrate that the structure, dwelling or building falls within one of
the categories set forth in divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above, followed
the procedures set forth in this section, and had adopted the State Building
Code at the time the closure, demolition or other corrective action occurred.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.180  RELIEF FROM ORDER FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   (A)   The owner of property subject to corrective action shall be given
notice of the right to apply to the Circuit Court of the county for a temporary
injunction or other similar relief restraining correction or demolition by the
city. Such notice shall be provided in the written notice produced pursuant to
§
150.179(A)(3)(a).
   (B)   If an application for relief is made by the owner to the Circuit
Court, a hearing shall be had within 20 days of the application, or as soon as
reasonably possible.
   (C)   Continuances of the hearing provided for in this section may be made
for cause only. If a continuance is granted upon request by the owner, the
owner is required to pay into court, in the form of a bond, any reasonable and
necessary costs related to the property likely to be incurred by the
municipality during the continuance. This requirement for security is in
addition to any other bond required or authorized by the West Virginia Rules of
Civil Procedure or other applicable law.
   (D)   At the conclusion of a hearing held under this division (D), if the
court finds that the structure, dwelling or building is unsafe, unsanitary,
dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare, the court shall make
and enter an order granting the relief as requested by the city. The court may
disburse any moneys paid into court by the owner in accordance with this
section.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.181  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The owner of any structure, dwelling or building under determination
of the State Fire Marshal, as provided in W.Va. Code § 29-3-12, or under order
of the Code Enforcement Agency of the city, shall be required to pay for the
costs of repairing, altering, improving, vacating, closing, removing or
demolishing any dwelling or building.
   (B)   In addition to any other rights provided by law, the city may file a
lien against the real property in question for an amount that reflects all
costs incurred by the city for repairing, altering, improving, vacating,
closing, removing or demolishing any dwelling or building.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.182  CIVIL ACTION FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   In addition to any other rights provided by law, the city may also
institute a civil action in Circuit Court against the landowner or other
responsible party to get an order to take corrective action up to and including
demolition of any structure, dwelling or building that is unsafe, unsanitary,
dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare; and to recover all
reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city with respect to the property
and for reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred in the prosecution of
the action.
   (B)   No fewer than ten days before instituting a civil action as provided
in this section, the city shall send notice to the landowner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, advising the landowner of the governing body’s
intention to institute such action.
   (C)   The notice shall be sent to the most recent address of the landowner
of record in the office of the County Assessor and to any other address for the
landowner as may exist on record with the city. If, for any reason, such
certified mail is returned without evidence of proper receipt, the municipality
shall resend the notice(s) by first class mail, postage prepaid, and shall also
post notice on the front door or other conspicuous location on the subject
property.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.183  NOTICES.
   (A)   To the extent not otherwise authorized by state law, all notices of
violation or correction for violations that do not fall within one of the
categories set forth in §
150.179(A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) shall be served in accordance with the process
set forth in the State Building Code.
   (B)   (1)   Any violation of this subchapter may be prosecuted by the
municipality consistent with state and local laws. Unless otherwise authorized
by state law, prosecution of a violation shall be initiated by a complaint
presented to and sworn or affirmed before a Municipal Judge or other municipal
official with lawful authority to hear and determine violations of municipal
code in the municipality where the offense is alleged to have occurred. Unless
otherwise provided by statute, the presentation and oath or affirmation shall
be made by a Code Enforcement Agency Official or City Attorney showing reason
to have reliable information and belief. If from the facts stated in the
complaint the Municipal Judge or other municipal official with lawful authority
to hear and determine violations of municipal code finds probable cause, the
complaint becomes the charging instrument initiating a criminal proceeding. A
complaint lawfully authorized by this division (B) along with a summons setting
forth the date, time and place of appearance before a Municipal Judge and or
other municipal official with lawful authority to hear and determine violations
of municipal code shall be served in accordance with the law of the state
concerning the service of process in civil actions, except that personal
service of a summons and complaint may be made by a Code Enforcement Agency
Official.
      (2)   (a)   If service is made by certified mail under Rule 4(d)(1)(D) of
the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure and delivery of the summons and
complaint is refused, the Code Enforcement Agency Official, promptly upon the
receipt of the notice of the refusal, shall mail to the person or entity being
noticed, by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the summons and
complaint.
         (b)   If the first class mailing is not returned as undeliverable by
the U.S. Postal Service, service of the summons and complaint is presumed to
have been effectuated. Upon service of the summons and complaint consistent
with this division (B), the violation may be prosecuted consistent with state
and local law.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
MEANS OF APPEAL
§ 150.195  PURPOSE.
   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official, as the term
has been defined in the city code, or a notice or order issued pursuant to this
Chapter 150, shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals, as herein
set forth. The basis for an application for appeal under this subchapter shall
be based on a claim that the true intent of the city’s Building Code has been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the Code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of the Code are adequately satisfied by other means.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.196  MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of three
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the city. The
Code Official shall be an ex officio member but shall have no vote on any
matter before the Board. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and the
Board members shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. After the
appointment of the founding members of the Board of Appeals, all appointments
shall be for a term of one year beginning on April 1 of the year of the
appointment. Any member of the Board of Appeals who has either a total of five
absences or three consecutive absences for meetings of the Board which are not
resulting from illness shall be removed from office upon the affirmative action
of the Chairperson of the Board and after approval of such removal by the
Mayor. The Mayor shall then appoint an alternate member as a replacement to
serve the remainder of the existing term and duly appoint a new alternate
member pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Alternate members. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members who
shall be called by the Board Chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualification of a member. Alternative members shall possess the
qualifications required for Board membership.
   (C)   Chairperson. At its first meeting of each year, the Board shall
appoint one of its members to serve as Chairperson.
   (D)   Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
that member has personal, professional or financial interest. If a member does
have such interest, said member shall notify the Board Chairperson immediately
and the Board Chairperson shall call upon an alternate member to serve in the
place of the disqualified member.
   (E)   Compensation. Compensation of members shall be determined by law and
agreed upon by Board of Appeal members and city.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.197  PROCEDURES AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Quorum. All three members of the Board of Appeals, either consisting
of members or alternate members, must be present to constitute a quorum. No
action of the Board is official unless authorized by a majority of the Board.
   (B)   Adoption of rules. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
concerning the filing of appeals, applications for variances and exceptions,
giving of notice and conduct of hearings as shall be necessary to carry out its
duties under the provisions of the city code.
   (C)   Minutes and records. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
keep records of its examination and other official actions and shall record the
vote on all actions taken. All minutes and records shall be filed in the office
of the Code Official and shall be public records.
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Board shall have the following powers and it
shall be the Board’s duty to:
      (1)   Determine appeals and review any notice, order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Code Official charged with the
enforcement of the city’s Building Code;
      (2)   Permit and authorize exception to the city’s Building Code only in
particular instances as specified in this subchapter;
      (3)   Decide special exceptions to the terms of the city’s Building Code
upon which the Board is required to act under this subchapter; and
      (4)   Receive applications for appeal based on a claim that the true
intent of the city’s Building Code has been incorrectly interpreted, or the
provisions of the city’s Building Code do not apply, or the requirements of the
city’s Building Code are adequately satisfied by other means.
   (E)   Appeals.
      (1)   An appeal taken from the requirement, notice, order and/or decision
for determination made by Code Official charged with the enforcement of the
city’s Building Code shall be filed with the Board within 20 days after the day
the decision, notice or order was served. The appeal shall specify the grounds
thereof and in such form as may be prescribed by the Board by general rule. The
Code Official from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon request from the Board,
transmit to the Board all documents, plans and papers constituting the record
of the action from which an appeal was filed.
      (2)    The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairperson, within 20
days of the filing of an appeal. Prior to the hearing, public notice shall be
given of the hearing by placing a classified legal advertisement in a qualified
newspaper of general circulation in the county, and due notice shall be given
to the interested parties by certified mail return-receipt requested. The Board
may require the party making the appeal to assume the cost of public notice and
due notice to interested parties. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person, by agent or by attorney.
      (3)    When an appeal from the decision of the Code Official has been
taken and filed with the Board, all work on the premises pertaining to the
Official’s decision shall be stayed unless the Official shall certify to the
Board that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
instance, work shall not be stayed except by an injunction which may be granted
by the Circuit Court of the county, on application, on notice to the officer to
whom the appeal is taken and the owner of the premises affected and on due
cause shown.
      (4)   All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The
party making the appeal, the party making the appeal’s representative, the Code
Official and any persons whose interest(s) may be affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.
      (5)   At the hearing the order of procedure shall be as follows:
         (a)   The party making the appeal, or the party making the appeals
representative;
         (b)   The Code Official;
         (c)   Any persons whose interest may be affected by the decision; and
         (d)   The party making the appeal, or the party making the appeals
representatives’ rebuttal.
      (6)   The Board shall adopt and make available to the public the
procedures under which the hearing will be conducted by and through the person
in charge of keeping minutes and records for the city. The procedures shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only
relative information be received for review by the Board.
      (7)   When the full Board is not present to hear an appeal, either the
person making the appeal, or that person’s representative, shall have the right
to request a postponement of the hearing.
      (8)   In exercising its powers, the Board shall reverse or affirm, wholly
or in part, or make, modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from as in the Board’s opinion deemed to be done on the premises and
to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
The Board’s decision to reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or to modify an
order, requirement, decision or determination, may only be done by a concurring
majority vote of two of the three appointed Board members.
      (9)   The final decision of the Board shall be recorded. A copy shall be
furnished to the person making the appeal and to the Code Official.
      (10)   The Code Official shall take immediate action in accordance with
the decision of the Board.
   (F)   Variances and special exemptions.
      (1)   Requests for variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances
where it is alleged that the provisions of the city’s Building Code inflicts
unnecessary hardship upon the person making the appeal. The Board may grant a
variance, provided the following findings are made, where relevant, in a given
instance:
         (a)   There are unique physical circumstances or conditions to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the city’s Building Code;
         (b)   Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of the city’s Building Code and that the authorization of a variance
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
         (c)   Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the party
making the appeal;
         (d)   The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district wherein the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; or
         (e)   The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
which will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of
the regulation at issue.
      (2)   Granting of variance. In granting any variance, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the City Building Code.
      (3)   Special exceptions. The Board shall hear and decide requests for
all special exceptions as provided in this subchapter and in accordance with
such standards and criteria contained in this subchapter. In granting a special
exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this subchapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes and intent of the City Building Code.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.198  REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any person, whether or not a previous party to the appeal, shall have
the right to apply to the appropriate court to correct errors of law.
Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law
following the entering of the final decision of the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   The Board or any designated enforcement official may institute a suit
for injunction in the Circuit Court of the county, in the name of the city, to
restrain an individual or a governmental unit from violating the provisions of
the city’s Building Code. The Board or any designated Code Enforcement Official
may also institute a suit for mandatory injunction in the Circuit Court of the
county, in the name of the city, directing an individual or a governmental unit
to remove a structure or erect a structure in violation of the provisions of
this subchapter. If the Board or any designated enforcement official is
successful in the suit, the respondent shall bear the costs of the action.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   In accord with §
150.036, any person who shall violate a provision of the State Building Code,
as adopted by the city, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the city code, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in an amount set forth by Council
from time to time. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      (2)   The imposition of the penalty herein prescribed by division (B)(1)
above shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting an appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, addition, alteration, conversion, removal, demolition,
maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
the occupancy of a building or structure or portion thereof or of the premises,
or to prevent an illegal act, conduct business or use in or about any premises.
      (3)   Nothing contained in this
Chapter 150 shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of any
department of the city to enforce any provision of the city code, ordinances or
regulations of the city, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the
powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the
powers conferred by any other law of the state or ordinance of the city.
(1991 Code, § 5-8)
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
150.085 through
150.099 shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
shall be subject to a fine of an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (D)   Any person who performs electrical work within the city without
compliance with the provisions of §
150.110 shall be subject to a fine of an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
(1991 Code, § 5-28)
   (E)   Violation of §§
150.125 through
150.138 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in an amount set
forth by Council from time to time. Each day that a violation continues after
notification of same by the Code Official shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of penalties prescribed herein shall not relieve the property
owner of responsibility for full compliance with all other applicable codes and
ordinances, including any and all separate fines and penalties imposed
thereunder.
   (F)   The failure or refusal for any reason of any owner, or agent of an
owner acting on behalf of the owner, to register a vacant building upon
adoption of §§
150.150 through
150.160 or to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of §§
150.150 through
150.160, within 30 days after they become due, shall constitute a violation
punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine in an amount set forth by Council
from time to time for each failure or refusal to pay a required vacant building
fee, as applicable. In such cases, whenever the minimum fine of an amount set
forth by Council from time to time is imposed, it shall not be subject to
suspension or reduction for any reason.
(Ord. passed 8-18-1978; Ord. passed 7-19-1979; Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord.
134, passed 12-1-2011; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013; Ord. 194, passed 6-12-2015;
Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Intent
   
151.002   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.003   Applicability
   
151.004   Matters not provided for specifically
Interpretations and Definitions
   
151.015   Interpretations
   
151.016   Definitions
Establishment of the Floodplain Area
   
151.030   Identification
   
151.031   Descriptions of floodplain areas
   
151.032   Changes in designation of area
   
151.033   Elevations prevail
   
151.034   Boundary disputes
Utilization of the Floodplain Area
   
151.045   Floodway (F1)
   
151.046   Floodway fringe (F2)
   
151.047   AE Zone without floodway
   
151.048   Approximated floodplain (Zone A)
   
151.049   Alteration or relocation of a stream
Criteria for Building and Site Plan Approval
   
151.060   General
   
151.061   Basic format
   
151.062   Elevation and flood proofing information
   
151.063   Site plan criteria
Specific Requirements
   
151.075   Design and construction standards
Administration
   
151.090   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.091   Development permits and site plan approvals required
   
151.092   Approval of permits and plans
   
151.093   Application procedures
   
151.094   Changes
   
151.095   Permit placards
   
151.096   Start of construction
   
151.097   Stop work orders, inspections and revocations
   
151.098   Certificate of compliance
   
151.099   Fees
Appeals
   
151.110   Appeals
   
151.111   Appeal review criteria
Government Actions
   
151.125   Municipal annexation
   
151.126   Permits for government entities
Municipal Liability
   
151.140   Liability
 
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001  INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community;
   (B)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
   (C)   Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water supply
and sanitary sewage disposal in cooperation with the County Sanitarian, and to
protect natural drainage;
   (D)   Assure the County Assessor obtains information concerning improvement
of real property as required by W.Va. Code § 11-3-3A;
   (E)   Assure County E-911 addresses are obtained to maintain the currency of
established emergency response dispatch systems; and
   (F)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by preventing the unwise design and construction of
development in areas subject to flooding.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.002  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood prone
areas. Any ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that its provisions are more restrictive.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.003  APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership,
business or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any
development, new construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial
damage or the placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured
homes) within the city unless a permit application has been completed and a
permit or certificate of compliance has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (2)   In addition, where land partially or fully in the floodplain is to
be developed, subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision
or otherwise developed, a site plan with elevation data must be submitted to,
and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development.
   (B)   Provision of all other codes, ordinances and regulations shall be
applicable insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this chapter
and the community’s need to minimize the hazards and damage resulting from
flooding.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.004  MATTERS NOT PROVIDED FOR SPECIFICALLY.
   Where conditions are encountered that are not specifically provided for
herein, the Floodplain Administrator shall determine the applicability of the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with its intent, and shall require the
applicant to take appropriate measures pursuant to such determination.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 151.015  INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following interpretations shall apply.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   (B)   The singular includes the plural.
   (C)   The plural includes the singular.
   (D)   The word “person” includes corporation, unincorporated association or
partnership as well as an individual.
   (E)   The term “shall” or “will” is always mandatory.
   (F)   The word “building” or “structure” shall be construed as if followed
by the phrase “or part thereof”.
   (G)   The word “chapter” shall refer to the Floodplain Ordinance.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.016  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. This does not include a gas or liquid storage tank.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood, which has been selected to serve as the basis upon
which the floodplain management provisions of this and other ordinances have
been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The water surface elevation of the base flood in
relation to the datum specified on the community’s flood insurance rate map.
For the purposes of this chapter, the 100-YEAR FLOOD or 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certification that the entire development,
including the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in
compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CONTRACTOR (W.VA CODE § 21-1 L-3(C)).
      (1)   (a)   A person who in any capacity for compensation, other than as
an employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the
capacity to undertake or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to,
subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road,
railroad, structure or excavation associated with a project, development or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding
or other structures or works in connection therewith, where the cost of the
undertaking is $1,000 or more.
         (b)   CONTRACTOR includes a construction manager who performs
management and counseling services on a construction project for a professional
fee.
      (2)   CONTRACTOR does not include:
         (a)   One who merely furnishes materials or supplies without
fabricating or consuming them in the construction project;
         (b)   A person who personally performs construction work on the site
of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or
residential purposes;
         (c)   A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and who
functions under the control of any other licensing or regulatory board, whose
primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management and
maintenance, who acting in his or her respective professional capacity and any
employee of such professional, acting in the course of his or her employment,
performs any work which may be considered to be performing contracting work;
         (d)   A pest control operator licensed under the provisions of W.Va.
Code § 19-16a-7 to engage in the application of pesticides for hire, unless the
operator also performs structural repairs exceeding $1,000 on property treated
for insect pests; or
         (e)   A corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship whose primary
purpose is to prepare construction plans and specifications used by the
contractors defined in this definition and who employs a full-time registered
architect licensed to practice in this state or a registered professional
engineer licensed to practice in this state. CONTRACTOR also does not include
employees of such corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility in which even a slight chance of flooding is
too great a threat. Typical critical facilities include hospitals, fire
stations, police stations, storage of critical records and similar facilities.
These should be given special consideration when formulating regulatory
alternatives and floodplain management plans. A CRITICAL FACILITY should not be
located in a floodplain if at all possible. If a CRITICAL FACILITY must be
located in a floodplain it should be provided a higher level of protection so
that it can continue to function and provide services during a flood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information and water
surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN.
      (1)   A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; and
      (2)   An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall be the
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR may also be identified
as the FLOODPLAIN MANAGER.
   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the
water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
unknown factors that may contribute uncertainty to flood heights of any given
flood and floodway condition, such as wave action, blockage at stream crossings
and increased runoff from urbanization of the watershed.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed foundation of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved
programs.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME DEALER. A business licensed to sell manufactured
homes in the state as set forth in the West Virginia Code.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME INSTALLER. A contractor licensed to install
manufactured homes in the state as set forth in the West Virginia Code.
   LICENSED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. Any person licensed by the State Board of
Examiners of Land Surveyors to engage in the practice of land surveying as
defined in the West Virginia Code.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished enclosure constructed with flood-resistant materials
as defined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) and usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction as herein
defined commenced on or after April 3, 1987 and including any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD. A flood that has one chance in 100 or a 1%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
   PRACTICE OF ENGINEERING.
      (1)   Any service or creative work, as described in the W.Va. Code §§ 30-
13-1 et seq., the adequate performance of which requires engineering education,
training and experience in the application of special knowledge of the
mathematical, physical and engineering sciences to such services or creative
work as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning and design of
engineering works and systems; planning the use of land and water; teaching of
advanced engineering subjects, engineering surveys and studies; and the review
of construction for the purpose of assuring compliance with drawings and
specifications any of which embraces such services or work, either public or
private, in connection with any utilities, structures, buildings, machines,
equipment, processes, work systems, projects and industrial or consumer
products or equipment of a mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or
thermal nature, insofar as they involve safeguarding life, health or property,
and including such other professional services as may be necessary to the
planning, progress and completion of any engineering services. Engineering
surveys include all survey activities required to support the sound conception,
planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of engineered
projects.
      (2)   Any person who practices any branch of the PROFESSION OF
ENGINEERING or who, by verbal claim, sign, advertisement, letterhead, card or
in any other way represents himself or herself to be a registered professional
engineer, or by using another title implies that he or she is a registered
professional engineer or that he or she is registered under W.Va. Code §§ 30-
13-1 et seq. or who holds himself or herself out as able to perform, or who
performs any engineering service or work or any other service designated by the
practitioner which is recognized as engineering, is considered to practice or
offer to PRACTICE ENGINEERING within the meaning and intent of W.Va. Code §§
30-13-1 et seq.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. Where at least 51% of the actual cash value of a
structure, less land value, is above ground.
   REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING. During the base flood, water should not
damage structures and any subsurface waters related to the base flood should
not damage existing or proposed structures.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (a)   Built on a single chassis;
      (b)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person who has been duly registered or
licensed as a registered professional engineer by the State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers as required under W.Va. Code Ch. 30,
Art. 13.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring a structure or other development into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or, if full compliance is not
possible, to reduce the adverse impacts of the noncompliance to the greatest
extent feasible.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in flood insurance
studies and on flood insurance rate maps as Zones A, AE, AO, A1-30 and A99. The
term includes areas shown on other flood hazard maps that are specifically
listed or otherwise described in this chapter.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. (The definition for start of construction is to be
used only when calculating the starting time for expiration of a permit.) The
date the permit was issued, including permits for substantial improvement or
repair of substantial damage, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Although a permit must be obtained prior to
beginning, permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an
alteration, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STATE COORDINATING OFFICE. The West Virginia Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management.
   STREAM. As defined in W.Va. Code § 7-1-3U, any watercourse, whether natural
or human-made, distinguishable by banks and a bed, regardless of their size,
through which water flows continually or intermittently, regardless of its
volume.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means cumulative flood- related damages sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each flood event equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred. See SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.
      (2)   This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial
damage, as defined herein regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violation of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
      (3)   Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT as defined above, must comply with all
ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   For the purpose of this definition IMPROVEMENT is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
   TOP OF BANK. The lines depicted on the FIRM maps delineating each side of a
stream indicate the TOP OF BANK. In the field, a professional familiar with
fluvial geomorphology should document the TOP OF BANK. When a professional is
not employed, the TOP OF THE BANK will be considered to be the top of the first
significant slope landward of the water’s edge when it is followed by at least
50 feet of relatively flat land.
   VIOLATION. The failure of any structure or development to be fully compliant
with all requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such
time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010; Ord. 256, passed 8-16-2018)
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FLOODPLAIN AREA
§ 151.030  IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the city which
are subject to the 100-year flood, as shown on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) and described in the flood insurance study (FIS) prepared for the city
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) dated September 29, 2010 or
the most recent revision thereof.
   (B)   The identified floodplain area shall also be those areas which have
been identified as flood hazard areas by the city by use of historic or other
technical data and shown on the city’s local flood hazards map. These areas
shall be designated as appropriate with the level of technical data described
below and shall be managed accordingly.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.031  DESCRIPTIONS OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   The identified floodplain shall consist of the following four specific
areas.
   (A)   The floodway area (F1) shall be those areas identified as such in the
FIS and as shown on the FIRM. The term shall also include floodway areas
identified in studies required to be used in the approximate areas as discussed
below.
   (B)   The floodway fringe area (F2) shall be those areas for which specific
100-year flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but which lie beyond
the floodway area.
   (C)   The AE Area without floodway (F3) shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which 100-year
flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been delineated.
   (D)   The approximated area (F4) shall be those areas identified as an A
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no 100-year
flood elevations have been provided.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.032  CHANGES IN DESIGNATION OF AREA.
   (A)   The delineation of the identified floodplain area may be revised by
the Council where natural or human-made changes have occurred and/or more
detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a
River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual document the
necessity for such changes. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   (B)   A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting
from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable
but, not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available, the community shall notify the NFIP Administrator of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
   (C)   The city may identify and regulate new flood hazard or ponding areas.
These areas may be delineated on a local flood hazard map using best available
topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record,
historic high water marks and/or approximate study methodologies.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.033  ELEVATIONS PREVAIL.
   (A)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development within an
identified flood hazard area is at or above the base flood elevation specified
in the flood insurance study, the structure shall not be required to conform to
the flood prevention design and construction standards or flood-related
development codes in §§
151.045 through
151.049. Topographic data certified by a registered professional engineer or
licensed professional surveyor shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow
a thorough review by the Floodplain Administrator. The applicant is advised to
apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA to have the special flood
hazard area designation removed from the parcel or structure.
   (B)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development is below
the base flood elevation specified in the flood insurance study, the site shall
be considered to be within the floodplain area and the proposed structure shall
be required to conform to all appropriate provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.034  BOUNDARY DISPUTES.
   (A)   Should a dispute concerning any district boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any party
aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Council.
   (B)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant/applicant.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
UTILIZATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN AREA
§ 151.045  FLOODWAY (F1).
   (A)   Within any floodway area (F1), no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements or other development shall be permitted
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation.
   (B)   Because floodways present increased risk to human life and property
due to their relatively faster and deeper flowing waters, the floodway shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
      (1)   New development shall not be permitted in the floodway where
reasonable alternatives exist elsewhere. In addition to the requirements below
the applicant shall demonstrate that there are no reasonable alternatives other
than the floodway encroachment before a permit is issued.
      (2)   When the floodway is the only reasonable alternative the applicant
shall demonstrate that the floodway encroachment is the minimum necessary to
accomplish the project.
      (3)   All permitted uses, activities and development shall be undertaken
in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained
herein, and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.046  FLOODWAY FRINGE (F2).
   Within any floodway fringe area, any development and/or use of land shall be
permitted provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions
contained herein and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.047  AE ZONE WITHOUT FLOODWAY.
   (A)   Within any AE without floodway area, no new construction or
development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood
more than one foot at any point.
   (B)   This requirement can be satisfied by utilization of the floodway area
where determined.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.048  APPROXIMATED FLOODPLAIN (ZONE A).
   Within any approximated floodplain area:
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall use elevation and floodway
information from federal, state or other acceptable sources when available to
determine the elevation above which development will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
   (B)   (1)   When data from an acceptable source is not available, the
Floodplain Administrator shall review, or shall cause to be reviewed, all
proposed development to determine:
         (a)   The amount being invested; and
         (b)   The specific flood risk at the site.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall then require the applicant to
determine the elevation above which the development will be reasonably safe
from flooding using the techniques set forth in the city’s approximate A zone
administrative procedures. When hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are required,
they shall only be undertaken by a registered professional engineer who shall
certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the
responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In
addition, studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (C)   Any development and/or use of land shall be permitted provided that
all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained herein and
in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.049  ALTERATION OR RELOCATION OF A STREAM.
   (A)   Whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a stream within the
floodplain area, the developer shall notify in writing, by certified mail, the
city’s Floodplain Administrator, the State Coordinating Office, any adjacent
communities and any adjacent property owners of all such intended activities
prior to the alteration or relocation of the stream. Copies of all required
notifications must be submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. In
addition prior to issuing the local permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
require copies of all necessary permits from those governmental agencies from
which federal or state law requires approval. Contact information for state and
federal permitting authorities as well as addresses for required notification
of appropriate county, state and federal government agencies are contained in
the city’s stream alteration administrative procedures.
   (B)   The developer shall also assure the city in writing that the flood
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the stream will be
maintained. The Floodplain Administrator may require the applicant to
demonstrate that the altered or relocated portion of stream will provide equal
or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. If hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be undertaken by a registered
professional engineers, who shall certify that the methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall
include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a
statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses,
computations and the like shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Alteration of a stream includes placement of culverts, bridges or
other stream crossings. The Floodplain Administrator may require the use of
certain “best practice” techniques in the construction of bridges, culverts or
stream crossings to prevent damage, loss of stream crossings and localized
flooding caused by blockage. These techniques may include, but are not limited
to, wing walls, trash grates or requiring openings to be of sufficient size to
pass debris and/or anticipated future increases in flood heights.
   (D)   All new and replacement bridges, culverts and other stream crossings
shall adhere to the relevant anchoring requirements contained in this chapter.
   (E)   The developer is required to provide the community a legal agreement
detailing all scheduled inspections and maintenance to be performed on altered
or relocated watercourses including culverts, bridges and other stream
crossings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer this
agreement to the new owner when the land associated with the watercourse
alteration is transferred. A copy of all new agreements shall be provided to
the Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
151.999.
   (F)   The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the flood
insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by the
Floodplain Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
151.999
CRITERIA FOR BUILDING AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL
§ 151.060  GENERAL.
   Permits are required in order to determine whether all new construction or
substantial improvements are:
   (A)   Located in an identified floodplain, floodway or other flood hazard
area;
   (B)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
   (C)   Constructed with material and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage as outlined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) or the most
recent revision thereof;
   (D)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (E)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
   (F)   To comply with W.Va Code § 11-3-3A, concerning County Assessor
building or real property improvement notice; and
   (G)   Approved by County Health Department for well, septic and other
permits to assure facilities are designed and located in compliance with the
flood damage reduction requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.061  BASIC FORMAT.
   The basic format of the permit shall include the following:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant;
   (B)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed development is to
occur;
   (C)   Names, addresses and valid state license numbers of all contractors
working at the building site, or affidavits stating that work is being
performed by individuals exempt from contractor licensing as set forth in W.Va.
Code Title 28, Series 2, § 3.9(b) of state regulations or the most recent
revision thereof;
   (D)   A description of site location sufficient to locate the project
including tax map and parcel number and most recent deed book and page number;
   (E)   A standard site plan showing size and location of the proposed
development as well as any existing buildings or structures. The site plan
shall also show all adjacent roads and watercourses with direction of flow, the
lowest adjacent grade to the proposed foundation and/or toe of fill, the base
flood elevation and the location of the floodway boundary when applicable;
   (F)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to pay any and all fees
associated with the permitting process as set forth in §
151.099;
   (G)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to allow authorized
representatives of floodplain management programs access to the development to
inspect for compliance; and
   (H)   The contract required by West Virginia Code of State Regulations Title
28, Series 4 and all addendums to the contract(s) shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator for review within five business days of contract
signing. The community does not require and will not keep copies of the
contracts or addendums. Failure to present contract or addendums for review
shall void the permit. If a licensed contractor is not involved, or the work is
of an aggregate value of an amount set forth by Council from time to time
including materials and labor, a brief written description of proposed work and
the estimated value will suffice.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.062  ELEVATION AND FLOOD PROOFING INFORMATION.
   (A)   All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum elevation
requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered
significantly by increasing the elevation of the lowest floor above the
freeboard height required by this chapter.
   (B)   Depending on the type of structure involved, the following information
shall also be included in the application for work within the floodplain area.
      (1)   For structures to be elevated two feet above the base flood
elevation.
         (a)   A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed;
         (b)   A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing
ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor, certified by a registered
professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor;
         (c)   Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure
including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls,
foundations, erosion protection measures and the like. When required by the
Floodplain Administrator, a registered professional engineer or architect shall
prepare these plans;
         (d)   Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas and the like) from flooding to two feet
above the base flood elevation at the building site;
         (e)   During the course of construction, as soon as the basic elements
of the lowest floor are in place and before further vertical construction, it
is highly recommended that the applicant check for error by obtaining elevation
data completed by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional
surveyor certifying the height of the lowest floor. If a mistake in elevation
has been made, this is the best time to correct the error;
         (f)   A finished construction elevation certificate must be prepared
by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated qualification.
The elevation certificate must confirm that the structure in question together
with attendant utilities is elevated in compliance with permit conditions; and
         (g)   A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant
whenever the community determines that the area below the first floor could be
converted to a nonconforming use (generally applies to enclosed areas below
base flood elevation that are five feet high or more). This agreement shall
state:
            1.   The area below base flood elevation shall not be converted for
use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as
detailed in this chapter; and
            2.   The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via
notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
151.999.
      (2)   For structures to be flood proofed to two feet above the base flood
elevation (nonresidential structures only). All applicants are encouraged to
exceed the minimum flood proofing requirements contained herein. Flood
insurance rates can be lowered significantly by increasing the level of flood
proofing above the height required by this chapter. In order to obtain an
elevation credited flood insurance rate on dry flood proofed buildings, flood
proofing must extend at least one foot above the base flood elevation:
         (a)   Plans showing details of all flood proofing measures, prepared
by a registered professional engineer, showing the size of the proposed
structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed;
         (b)   A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing
ground, proposed finished ground, lowest floor and flood proofing limits;
certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional
surveyor; and
         (c)   A flood proofing certificate, FEMA 81-65, as revised by FEMA,
shall be prepared by the registered professional engineer who prepared the
plans in division (B)(2)(a) above, stating the structure in question, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities is designed so that:
            1.   The structure is water-tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest structural element to two
feet above the base flood elevation; and
            2.   The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic,
buoyant, impact and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities,
pressures and other factors associated with the base flood.
      (3)   For structures constructed of flood-resistant materials used solely
for parking of vehicles, or storage (appurtenant structures only).
         (a)   A site plan prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or
others of demonstrated qualifications showing elevation of existing ground,
proposed finished ground and lowest floor. The plan shall also show details of
proposed flood-resistant materials usage and the size of the proposed structure
and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. The location of the
floodway boundary shall be represented on the plan when a floodway is present
on the site.
         (b)   An elevation certificate, based on finished construction, must
be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated
qualifications. This certificate or report must confirm that the structure in
question, together with attendant utilities is designed so that:
            1.   Flood-resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical
Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) are used in the construction of the structure from the
lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation and that
all utilities are located at least two feet above the base flood elevation; and
            2.   Hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls are equalized by
allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
               a.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided;
               b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
               c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
         (c)   In addition, the applicant shall sign a non-conversion agreement
and notify prospective buyers of the existence of the agreement. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the non-conversion agreement to
any new owner at closing via notarized signature. A signed copy of the
transferred non-conversion agreement shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to
the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in §
151.999.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.063  SITE PLAN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Site plans are required for all development, new construction and
substantial improvements determined to be located in a mapped floodplain area
and all proposed subdivisions and manufactured home parks. These proposals
shall be reviewed by the Floodplain Administrator to assure that they are
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (B)   The owner or developer shall submit a preliminary site plan to the
Floodplain Administrator that includes the following information:
      (1)   Name of registered professional engineer, licensed professional
surveyor or other qualified person responsible for providing the information
required in this section;
      (2)   A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or
development with respect to floodplain areas, proposed lot sites and fills;
      (3)   Where the subdivision and/or development lies partially or
completely in the floodplain areas, the plan map shall include detailed
information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public
utilities and building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at
intervals of two or five feet depending upon the slope of the land and identify
accurately the boundaries of the floodplain areas. A registered professional
engineer or licensed professional surveyor must certify the site plan;
      (4)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments which
are proposed to take place either fully or partially within the approximated
floodplain area (F4) and which are greater than ten lots or two acres,
whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data and shall
delineate a floodway:
         (a)   When a flood insurance study (FIS) is available from FEMA, the
data contained in that study must be used to substantiate the base flood;
         (b)   If a FEMA flood insurance study is not available, the required
data may be available from an authoritative source, such as the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resource Conservation Service or
state and local water resource department; and
         (c)   If the required data is not available from other sources, the
applicant shall develop the technical data using detailed methodologies
comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study. This data shall be
prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer, who shall certify
that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
      (5)   (a)   Where the subdivision or other development site lies
partially in the floodplain area and all proposed development including fill
will take place on natural grade a significant vertical distance above the
approximated floodplain area (Zone A) boundary depicted on the map, development
of detailed base flood elevation data may not be necessary.
         (b)   In these cases the site plan for the proposed development must
show contours at intervals of two or five feet depending on the slope, and
clearly delineate the area to be developed and the location of the floodplain
boundary as scaled from the FEMA map.
         (c)   A registered professional engineer, licensed professional
surveyor or others of demonstrated qualifications must certify the site plan.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.075  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings, structures and related
utilities and facilities, the following restrictions apply to all development,
subdivision proposals, manufactured home parks, new construction and to
construction of substantial improvements, and the repair of substantial damage,
to existing structures occurring in the floodplain area.
   (A)   Basements and lowest floors.
      (1)   Residential structures. All new construction, relocation,
substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of
residential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork
and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures. All new construction, relocation,
substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of
nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement,
ductwork and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation;
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so
that the structure is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water from the lowest structural element to two feet above the base
flood elevation.
      (3)   Openings.
         (a)   For all new construction, relocation, substantial improvements
and repair of substantial damage, those fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters.
         (b)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters; and
            4.   A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant on
all flood proofed structures and any elevated structures when the community
determines that the area below the first floor could be converted to a
nonconforming use (generally applies to enclosed areas below base flood
elevation that are five feet high or more). This agreement shall state:
               a.   The area below base flood elevation shall not be converted
for use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as
detailed in this chapter; and
               b.   The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via
notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
151.999.
   (B)   Manufactured home placement. Certain unique characteristics of
manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas pose an elevated risk of
substantial damage to property.
      (1)   (a)   All manufactured homes to be sited within the identified
flood hazard areas of the city shall be installed by a contractor possessing a
valid state manufactured home installer’s license. The installer shall use an
installation design engineered to withstand flood hazards specific to the
particular home site.
         (b)   Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
the flood hazard areas shall be installed in accordance with the following
standards.
            1.   The lowest floor, ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat
pump shall be elevated two feet above the base flood elevation.
            2.   Elevation shall be on reinforced piers on a permanent
foundation or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
engineered for use in a flood hazard area. Installation designs incorporating
dry stacked block piers shall not be used in flood hazard areas.
            3.   All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in compliance with the requirements of 42
West Virginia Code of State Regulations, Series 19, §§ 10.1, 10.2 and 10b as
authorized by W.Va. Code § 21-9-4. The anchoring shall be adequate to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to, the over-the-top and frame ties, attached to permanent
foundation elements. Ground anchors may not be adequate to satisfy flood
specific anchoring requirements. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
            4.   a.   Permanently attached rigid skirts and perimeter wall
skirts of brick or block must have openings; this type of skirting can collapse
during floods and compromise supporting piers. The openings must be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces by allowing for entry and exit
of floodwaters.
               b.   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria.
                  i.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
                  ii.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
                  iii.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
            5.   Any additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly
anchored and vented.
      (2)   The licensed state manufactured home installer placing the unit
shall perform a site inspection and certify in writing that the manufactured
home has been installed to the standards set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Appurtenant structures.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, appurtenant structures
shall be located out of the floodplain area or elevated to two feet above the
base flood elevation.
      (2)   Where appurtenant structures not connected to the principal
structure are to be located on sites below the base flood elevation, the
following flood damage reduction provisions apply.
         (a)   Structures shall be no more than 600 square feet in size and
valued at less than an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
         (b)   Floors shall be at or above grade on at least one side.
         (c)   Structures shall be located, oriented and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
         (d)   Structures shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
         (e)   Flood-resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin
2-93 (FIA-TB-2) shall be used in the construction of the structure from the
lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation.
         (f)   Machinery, electric devices or appliances, and all utilities
shall be located at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
         (g)   The venting requirements contained in division (A) above are
applicable and shall be strictly adhered to.
      (3)   In addition, a non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the
applicant stating that the use of the appurtenant structure or detached or
attached garage shall not be changed from the use permitted, acknowledging that
the structure may be subject to greater flood risk and that higher flood
insurance premiums may be possible, and that a change in use may require full
compliance with this chapter. The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers
of the existence of this agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized
signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to
the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in §
151.999.
   (D)   Recreational vehicle placement.
      (1)   Recreational vehicles to be placed within any floodplain area shall
either:
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect utilities and security devices,
and has no permanently attached additions; or
         (c)   Be installed in accordance with the manufactured home placement
requirements and all other flood reduction requirements contained in this
chapter.
   (E)   Fill.
      (1)   The Council officially recognizes the beneficial functions the
floodplain serves in storage and transportation of water during floods.
Placement of fill in the floodplain area is discouraged and should be
minimized.
      (2)   No fill shall be permitted in the floodway.
      (3)   All fill placed in other floodplain areas shall meet or exceed the
following standards.
         (a)   1.   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties. The city may require the applicant to
demonstrate through engineering reports that proposed fill would not adversely
affect adjacent properties. When required, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed and sealed by the
responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In
addition, studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the city.
            2.   During permit review, the community shall consider the
following issues that have the potential to cause adverse impact to adjacent
properties:
               a.   Unacceptable increases in flood heights;
               b.   Blocking drainage from adjacent property;
               c.   Deflection of floodwaters onto adjacent existing
structures;
               d.   Increases to stream velocity initiating or exacerbating
erosion problems; and
               e.   Other unique site conditions may be considered when
determining whether fill will cause adverse impact to adjacent property
including, but not limited to, subsidence areas, Karst topography, stream
blockages and steep topography adjacent to the channel.
         (b)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any tributary to the
main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
         (c)   Filled site must be contoured to drain properly (avoid ponding).
         (d)   Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance
to provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend
laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all points before the start of
sloping required in division (E)(3)(e) below. For nonresidential structures,
fill shall be placed to provide access acceptable for intended use.
         (e)   At grade access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond,
the building line shall be provided to a minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a
nonresidential structure.
         (f)   Fill shall consist of soil or rock material only. Sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted; no trash or woody debris shall be buried on
site.
         (g)   Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling. Fill compaction
standards must be appropriate to proposed post fill use, particular attention
is necessary when fill is being used to elevate a structure.
         (h)   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two
horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted
to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
         (i)   Fill site and fill must be protected from erosion.
         (j)   All applicants placing fill in a mapped flood hazard area must
obtain a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA when directed to
do so by the Floodplain Administrator before a permit can be issued. After fill
is finished, the applicant must convert the CLOMR to a letter of map revision
based on fill (LOMR-F) before a certificate of compliance can be issued.
         (k)   The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other
material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise
the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by
the Floodplain Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by
FEMA for this purpose.
   (F)   Placement of structures and other development. All structures and
other development shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum obstruction effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
      (1)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
      (2)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on
the same flood-flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
   (G)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All structures and other development including stream crossings
shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement, thus reducing the threat to
life and property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge
openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below
the base flood elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation.
   (H)   Flood protection setback.
      (1)   A flood protection setback equal to twice the width of the
watercourse channel measuring from the top of one bank to the top of the
opposite bank or 50 feet, whichever is less, shall be maintained from the top
of the banks of all watercourses. To reduce erosion, natural vegetation shall
be maintained in this area. Where natural vegetation does not exist along the
watercourse and conditions for replanting are suitable, high priority shall be
given to planting vegetation in the setback area to stabilize banks and enhance
aquatic resources.
      (2)   Necessary public works and temporary construction may be exempted
from this division (H).
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator may consider an appeal to the flood
protection setback requirement if the applicant demonstrates that it is
impossible to allow any development without encroachment into the flood
protection setback area. The appeal conditions shall be the minimum necessary
and shall be made only after due consideration is given to varying other siting
standards, such as side, front and back lot line setbacks.
   (I)   Storage.
      (1)   No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in times of
flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored
below base flood elevation.
      (2)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
      (3)   Due to the potential of masking the natural elevation and making it
more difficult to enforce this chapter, material that resembles “fill” material
shall not be considered “storage” material for purposes of this division (J).
   (J)   Utility and facility requirements.
      (1)   All new or replacement water systems whether public or private,
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
      (2)   All new or replacement sanitary disposal systems, whether public or
private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (3)   All other new or replacement public and/or private utilities and
facilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
      (4)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (K)   Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazard.
   (L)   Backflow preventers. Back flow prevention valves should be used for
all enclosed structures with sewage or drainage facilities located in the
floodplain.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
151.999
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.090  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor, or his or her designee, is hereby appointed as Floodplain
Administrator to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying
floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010; Ord. 256, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 151.091  DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND SITE PLAN APPROVALS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development or the new
construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, the
placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) within
the city unless a permit application and standard site plan has been completed,
and a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator. In addition,
where land that is either partially or fully in the regulatory floodplain is to
be subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or
otherwise developed, a detailed site plan must be submitted to, and approved
by, the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.092  APPROVAL OF PERMITS AND PLANS.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review, or shall cause to be
reviewed, all permit applications and plans in order to determine whether
proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding.
   (B)   All permits and plans shall be approved only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with
the requirements of the state and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator shall not issue a permit to any person
who does not possess a valid contractor’s license when a contractor’s license
is required by W.Va. Code § 21-11-10.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator, before issuance of the permit, shall
require the applicant to furnish satisfactory proof that such person is duly
licensed as a contractor under the provisions of the West Virginia Code. If the
applicant is not licensed, a written affidavit that such person is not subject
to licensure as a contractor or subcontractor as defined in W.Va. Code § 21-11-
3 shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator and placed in the permit
file.
   (E)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require copies of all necessary
permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state law
requires approval.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a copy of all permits to
the County Assessor as required by W.Va. Code  § 11-3-3A.
   (G)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a copy of all permits for
new structures to the County E-911 addressing coordinator.
   (H)   The County E-911 addressing coordinator shall provide a copy of all
requests for addresses for new structures to the County Floodplain
Administrator.
   (I)   The city shall provide sufficient space to allow the Floodplain
Administrator to keep on file in perpetuity, in a location safe from natural
hazards, all information collected during the course of the administration of
this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.093  APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   Application for a permit and/or site plan approvals shall be made, in
writing, on the forms supplied by the city and shall include all information
stipulated under §§
151.060 through
151.063.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.094  CHANGES.
   After the issuance of a permit or site plan approval by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit
or any of the plans, specification or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.095  PERMIT PLACARDS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit placard, which shall be
prominently displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.096  START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Work on the proposed development shall begin within 180 days after the
date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. All work on
the proposed development must be completed within 18 months of permit issuance,
at which time the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is granted in
writing by the Floodplain Administrator. The request for a time extension shall
be in writing and shall state the reasons for the extension.
   (B)   When considering an extension, the Floodplain Administrator shall
consider the following criteria:
      (1)   Has the developer diligently pursued the completion of the proposed
development during the 18 months?
      (2)   Will the granting of the extension be detrimental to public safety,
health or welfare or injurious to other property?
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.097  STOP WORK ORDERS, INSPECTIONS AND REVOCATIONS.
   (A)   Stop work orders.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
stop work order notice for any development found ongoing without having
obtained a permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to
the penalties described in §
151.999 of this local law.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
stop work order notice for any development found noncompliant with the
provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the permit. Disregard of a stop
work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in §
151.999 of this local law.
   (B)   Inspections and revocations.
      (1)   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
      (2)   If the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not
comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances or
that there has been false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
Floodplain Administrator shall issue a stop work order notice revoke the permit
and request a temporary injunction.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official may
inspect any development covered by this or previous ordinance to determine
whether any portion of the development has been altered to be in non-compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.098  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to occupy, or to permit
the use or occupancy, of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, installed, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance
has been issued by the local Floodplain Administrator stating that the building
or land conforms to the requirements of this local law. Occupying or using a
building or premises in violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties described in §
151.999.
   (B)   In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to inspect and approve a
permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until the inspector is
in possession of a copy of the certificate of compliance issued by the local
Floodplain Administrator stating that the particular development being
inspected conforms to the requirements of this local law. Inspection and
approval of utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator
to the penalties described in §
151.999.
   (C)   In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to install a permanent
utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local Floodplain Administrator stating that
the development conforms to the requirements of this local law. Installation of
utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in §
151.999.
   (D)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local Administrator
upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood
hazard.
   (E)   Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in this chapter or local administrative procedures, and
any finished construction elevation certificate, hydraulic data, flood proofing
certificate or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a
condition of permit approval.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.099  FEES.
   (A)   Application for a permit for proposed development determined to be
occurring in a flood hazard area regulated by this chapter shall be accompanied
by an additional fee, payable to the city based upon a set schedule approved by
the city using the estimated value of the proposed construction as determined
by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the
city for any additional costs for services necessary for review and/or
inspection of proposed development. Services include, but are not limited to,
professional engineering and surveying. The Floodplain Administrator may
require a deposit towards these additional costs. Additional costs may include
reimbursement for contracted services.
   (C)   Due to the increased cost of processing, when any work for which a
permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to
obtaining a permit, the fees above specified shall be doubled. The additional
fee is intended to partially reimburse the city for the additional cost of
processing permits for work already underway. To more fully recover this cost,
the fees above shall be tripled for every subsequent occurrence by the same
person. Payment of the increased fee shall not relieve any person from
complying fully with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the
work or from other penalties prescribed herein.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
APPEALS
§ 151.110  APPEALS.
   Whenever any person is aggrieved by a decision of the Floodplain
Administrator with respect to the provision of this chapter, it is the right of
that person to appeal to the Council which shall be known as the Appeals Board.
Such appeal must be filed with the Council, in writing, within 30 days after
notification of the decision. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Appeals Board
shall set a time and place not less than ten nor more than 60 days for the
purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be given to all parties at which time they may appear and be heard. The
determination by the Appeals Board shall be final in all cases.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.111  APPEAL REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   All appeals contesting only the permit fee, the cumulative substantial
damage requirement, the flood protection setback requirement or the freeboard
requirements may be handled at the discretion of the Appeals Board.
   (B)   All decisions on appeals to all other provisions of this chapter shall
adhere to the following criteria.
      (1)   Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the Appeals Board
upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the appeal would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of an appeal will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing locals laws or ordinance.
      (2)   An affirmative decision shall be issued only upon determination
that it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. Financial hardship, as a sole criterion, shall not be considered
sufficient justification to grant an appeal.
      (3)   An affirmative decision shall be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   The Appeals Board shall notify the applicant in writing over the
signature of a community official that:
         (a)   The issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance;
         (b)   Such construction below the base flood elevation increases risk
to life and property. Such notifications shall be maintained with a record of
all decisions as required in this division (B)(4).
      (5)   The Appeals Board shall:
         (a)   Maintain a record of all decisions including justification for
their issuance; and
         (b)   Report such decisions issued in its biannual report to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
      (6)   An affirmative decision shall not be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
GOVERNMENT ACTIONS
§ 151.125  MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION.
   (A)   The county floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation
shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all
annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which
meets the requirements for participation in the national flood insurance
program.
   (B)   Municipalities with existing floodplain ordinances shall pass a
resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain
ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified flood
hazards.
   (C)   All plats or maps of annexation shall show the floodplain boundaries,
base flood elevation and location of the floodway where determined.
   (D)   In accordance with the 44 C.F.R. subpart (B) § 59.22(a)(9)(v), all
NFIP participating communities must notify the Federal Insurance Administration
in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by
annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that all flood insurance rate maps accurately represent the community’s
boundaries, a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly
delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has
assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must, be
included with the notification.
   (E)   NFIP participating communities must notify the State Coordinating
Office in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified
by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority
to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. A
copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating
the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or
relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be included with
the notification.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.126  PERMITS FOR GOVERNMENT ENTITIES.
   Unless specifically exempted by law, all public utilities and municipal,
county, state and federal entities are required to comply with this chapter and
obtain all necessary permits. Any entity claiming to be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter must provide a written statement setting forth the
rationale for exemption. In addition the entity claiming exemption shall
provide copies of all relevant legal documentation demonstrating the exemption.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
§ 151.140  LIABILITY.
   The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision or development plan in
an identified flood prone area, shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the city or by any official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create
no liability upon the city. All applicants proposing development in or near a
flood hazard area are urged to locate development as far away from, and as high
above, all flooding sources as possible.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 151.999  PENALTY.
   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or direction of the Floodplain Administrator, or any
other authorized employee of the community, shall be unlawful and shall be
referred to the prosecuting attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such
violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, pay a fine to the city of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time, plus cost of prosecution. In
default of such payment such person shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed ten days. Each day during which any violation of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all
other actions are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance with the chapter or permit it to continue; and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this
chapter may be declared by the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as
such.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-17-2010)
CHAPTER 152:  ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Definitions
   
152.002   Chapter subject to limitations of state zoning law
   
152.003   Zoning map
   
152.004   Streets not shown on zoning map
   
152.005   Building permits; required for certain purposes
   
152.006   Building permits; plats to accompany applications for permit
   
152.007   Enforcement officers
   
152.008   Investigation of reports of violation; building permit denied in
cases of violation
Use Districts
   
152.020   Purpose, number and designation
   
152.021   Districts are as shown on zoning map
   
152.022   Buildings and premises to be used only for permitted purposes
   
152.023   Limited uses for animals and poultry
   
152.024   Electric fences prohibited; staking of domestic animals prohibited
   
152.025   Permitted uses in residential districts
   
152.026   Institutional districts
   
152.027   Permitted uses in commercial districts
   
152.028   Permitted uses; industrial
Nonconforming Uses
   
152.040   When permitted
   
152.041   Certain structural alterations in buildings require change of use
   
152.042   Effect of addition of side and rear open porches
   
152.043   Change or abandonment
   
152.044   Determination of existence or abandonment
Height Districts
   
152.055   Purpose, number and designation
   
152.056   Districts are as shown on zoning map; applicability
   
152.057   Buildings to conform to height regulations
   
152.058   Forty-foot district
   
152.059   Eighty-foot district
   
152.060   One hundred thirty-foot district
   
152.061   One hundred fifty-foot district
   
152.062   Exceptions
Area Districts; Generally
   
152.075   Purpose, number and designation
   
152.076   Districts are as shown on zoning map
   
152.077   Buildings to conform to area regulations
A Area District
   
152.090   Minimum dimensions of yards and courts
B Area District
   
152.105   Minimum dimensions of yards and courts
   
152.106   Rear yard
   
152.107   Side yard
   
152.108   Open court
   
152.109   Enclosed court
   
152.110   Percentage of lot occupancy
C, D and E Area Districts
   
152.125   Minimum dimensions of yards and courts
   
152.126   Percentage of lot occupancy
Area District Exceptions
   
152.140   Exceptions enumerated
   
152.141   Limited video lottery establishments
Vehicle Parking; Parking Areas
   
152.155   “Parking or garage space” defined
   
152.156   Minimum parking or garage space for each building
   
152.157   Limitations on location
   
152.158   Limited use of parking or garage space when located on lot other than
lot on which related building stands
   
152.159   Applicability of division to existing buildings
   
152.160   Arrangement of parking spaces within area
   
152.161   Plat or map to accompany application for building permit
   
152.162   Storage garages
   
152.163   Table for determination of number of required spaces
   
152.164   Lot location for off-street parking facilities
   
152.165   Fractional spaces
   
152.166   Authority of Board of Zoning Appeals to permit waivers and
modifications
Parking of Trailers; House Trailer Camps
   
152.180   Definitions
   
152.181   Prohibited parking of mobile homes
   
152.182   How house trailer camps may be established
   
152.183   Space and location requirements for parking of house trailers
   
152.184   Building permit requirements
Certificates of Occupancy
   
152.195   Purposes for which required; applications for and issuance of
   
152.196   Posting of certificate
   
152.197   When certificate may be issued
   
152.198   Prohibited occupation or use of premises prior to issuance of
certificate
   
152.199   Record of certificates issued
Board of Zoning Appeals; Generally
   
152.210   Board continued in existence; how referred to; statutory powers and
duties
   
152.211   Officers
   
152.212   Docket and minute book
   
152.213   Publications of notice of public hearings on appeals; adjourned
meetings
   
152.214   Duration of validity of orders and building permits relating to
erection or alteration of buildings
   
152.215   Duration of validity of orders permitting use of buildings or
premises
   
152.216   Reports of Board proceedings and records thereof
   
152.217   Annual reports to Planning Commission, Mayor and Council
Board of Zoning Appeals; Powers Relating to Exceptions and Special Questions
   
152.230   Powers relative to variances
   
152.231   Granting of exceptions
   
152.232   Powers relative to nonconforming uses
Board of Zoning Appeals; Miscellaneous Provisions
   
152.245   Meetings; quorum
   
152.246   Cases before the Board
   
152.247   The docket and calendar
   
152.248   Hearings
   
152.249   Rehearing
   
152.250   Advice
   
152.251   Fee for filing of an appeal
 
   
152.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to prohibit within the city or within one mile of its
corporate limits the erection or maintenance of slaughter houses, glue
factories, tanneries and the like, see Char. §
28, subsec. (28)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to enact zoning ordinances, see W.Va. Code § 8A-7-1
   Urban and rural planning and zoning, see W.Va. Code § 8A-7
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Such
definitions shall not be held to modify or affect in any way the legal
interpretations of such terms or words where used in other regulations.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building located in and occupying not more
than 30% of the rear yard of the main building, whose use is incidental to that
of the main building, and which does not exceed 15 feet in height above the
ground level.
   ALLEY. A public way designated as an ALLEY in the records and on the city
map on file in the office of the City Clerk.
   APARTMENT. A household unit with kitchen facilities, except portable
electrical table appliances, exclusively for the use of the persons occupying
such unit.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. A building in which there are three or more apartments.
   AREA. See BUILDING AREA.
   BLOCK or SQUARE. See SQUARE.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals
or lodging and meals are provided for three or more guests.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
shelter, support or inclosure of persons, animals or chattels. When separated
from the ground up, or from the lowest floor up, each such portion shall be
deemed a separate BUILDING. The existence of communication between separate
portions of a structure below the main floor shall not be construed as making
such structure one BUILDING. The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of a building and its
accessory buildings, excluding open steps, terraces and cornices. (Front
entrance porches which do not extend more than three feet beyond the front wall
and are not greater than 20 square feet in area will not be construed as part
of the BUILDING AREA, and the depth of such porches will be excluded from the
depth of the building for the purpose of computing the width of side yards.)
   BUILDING LINE. A line beyond which property owners and others have no legal
or vested right to extend a building or any part thereof without special
permission and approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals; ordinarily a line of
demarcation between public and private property when recorded in the office of
the City Clerk or the County Clerk. For the purpose of zoning, it is also
applied to a building restriction line which is hereby prescribed as follows.
In residential areas, the BUILDING LINE shall hereafter be not less than 25
feet from the front property line. In commercial and industrial areas, the
BUILDING LINE shall be the same as the front property line, and in no case set
back more than five feet from the front property line, except where the
building is to be a residence.
   CELLAR. The portion of a building below the first floor joists, the floor of
which is more than one- half the clear ceiling height below the adjacent
ground.
   COMMUNITY HOUSE. A group of not more than three single-family dwellings so
designed as to give the appearance of a single building and erected
simultaneously.
   DEPTH OF LAND. The main horizontal distance between the front property line
and the rear lot line.
   DEPTH OF REAR YARD. The main horizontal distance between the rear line of
the building and the centerline of the alley where an alley exists, otherwise
the rear lot line.
   DISTRICT. Sections of the city for which the regulations governing the
height, the area and the use of buildings and premises are the same.
   DWELLING. A house occupied by a person or family as a place of residence.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A privately or publicly owned and operated facility
providing post-secondary academic instruction.
   ENCLOSED COURT. An open, unoccupied space surrounded on all sides by walls
or by walls and a party line.
   FLAT. A building in which there are two apartments.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. In the 150-foot, 130-foot and 80-foot height districts,
the vertical distance from the level of the curb opposite the middle of the
front of the building to the top of any enclosure wall or to the highest point
of the roof; provided, that in the 80-foot height district, in the case of a
building located on a terrace, the height above the curb level may be increased
by an amount equal to the height of the terrace above the same curb level. In
the 40-foot height district the vertical distance from the ground level at the
middle of the front of the building to the ceiling of the top story.
   HEIGHT OF COURT. The vertical distance from the bottom of any opening in
such court, necessary for light and ventilation, to the highest point of any
bounding wall.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation in connection with which there is used no
sign or display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; in
which there is kept no stock in trade or commodity sold upon the premises, no
person employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the
premises, and no mechanical equipment used except such as is permissible for
purely domestic or household purposes.
   HOTEL. Every place where lodging is provided for ten or more transient
guests. This definition shall not be interpreted to include private clubs.
   LENGTH OF OPEN COURT. The mean horizontal distance between the open and
closed ends of the court.
   LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A dwelling providing lodging for three or more
roomers for compensation.
   LOT. The land bounded by definite lines and occupied or to be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings, and including open spaces required by
these regulations. A LOT may or may not be the land so recorded on the records
of the City Clerk, or of the Clerk of the County Commission of Randolph County.
The word LOT includes the words PLOT or PARCEL.
   LOT, ALLEY. A lot facing or abutting an alley but at no point facing or
abutting a street.
   LOT, CORNER OR TRIANGULAR. A lot fronting on two or more streets at their
junction, such streets forming with each other an angle of 45 degrees or more,
is a CORNER LOT. When the angle formed by the intersecting streets is less than
45 degrees, such lot shall be known as a TRIANGULAR LOT.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or triangular lot.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
   LOT, THROUGH. An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
   NONCONFORMING USE. The use of a building or premises classified as a use
that does not conform with the regulations of the use district in which such
building or premises is located.
   PERCENTAGE OF LOT OCCUPANCY. The portion of such area of a lot as lies
within lot lines and building lines as defined herein which is occupied or may
be occupied, under these regulations, as a building area.
   PRIVATE GARAGE. A garage without public repair or service facilities, of not
more than 800 square feet and housing not more than four steam- or motor-driven
vehicles.
   PUBLIC SERVICE GARAGE. A garage in which steam- or motor-driven vehicles are
equipped for operation, repaired or kept for hire or sale, not including
exhibition or show rooms for model cars.
   PUBLIC STORAGE GARAGE. A garage, other than a private garage, in which
repair facilities are incidental to its primary use for storage.
   REAR YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building between the rear
line of the building and rear line of the lot, for the full width of the lot,
and unoccupied except as herein specifically authorized.
   SIDE YARD. An open unoccupied space on the same lot between the building and
the side line of the lot extending through from the front of the building to
the rear yard.
   SQUARE. Land so designated as a BLOCK or SQUARE on the records of the City
Clerk or on maps or plots in the office of the Clerk of the County Commission
of Randolph County, or either of them. A BLOCK or SQUARE shall consist of an
area bounded by open public thoroughfares, streets or alleys, by the Tygart
River, the property line of any railway company or other property line, or the
city corporation line, as the case may be.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it; provided, that
a cellar shall not be considered a STORY. A mezzanine story, covering not more
than one-third of the area of a building at the mezzanine level, shall not be
considered a STORY within the meaning of these regulations.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, except such
alterations as may be required for the safety of the building.
(1991 Code, § 21-1)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979; Ord. 255,
passed 6-21-2018)
§ 152.002  CHAPTER SUBJECT TO LIMITATIONS OF STATE ZONING LAW.
   The provisions of this chapter are subject to all limitations imposed by
W.Va. Code § 8A-7.
(1991 Code, § 21-2)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.003  ZONING MAP.
   The official zoning map, thereon certified as such by the Mayor and which is
now and shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, together with
such amendments thereof and notations made thereon as of the effective date of
this code, shall continue to be the official zoning map of the city, by which
title it may be cited, or it may be cited simply as the “zoning map”.
(1991 Code, § 21-3)
§ 152.004  STREETS NOT SHOWN ON ZONING MAP.
   When a street is shown on the highway plan or on plats on file in the office
of the City Clerk or the office of the Clerk of the County Commission, and is
not indicated or shown on the zoning map as being in any height, area or use
district, the designation of the adjoining square or parcel shall extend to the
centerline of such street.
(1991 Code, § 21-4)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.005  BUILDING PERMITS; REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   Any person who shall build or cause to be built, altered or converted any
building in the city without having first obtained a city building permit so to
do shall be fined.
(1991 Code, § 21-5)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.006  BUILDING PERMITS; PLATS TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT.
   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat in
duplicate, drawn to scale as required on the application form, showing the
actual dimensions of the recorded lot to be built upon, all buildings existing
upon such lot, the size of the building to be erected and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these
regulations. A careful record of such application and plats shall be kept in
the office of the Building Inspector.
(1991 Code, § 21-6)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
§ 152.007  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Council and the
Chief of Police.
(1991 Code, § 21-7)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.008  INVESTIGATION OF REPORTS OF VIOLATION; BUILDING PERMIT DENIED IN
CASES OF VIOLATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and Building Official to
investigate and report any violation of these zoning regulations to the Mayor
and Council, and no building permit shall be granted in violation of these
zoning regulations.
(1991 Code, § 21-8)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
USE DISTRICTS
§ 152.020  PURPOSE, NUMBER AND DESIGNATION.
   In order to regulate the location of commerce, business, trades and
industries, and the location of all buildings designed or occupied for specific
uses, the city is hereby divided into use districts, of which there shall be
five, known as:
   (A)   Residential, restricted;
   (B)   Residential, unrestricted;
   (C)   Commercial;
   (D)   Industrial; and
   (E)   Institutional.
(1991 Code, § 21-10)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
§ 152.021  DISTRICTS ARE AS SHOWN ON ZONING MAP.
   The use districts shall be as shown on the official zoning map in the office
of the City Clerk.
(1991 Code, § 21-11)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.022  BUILDINGS AND PREMISES TO BE USED ONLY FOR PERMITTED PURPOSES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall be erected or converted,
nor shall any building or premises be used, for any purpose other than that
permitted in the use district in which such building or premises are located.
(1991 Code, § 21-12)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.023  LIMITED USES FOR ANIMALS AND POULTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct and use any new,
altered, converted or remodeled building or structure on any lot, area, tract
or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city for the housing and
care of any domestic animal (other than dogs and cats or household pets) or of
poultry of any kind customarily housed in barns, hog pens, poultry or chicken
houses, or other outhouses or sheds.
(1991 Code, § 21-13)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty,
see §
152.999
§ 152.024  ELECTRIC FENCES PROHIBITED; STAKING OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or operate any
electric fence for any purpose within the corporate limits of the city, or to
stake any cow, bull, horse, mule, goat or other domestic animal on any lot or
parcel of land within the city.
(1991 Code, § 21-14)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)  Penalty,
see §
152.999
§ 152.025  PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In the residential districts, all buildings and premises, except as
otherwise provided in these regulations, shall be erected for and used
exclusively as:
   (A)   Dwellings;
   (B)   Apartment houses, flats and tenements in the B District only;
   (C)   (1)   Hotels in the B District only; and
      (2)   Commercial uses which distinctly pertain to or are appropriate
adjuncts to hotels as follows: restaurant dining room; drug stand, including
soda fountain, perfumery shop, florist shop, barbershop, beauty parlor,
pressing or tailoring establishment; cigar and newsstand; and uses similar to
these enumerated in the B District when approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
   (D)   Lodging or boardinghouses in the B District only;
   (E)   Churches in the B District only;
   (F)   Private clubs, fraternities and lodges in the B District only, except
those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a
business;
   (G)   Transportation rights-of-way;
   (H)   Farms, truck gardens, nurseries and greenhouses in the B District
only;
   (I)   Accessory buildings and uses of property customarily incidental to the
district, when located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a
business on the premises;
   (J)   The following usual accessories of a residence located on the same lot
with that residence and not involving the conduct of a business shall be
allowed:
      (1)   A private garage located in a fireproof compartment within,
adjoining or forming an addition to a building, or both; provided, that the
total garage storage facilities on any one lot shall not exceed 800 square feet
in area;
      (2)   A private garage located in the rear yard with a dwelling, and not
less than ten feet from any point of such dwelling nor less than 20 feet from
the building line of any street upon which the lot abuts; provided, that if the
lot will not permit a garage to be located in conformity with this regulation,
a garage may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided in §§
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251; and provided further, that the total private garage storage facilities
on any one lot shall not exceed 800 square feet in area;
      (3)   A public storage garage in an apartment house, where the floor area
of the garage does not exceed one-fourth of the total floor area designed for
use or used by the tenants; provided, that the vehicular entrances or exits are
located 75 feet or more back of the building line of the nearest street, or are
so located that dangerous traffic or otherwise objectionable conditions, as may
be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals in as provided in §§
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251, will not be created; and
      (4)   Open parking spaces accommodating motor-driven passenger vehicles
of the persons residing in the building on the premises, provided, that no part
of such parking space shall occupy any part of the side yards and courts nor
more than 30% of the rear yard required by these regulations; and provided
further, that any such parking space between the outside walls of the building
and the line of any street upon which the lot abuts shall require the approval
of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (K)   A private garage which is not appurtenant to any of the above uses and
housing not more than two motor-driven vehicles, nor exceeding 800 square feet
in area, if located 50 feet or more back of the building line of the nearest
street, and abutting and opening directly upon a public alley;
   (L)   In the B District, a public storage garage, or the temporary parking
of motor vehicles on an alley lot, so recorded on the records of the City Clerk
or the County Clerk, when no part of such garage or the space for such parking
is located within 25 feet of any street building line, and when vehicular
entrances and exits open directly on a public alley;
   (M)   In the B District temporary use of premises by fairs, circuses or
carnivals, upon compliance with the applicable provisions of this code; and
   (N)   Public or private schools, municipal recreational uses, pumping
stations and fire engine houses may be erected in any district. In the case of
a fire engine house located in a residential district, a public hearing shall
first be held by the Mayor and Council. Police stations shall be located only
in commercial and industrial districts.
(1991 Code, § 21-15)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-17-1980)
Editor’s note:
   See §§
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251 for other uses which may be approved in a residential district by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 152.026  INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   All uses authorized for the institutional districts are subject to the
limitations of law and municipal regulations under the provisions of the
Charter of the city.
   (B)   In the institutional district, all buildings and premises may be used
for any and all educational related use, including, but not limited to,
instructional and residential facilities, but not including mobile homes.
   (C)   In the institutional district, all buildings and premises, except as
otherwise provided in these regulations, may be used for any use permitted in
the residential districts, as well as the following accessory uses:
      (1)   Commercial uses which distinctly pertain to or are appropriate
adjuncts to a catering or banquet service providing meals and/or refreshments
for consumption for a fee;
      (2)   Facilities for preparing and serving meals and beverages primarily,
but not exclusively, to members of the campus community, and including, but not
limited to, cafeterias, restaurants, cafés, coffee shops, bakeries and ice
cream and yogurt parlors;
      (3)   Any and all offices and facilities including, but not limited to,
meeting and conference rooms, administrative offices, libraries, audio/video
media centers, campus post office, service center for document assembly and
photocopying, laundry services and campus security;
      (4)   Any and all indoor and outdoor facilities for athletic, sporting,
recreational purposes, performing arts and cinematic productions or exhibits;
      (5)   Any and all retail establishments typically associated with
educational functions, including, but not limited to, the sale of books,
apparel, groceries and sundries;
      (6)   Any and all facilities associated with human medical or wellness
care as administered by physicians, nurses, counselors, trainers or other
associated licensed professionals, for the benefit of any campus community
member;
      (7)   Any and all facilities associated with the institution’s physical
plant activities, including, but not limited to, building and structure
improvement and maintenance, such as landscaping, carpentry, painting,
plumbing, masonry, mechanical and electrical work; and the storage and
warehousing of all reasonable or necessary vehicles, machinery, equipment,
tools, materials and any other persona property; and
      (8)   Any and all parking lots, provided that the surface is improved
with asphalt, concrete, or compacted gravel, and satisfies both ADA
requirements and any city storm water drainage requirements.
(Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
§ 152.027  PERMITTED USES IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   All uses authorized for the commercial districts are subject to the
limitations of law and municipal regulations under the provisions of the
Charter of the city.
   (B)   In the commercial district, all buildings and premises, except as
otherwise provided in these regulations, may be used for any use permitted in
the residential district or for any other use except the following:
      (1)   Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture;
      (2)   Bag cleaning establishment;
      (3)   Distillation of coal, wood, bones or tar;
      (4)   Distillation of turpentine or varnish;
      (5)   Emery cloth manufacture;
      (6)   Fertilizer manufacture;
      (7)   Fireworks or explosives manufacture;
      (8)   Garbage incineration other than in municipal plants or incidental
to the operation of hotels, restaurants, apartment houses and dwellings;
      (9)   Glue, size or gelatine manufacture;
      (10)   Grinding, cooking, boiling, rendering or storing of slaughterhouse
refuse, animal refuse, rancid fats or refuse of dead animals;
      (11)   Pyroxyline or celluloid manufacture;
      (12)   Stockyards;
      (13)   Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture; and
      (14)   Tetra-ethyl lead precipitate or liquid manufacture.
(1991 Code, § 21-16)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.028  PERMITTED USES; INDUSTRIAL.
   In the industrial districts, all buildings and all premises may be used for
any purpose whatsoever not in conflict with law or municipal regulations. No
building shall be erected or altered for use and no building or premises shall
be used unless the application for the permit shall first be presented to and
approved by the Mayor and Council and Board of Zoning Appeals.
(1991 Code, § 21-17)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 152.040  WHEN PERMITTED.
   The lawful use of a building or premises, as existing and lawful at the time
of the adoption of any regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted, may be
continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of such
regulation; provided, that no structural alteration or conversion, except such
as may be required by law, or no extension, enlargement of change in design, is
made or new building is erected. The casual, temporary or illegal use of a
building or premises shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a
nonconforming use.
(1991 Code, § 21-18)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 152.041  CERTAIN STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS IN BUILDINGS REQUIRE CHANGE OF USE.
   Where structural alterations are made in a building of a nonconforming use,
such use shall be changed to a use consistent with the provisions of these
regulations for the district in which such building is located; provided, that
structural alterations made wholly within the outside walls of nonconforming
single-family dwellings, or the enclosing of side and rear porches existing on
such dwellings at the time of the adoption of this regulation, shall not be
prohibited.
(1991 Code, § 21-19)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 152.042  EFFECT OF ADDITION OF SIDE AND REAR OPEN PORCHES.
   The addition of side and rear open porches to nonconforming single-family
dwellings shall not be prohibited; provided, that the permitted percentage of
lot occupancy is not exceeded thereby; and provided, further, that the widths
of the side yards adjacent to such porches comply with the regulations.
(1991 Code, § 21-20)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 152.043  CHANGE OR ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of the same
classification, provided no structural alterations are made, or may be changed
to a use of a higher classification. If a nonconforming use is changed to a use
of a higher classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a
lower classification.
   (B)   A nonconforming use, located in a residential district, which shall
remain idle, unused or vacant for a continuous period of one year, whether or
not the fixtures or equipment are removed, shall be considered abandoned as a
nonconforming use and thereafter such building or premises shall be used for a
conforming use.
(1991 Code, § 21-20.1)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 152.044  DETERMINATION OF EXISTENCE OR ABANDONMENT.
   Whether a nonconforming use exists or whether a nonconforming use has been
abandoned shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 21-20.2)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
HEIGHT DISTRICTS
§ 152.055  PURPOSE, NUMBER AND DESIGNATION.
   In order to regulate the height of buildings, the city is hereby divided
into height districts, of which there shall be four, known as:
   (A)   Forty-Foot District;
   (B)   Eighty-Foot District;
   (C)   One Hundred Thirty-Foot District; and
   (D)   One Hundred Fifty-Foot District.
(1991 Code, § 21-21)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
§ 152.056  DISTRICTS ARE AS SHOWN ON ZONING MAP; APPLICABILITY.
   The height districts shall be as shown on the map designated as the official
zoning map, and shall apply, respectively, to:
   (A)   A - Restricted Residential Districts;
   (B)   B - Residential Unrestricted;
   (C)   C - Commercial;
   (D)   D - Industrial; and
   (E)   E - Institutional.
(1991 Code, § 21-22)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
§ 152.057  BUILDINGS TO CONFORM TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Except as herein specifically provided, no building shall be altered,
converted, constructed or raised so as to exceed the height hereby established
for the district wherein such building is located.
(1991 Code, § 21-23)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.058  FORTY-FOOT DISTRICT.
   In the district designated as the 40-Foot District on the official zoning
map, no building shall exceed 40 feet in height. This applies to the
residential, restricted district only.
(1991 Code, § 21-24)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.059  EIGHTY-FOOT DISTRICT.
   In the district designated as the 80-Foot District on the official zoning
map, no building shall exceed 80 feet in height. This applies to the
residential, unrestricted district only.
(1991 Code, § 21-25)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.060  ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-FOOT DISTRICT.
   In the district designated as the 130-Foot District on the official zoning
map, no building shall exceed 130 feet in height. This applies to the
commercial district only.
(1991 Code, § 21-26)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.061  ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FOOT DISTRICT.
   In the district designated as the 150-Foot District on the official zoning
map, no building shall exceed 150 feet in height. This applies to the
industrial and institutional districts only.
(1991 Code, § 21-27)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
§ 152.062  EXCEPTIONS.
   The foregoing requirement in the height districts shall be subject to the
following exceptions and regulations.
   (A)   Spires, towers, domes, minarets, pinnacles, penthouses over elevator
shafts, ventilation shafts, chimneys, smoke stacks and fire sprinkler tanks may
be erected to a greater height than any limit prescribed in these regulations
when and as they may be approved by the Mayor and Council and Board of Zoning
Appeals; provided, that such structures when above such limit in height shall
be fireproof, and no floor or compartment thereof shall be constructed or used
for human occupancy above the top story of the building upon which such
structures are placed; and provided further, that penthouses, ventilation
shafts and tanks shall be set back from the exterior walls distances equal to
their respective height above the adjacent roof.
   (B)   Public or semi-public buildings of an institutional character or
monumental character may exceed the height regulations for the district in
which such buildings are to be located when set back from the established
building lines and all lot lines one foot for each foot of excess height.
   (C)   Churches may be erected to a height in excess of that authorized in
the district in which located upon the approval of the Mayor and Council and
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   On through lots 100 feet or less in depth, the height of buildings may
be measured from the curb level of either street. On through lots more than 100
feet deep, the height regulations and basis of height measurement for the
street permitting the greater height shall apply to the depth of 100 feet only
from the street.
   (E)   Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the erection in any height
district of a building complying with the requirements of the 40-Foot Height
District.
(1991 Code, § 21-28)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
AREA DISTRICTS; GENERALLY
§ 152.075  PURPOSE, NUMBER AND DESIGNATION.
   In order to regulate the area of yards and courts and the percentage of the
lot which may be occupied by buildings hereafter erected or enlarged, the city
is hereby divided into area districts, of which there shall be five, known as
A, B, C, D and E.
(1991 Code, § 21-29)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
Editor’s note:
   The ordinance provisions codified in this subchapter were adopted March 5,
1959.
§ 152.076  DISTRICTS ARE AS SHOWN ON ZONING MAP.
   The area districts shall be as shown upon the map designated as the official
zoning map.
(1991 Code, § 21-30)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.077  BUILDINGS TO CONFORM TO AREA REGULATIONS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall be erected nor shall an
existing building be structurally altered, enlarged or rebuilt except in
conformity with these regulations. No lot area shall be so reduced or
diminished in area that yards, courts and open spaces shall be smaller than
prescribed by these regulations.
(1991 Code, § 21-31)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)  Penalty, see §
152.999
A AREA DISTRICT
§ 152.090  MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF YARDS AND COURTS.
   In the A Area District, the minimum dimensions of yards and courts and the
maximum percentage of lot occupancy shall be the same as for a B Area District;
except, that hereafter no building shall be erected, and no buildings or
premises altered for use or used as an apartment house, hospital, sanitarium,
lodging or boarding house, public garage, flat, hotel or community house, but
shall be erected or altered for use or used only as a wholly detached single-
family dwelling with two side yards, church, transportation right-of-way or
school, when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided in §§
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251. (For other uses permissible in the A Area District, see §§
152.025,
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251.)
(1991 Code, § 21-32)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
B AREA DISTRICT
§ 152.105  MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF YARDS AND COURTS.
   In the B Area District, the minimum dimensions of yards and courts and the
maximum percentage of lot occupancy shall be as provided in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 21-33)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.106  REAR YARD.
   (A)   There shall be a rear yard having either a depth of not less than 15%
of the depth of the lot, or a depth of not less than five inches for each foot
of building height, whichever is greater.
   (B)   This yard need not exceed 25 feet in depth; provided, it has a depth
of not less than five inches for each foot of building height.
(1991 Code, § 21-34)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.107  SIDE YARD.
   A side yard shall not be less than two inches wide for each foot of building
height. A side yard shall not be less than five feet wide and there shall be at
least two side yards.
(1991 Code, § 21-35)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.108  OPEN COURT.
   An open court shall be not less than five feet wide nor less than two and
one-half inches wide for each foot of height of such court.
(1991 Code, § 21-36)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.109  ENCLOSED COURT.
   An enclosed court shall not be less than six feet wide, nor less than three
inches wide for each foot of height of such court, nor shall its area be less
than twice the square of its required least dimension.
(1991 Code, § 21-37)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.110  PERCENTAGE OF LOT OCCUPANCY.
   No building, with its accessory buildings, shall occupy in excess of 40% of
an interior lot, nor in excess of 50% of a corner lot, nor in excess of 60% of
a triangular lot.
(1991 Code, § 21-38)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
C, D AND E AREA DISTRICTS
§ 152.125  MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF YARDS AND COURTS.
   For residences, in the C, D and E Area Districts, the minimum dimensions of
yards and courts and the maximum percentage of lot occupancy shall be the same
as for the B Area District.
(1991 Code, § 21-39)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
§ 152.126  PERCENTAGE OF LOT OCCUPANCY.
   For commercial and industrial buildings in the C, D and E Area Districts,
the maximum percentage of lot occupancy may be 100%; provided, that the
Building Code and the sanitary provisions of this city code, and the provisions
of this chapter with reference to parking area, are fully complied with.
(1991 Code, § 21-40)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 255, passed 6-21-2018)
AREA DISTRICT EXCEPTIONS
§ 152.140  EXCEPTIONS ENUMERATED.
   The foregoing requirements in the area districts shall be subject to the
following exceptions and regulations.
   (A)   A building upon a through lot may waive the requirements for a rear
yard when complying with the percentage of lot occupancy requirements;
provided, that in computing percentage of lot occupancy one of the streets upon
which the lot abuts may be assumed to be an alley; and provided further, that
when such a building is located between lots requiring rear yards on either or
both sides, such building on a through lot shall provide a court on the side or
sides on which the adjoining lots are required to provide rear yard.
   (B)   Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest
point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of skylights
above the bottom of such yard or court, and except for the projections of
sills, bolt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed four
inches; provided, that open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, the ordinary
projection of chimneys and flues, and portions of a building which do not
extend above the level of the first floor of the main building may be permitted
if so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
   (C)   Courts or shafts for bathrooms, toilets, hallways or stairways may be
of smaller dimensions than herein specified for courts; such courts or shafts,
and also yards less than five feet wide, and open and enclosed courts not
conforming to the requirements of these regulations, will be considered as part
of the building in computing the percentage of lot occupancy.
   (D)   In the residential A and B Area Districts, the percentage of lot
occupancy of interior and corner lots that are heretofore occupied by dwellings
may be increased 10% to permit the erection of one story private garages only.
   (E)   In case of recorded private restriction lines, the whole area of
privately owned property will be considered in computing the area of occupancy;
also, in computing the lot occupancy the area between the building line and the
building restriction line, upon which the owner pays taxes shall be counted in
the area of the lot.
   (F)   In the B District, a row of connected single-family dwellings with
division walls from the ground up or from the lowest floor up may be erected
and deemed a single building for the purpose of these regulations; provided,
the building conforms with the following requirements.
      (1)   All the buildings in such group shall be erected simultaneously and
shall not exceed two stories in height.
      (2)   There shall be two side yards, each conforming with the regulations
of the B District Area, but each side yard shall not be less than 20 feet in
width; and the rear yard shall conform with the regulations of the B Area
District, but shall be not less than 20 feet in depth.
      (3)   The structure and its accessory buildings shall not occupy in
excess of 25% of the total area.
      (4)   No exterior stairway, unless located within the buildings area,
shall be constructed above the level of the main floor joists.
      (5)   A combination of single-family dwellings and apartment houses,
flats or tenements in any one group is prohibited.
      (6)   The group shall consist of not more than 12 single-family
dwellings. There shall be at least one front entrance for each four family
dwellings.
   (G)   Churches hereafter erected, altered or enlarged in the A Restricted,
and B Area Districts shall not be subject to the maximum lot occupancy
provisions applicable to such districts; provided, that yard and court
provisions required for such districts are met and complied with.
(1991 Code, § 21-41)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.141  LIMITED VIDEO LOTTERY ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to limited video lottery machines being operated in an
establishment within the city, an applicant shall apply for a permit from the
Mayor or City Clerk or one of his or her authorized representatives, who shall
forward said application to the Code Enforcement Official.
   (B)   Limited video lottery establishments shall be permitted in the city B,
C and D Zoning Districts by a conditional use permit which must be applied for
to and approved by the Code Enforcement Official, which permit shall be
approved subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The limited video lottery establishment shall not be located within
1,000 feet of a residential zone, church or place of worship, school, park,
community or recreation facility, or other limited video lottery establishment.
      (2)   The 1,000 feet from a school, park, community or recreation
facility, or residential zone shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the wall of a limited video lottery establishment to the
nearest property line of a school, park, community or recreation facility, or
residential zone.
      (3)   The 1,000 feet from a church or place of worship shall be measured
in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the
building in which a limited video lottery is conducted to the nearest point of
a wall of a building in which church worship services or related activities are
conducted.
      (4)   The 1,000 feet from another limited video lottery establishment
shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the
portion of the building in which a limited video lottery is conducted to the
nearest point of a wall in which another limited video lottery may be
conducted.
      (5)   Fraternal organizations with a valid club license are limited to
operating a maximum of ten LVL machines. Licensed clubs or taverns are limited
to operating a maximum of five LVL machines.
      (6)   A limited video lottery establishment located on the property known
as the Tygart Valley Mall shall not be subject to the above distance
requirements, except for the requirement that a limited video lottery
establishment shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another limited video
lottery establishment. All other non-distance restrictions and requirements
contained in this section remain applicable. Persons wishing to operate a
limited video lottery establishment located on the property known as the Tygart
Valley Mall shall make application to the Mayor or City Clerk or one of his or
her authorized representatives, who shall forward said application to the Code
Enforcement Official. Upon the determination of the Code Enforcement Official
that the establishment is located on the property known as the Tygart Valley
Mall and is not within 1,000 feet of another limited video lottery
establishment, the permit shall be approved.
(Ord. O-026, passed 2-17-2005; Ord. 047, passed 8-17-2006; Ord. 172, passed 10-
17-2013)
VEHICLE PARKING; PARKING AREAS
§ 152.155  “PARKING OR GARAGE SPACE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARKING OR GARAGE SPACE. A level area of not less than 150 square feet,
exclusive of driveways or aisles giving access thereto, accessible from streets
or alleys or from private driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys, and
of such shape and condition as to be usable for the temporary parking of motor-
driven vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 21-42)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.156  MINIMUM PARKING OR GARAGE SPACE FOR EACH BUILDING.
   In all districts there shall be provided at the time of the erection of any
building hereafter designated, minimum off-street parking or garage space for
motor-driven vehicles in amounts not less than hereafter specified, and such
area shall thereafter be maintained and not reduced below the requirements of
this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 21-43)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.157  LIMITATIONS ON LOCATION.
   No part of the open parking or garage space required which is located on the
same lot with the building it is intended to serve shall be permitted within
five feet of the outside walls of such building. No open parking or garage
space shall be between the outside walls of a building and the line of any
street upon which the lot abuts unless approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(1991 Code, § 21-44)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.158  LIMITED USE OF PARKING OR GARAGE SPACE WHEN LOCATED ON LOT OTHER
THAN LOT ON WHICH RELATED BUILDING STANDS.
   When the parking or garage space for vehicles in connection with any
building, as required by this subchapter, is provided on any lot other than the
same lot on which the building is located, then such space shall not be used
for any other purpose or included or counted as any part of a yard or court or
other open space required under these regulations for or accessory to or in
connection with any other building, structure or use.
(1991 Code, § 21-45)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.159  APPLICABILITY OF DIVISION TO EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the
establishment of any parking or garage space for existing buildings; provided,
the applicable provisions of the foregoing sections of this subchapter are met
and complied with.
(1991 Code, § 21-46)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.160  ARRANGEMENT OF PARKING SPACES WITHIN AREA.
   For the purpose of this section ACCESSIBLE shall mean graded and
unobstructed ingress and egress at all times to and from the parking area and
to each parking or garage space within such area. An aisle required for
accessibility between rows of two or more parking spaces or between a row of
two or more parking spaces and the perimeter of the parking area shall be not
less than 14 feet in width, but in computing the width of an aisle between a
row of two or more parking spaces and the perimeter of the parking area, a
private right-of-way or alley abutting such perimeter, if accessible, shall be
assumed to be the whole or a part of the width of such aisle, as the case may
be.
(1991 Code, § 21-47)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.161  PLAT OR MAP TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   Upon application for building permit, the City Clerk shall require the
applicant to provide any plat, profile or topographical map necessary to
determine the accessibility of the parking area.
(1991 Code, § 21-48)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.162  STORAGE GARAGES.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall also apply to public storage garages
hereafter erected in residential areas as provided in §§
152.025(J)(3) and
152.231(A)(3) and to parking garages as permitted in §§
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251.
(1991 Code, § 21-49)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.163  TABLE FOR DETERMINATION OF NUMBER OF REQUIRED SPACES.
   Except as otherwise provided the amount of off-street parking or garage
space shall be determined in accordance with the following table:
 
Apartment or tenement houses in A       1 parking or garage space for each
District                                dwelling unit
Apartment or tenement houses in B       1 parking or garage space for each
District                                dwelling unit
Apartment or tenement houses in C       1 parking or garage space for each
district                                dwelling unit
Flats                                   1 parking or garage space for each
                                        dwelling unit
High schools, colleges and universities 1 parking or garage space for each 65
                                        students
Hospitals                               1 parking or garage space for each 4
                                        beds
Lodging, rooming, boarding houses or    1 parking or garage space for each 4
hotels                                  guest bedrooms
Orphanages, eleemosynary institutions   1 parking or garage space for each 4
                                        beds
Private clubs, fraternity houses or     1 parking or garage space for each 4
dormitories                             guest bedrooms
Sanitariums, convalescent homes, homes  1 parking or garage space for each 4
for aged                                beds
Single-family dwellings                 1 parking or garage space for each
                                        dwelling unit
 
(1991 Code, § 21-50)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.164  LOT LOCATION FOR OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.
   For all buildings, the off-street parking facilities required shall be
located on the same lot with such building, or on a lot adjacent to such
building, or on a lot separated only by an alley from the property on which the
building is located, or elsewhere when permitted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(1991 Code, § 21-51)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.165  FRACTIONAL SPACES.
   Whenever the basis used requires a fractional parking or garage space, the
next higher number of parking or garage spaces shall be provided.
(1991 Code, § 21-52)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.166  AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS TO PERMIT WAIVERS AND
MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals is authorized to permit a waiver or
modification of the required location or conditions of off-street parking
facilities required, or both, if the Board finds that such action is necessary
to secure an appropriate development of a specific lot which is made difficult
or impracticable by reason of steep hillsides or unusual physical conditions
inherent in or directly affecting the lot as follows: topography; grades;
shapes; size; and dimensions of the lot.
   (B)   In exercising these powers the Board shall find that the waiver or
modification will not be inconsistent with the spirit and purpose of the
regulations, with public safety, with the present character and future
development of the neighborhood and with substantial justice.
(1991 Code, § 21-53)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
PARKING OF TRAILERS; HOUSE TRAILER CAMPS
§ 152.180  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE HOME; HOUSE TRAILER. Any vehicle greater than 28 feet in length or
eight feet in width so designed and constructed to permit the occupancy thereof
as a dwelling for one or more persons, which is both used and occupied as a
dwelling, having no foundation other than wheels, jack, skirting or other
temporary supports, and designed and constructed so as to be capable of being
towed upon public thoroughfares by a motor truck or tractor.
   TRAILER PARK. An area of land upon which two or more house trailers or
mobile homes are harbored for the purpose of human habitation, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure,
vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment and
facilities of such mobile home park.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. Any vehicle not greater than 28 feet in length or eight feet
in width, so constructed as to permit its being towed upon public thoroughfares
by a motor vehicle, usually an automobile, and designed for the temporary use
by one or more persons as a shelter or sleeping place while traveling from
place to place as distinguished from the permanent use made of mobile homes.
(1991 Code, § 21-54)  (Ord. passed 9-17-1970)
§ 152.181  PROHIBITED PARKING OF MOBILE HOMES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, for compensation or otherwise, to use
or permit the use of a lot or any portion of a lot in any zoned restricted
residence area, block or square in the city for the parking and use of any
occupied or unoccupied house trailer or mobile home at any time; and it shall
likewise be unlawful for any person, for compensation or otherwise, to permit
the occupation and use of any portion of a lot or parcel of land in any zoned
unrestricted residence area or district for the parking of a house trailer or
mobile home at any time unless such area be approved pursuant to the provisions
of §
152.182.
(1991 Code, § 21-55)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 1-8-1968; Ord. passed
9-17-1970)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.182  HOW HOUSE TRAILER CAMPS MAY BE ESTABLISHED.
   House trailer camps, conforming with the Regulations Governing the
Sanitation of House Trailer Camps as adopted by the State Public Health
Council, and other state and municipal laws and regulations, may be established
in unrestricted residential (or B) districts at such locations as are approved
by the Planning Commission after a public hearing is held in relation thereto.
(1991 Code, § 21-56)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.183  SPACE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING OF HOUSE TRAILERS.
   Each car and house trailer shall be allotted a space of not less than 700
square feet. The minimum dimensions shall be not less than 20 feet wide and 35
feet long. Each space allotment shall abut or face on a driveway or an
unoccupied space of not less than 20 feet in width, which space shall have an
unobstructed access to a public highway, street or alley.
(1991 Code, § 21-57)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.184  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person who desires to place, locate or erect a house trailer or
mobile home within the city and intends to use it as a residence for himself,
herself or others shall obtain from the city a building permit, which permit
shall be subject to the same rules and regulations as are in effect for the
obtaining of a permit to place, locate, erect or construct a conventional type
residence within the limits of the city.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed, however, to require the owner of
a travel trailer to obtain a building permit for storing or parking it
unoccupied on his or her own premises nor shall this section require an owner
allowing his or her property to be used for the temporary parking of a travel
trailer, as above set forth, to acquire a building permit.
   (C)   The owner of a house trailer or mobile home shall likewise be required
to obtain a building permit for any remodeling or reconstruction to a mobile
home or house trailer, such permit to be acquired in the same manner as permits
are acquired for the remodeling or reconstruction of a conventional type home,
and the permit to be subject to the same rules and regulations.
(1991 Code, § 21-58)  (Ord. passed 1-8-1968)
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
§ 152.195  PURPOSES FOR WHICH REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS FOR AND ISSUANCE OF.
   Hereafter, no person shall use any building, land or premises, or part
thereof, for any purpose except as a single-family dwelling until the City
Collector and Treasurer and the Building Inspector shall, upon written
application, have issued to such person a certificate of occupancy stating that
such use complies with these regulations and that the building and premises
comply with the requirements of these regulations and the building or portion
of the building affected complied with the requirements of these regulations
and the Building Code for such use; provided, that certificates of occupancy
shall not be required for separate offices in an office building if a
certificate of occupancy, as herein required, is issued for the entire
building.
(1991 Code, § 21-59)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
§ 152.196  POSTING OF CERTIFICATE.
   Certificates issued in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter
shall, except in the case of churches, be so conspicuously posted in or upon
the premises to which they apply that they may readily be seen by anyone
entering the premises.
(1991 Code, § 21-60)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.197  WHEN CERTIFICATE MAY BE ISSUED.
   If erection or alteration of buildings is contemplated, certificates of
occupancy therefor shall not be issued until such erection or alteration has
been completed in accordance with the building permit issued therefor, until
all nonresident contractors’ fees and taxes, if any, have been paid and until
such erection or alteration has been completed to the point of availability for
occupancy and use.
(1991 Code, § 21-61)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
§ 152.198  PROHIBITED OCCUPATION OR USE OF PREMISES PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF
CERTIFICATE.
   Any occupation and use of a building, land or premises, without a
certificate of occupancy as required by these regulations shall be unlawful,
and any violation thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter
provided.
(1991 Code, § 21-62)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.199  RECORD OF CERTIFICATES ISSUED.
   A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Collector and Treasurer unless they shall have first been microfilmed, in which
event the original records may then be destroyed and the microphotographs shall
be kept on file in lieu thereof.
(1991 Code, § 21-63)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; GENERALLY
§ 152.210  BOARD CONTINUED IN EXISTENCE; HOW REFERRED TO; STATUTORY POWERS AND
DUTIES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, as constituted immediately preceding the
effective date of this code and in conformity with the provisions of W.Va. Code
§§ 8A-8-1 et seq., is hereby continued in existence and shall continue to
exercise the powers and perform the duties specified for municipal boards of
zoning appeals under the provisions of W.Va. Code Chapter 8, Article 24.
(1991 Code, § 21-65)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
Editor’s note:
   The Board hereby continued in existence was initially created as the “Board
of Adjustment”, as provided in 1955 W.Va. Code § 8-5-7. That statute was
amended by Acts 1959, Ch. 118, and again by Acts 1969, Ch. 86, and the 1955
W.Va. Code § 8-5-7 is now W.Va. Code § 8A-8-1 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal boards of zoning appeals, see W.Va. Code §§ 8A-8-1 et seq.
§ 152.211  OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary
annually at its first meeting held in January.
   (B)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the
Board. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Acting or Vice Chairperson shall
preside. The Secretary, subject to the direction of the Board and its
Chairperson, shall conduct all correspondence of the Board, send out all
notices required by these regulations, shall attend all meetings of the Board
and all hearings, shall keep all dockets and minutes of the Board’s
proceedings, shall compile all required records and shall maintain the
necessary files and indexes.
(1991 Code, § 21-66)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.212  DOCKET AND MINUTE BOOK.
   (A)   The Secretary shall keep a docket and a minute book which shall be
kept posted to date.
   (B)   The Secretary shall enter in the docket the number of the appeals or
applications, the name of the applicant, a short description by street number
or otherwise of the premises, the nature of the application and the final
disposition after the case has been disposed of.
   (C)   All continuances, postponements, dates of sending notices and other
steps taken and acts done shall be noted on the docket.
   (D)   In the minute book shall be recorded the resolution relating to each
case acted on, together with the vote of each member of the Board.
(1991 Code, § 21-67)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.213  PUBLICATIONS OF NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS ON APPEALS; ADJOURNED
MEETINGS.
   Whenever appeal is made to the Board, the Board shall within 30 days publish
a notice of the time and place of public hearing upon such appeal, which notice
shall be published at least once, not less than ten days from the date of such
hearing in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city. The Board
shall also give such additional notice of such hearing to interested persons
and organizations as it shall deem feasible and practicable. Such public
hearings may be adjourned from time to time and, if the time and place of the
adjourned meeting be publicly announced when the adjournment is had, no further
notice of such adjourned meeting need be published.
(1991 Code, § 21-68)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.214  DURATION OF VALIDITY OF ORDERS AND BUILDING PERMITS RELATING TO
ERECTION OR ALTERATION OF BUILDINGS.
   No order of the Board permitting the erection or alteration of a building
shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless, within such period,
the plans therefor are filed with the City Clerk for the purpose of securing a
building permit. Any permit approved shall be started within six months after
the date of the issuance of the permit and shall proceed to completion in
accordance with its terms; provided, that if the work is not started within
such period, the permit shall expire.
(1991 Code, § 21-69)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.215  DURATION OF VALIDITY OF ORDERS PERMITTING USE OF BUILDINGS OR
PREMISES.
   No order of the Board permitting the use of a building or premises shall be
valid for a period longer than six months unless such use is established within
such period; provided, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the
erection or alteration of a building, the provisions of §
152.214 shall apply.
(1991 Code, § 21-70)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.216  REPORTS OF BOARD PROCEEDINGS AND RECORDS THEREOF.
   The Board shall cause to be made a record of all of its proceedings, which
record shall set forth the full reasons for its decisions and the vote of each
member participating therein. Such record, immediately following the Board’s
final decision, shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of the Board and
be open to public inspection.
(1991 Code, § 21-71)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.217  ANNUAL REPORTS TO PLANNING COMMISSION, MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
   The Board shall annually, on or before September 1 make a report for the
fiscal year preceding, or June 30, to the Planning Commission and to the Mayor
and Council, summarizing cases considered and action taken.
(1991 Code, § 21-72)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; POWERS RELATING TO
EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL QUESTIONS
§ 152.230  POWERS RELATIVE TO VARIANCES.
   In addition to the various powers set forth above, the Board shall have the
power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer
in the enforcement of this chapter, or of any ordinance adopted pursuant
hereto, and to grant variances, all in accordance with W.Va. Code § 8A-7-11.
(1991 Code, § 21-73)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.231  GRANTING OF EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon appeals to the Board, the Board is hereby empowered to grant
requests for the following exceptions, when, in the judgment of the Board, such
exceptions shall be in harmony and not in conflict with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter and the zoning map and will not tend to affect adversely
the use of neighboring property in accordance with the zoning regulations and
zoning map:
      (1)   Permit, in a residential district, a college, a university, a
private school or a non-profit institution of higher learning or culture
devoted exclusively to the arts and sciences, if:
         (a)   Its space and equipment may not be readily convertible to
business use;
         (b)   Its operation would be impaired by location on a business
street; and
         (c)   It is not likely to become objectionable in a residential
district because of noise, traffic and number of students.
      (2)   Permit a philanthropic or eleemosynary institution in the
residential district, except in an A Restricted Area District;
      (3)   Permit in a residential district a public storage garage in an
apartment house when the vehicular entrances and exits are so located that
dangerous traffic or otherwise objectionable conditions will not be created;
provided, that the floor area of such garage does not exceed one-fourth of the
total floor area designed for use by the tenants;
      (4)   (a)   Permit in a residential district, except as hereinafter
provided, the use of an unimproved lot for the temporary parking of motor
vehicles, subject to such restrictions and safeguards as may, in the opinion of
the Board, be necessary to protect the residential property in the vicinity,
when such use is found to be reasonably necessary or convenient to the
neighborhood, and not to interfere unreasonably with most appropriate use of
neighboring property under the zone plan.
         (b)   The use of an unimproved lot in an A - Restricted District for
the temporary parking of motor vehicles shall not be permitted;
      (5)   Permit, in a residential district, a temporary building for
commerce and industry which is incidental to the residential development, such
permit to be issued for a period of not more than one year, but such permit may
be renewed by the Board from time to time for not exceeding a like period;
      (6)   Permit, in a residential or commercial district, the construction
of private garage storage facilities in excess of 800 square feet accessory to
a dwelling, or educational, philanthropic or eleemosynary institution, on a lot
containing an area of not less than one acre; provided, the facilities do not
adversely affect light and air of the dwelling or institution and of
neighboring property;
      (7)   Permit, in a residential or commercial district, the erection of a
one-story, private garage not exceeding 400 square feet in area accessory to a
dwelling nonconforming because of lot over- occupancy; provided, that such
garage does not adversely affect light and air of such dwelling and neighboring
property, and that the total over occupancy of the lot does not exceed 400
square feet;
      (8)   Permit the use of a building as an apartment house, flat, tenement,
lodging, rooming or boarding house, private club, fraternity, lodge or hotel
where parking space is provided to the extent required by §§
152.155 through
152.166 on a lot other than the lot upon which the building is located or
adjacent thereto or separated only by an alley from the property on which such
building is located; provided, that the Board shall find that such parking area
is so located with respect to the building as to furnish reasonable and
convenient parking facilities for the tenants, guests and occupants of such
building; and provided, also, that the Board shall approve such parking area
under the provisions of division (A)(4) above; and
      (9)   Permit in the B District the erection of antenna towers for
television and frequency modulating broadcasting to any height and in
conjunction therewith the erection, alteration or use of buildings for
transmission equipment on the same lot or elsewhere when the Board finds:
         (a)   The proposed location and height will not affect adversely the
use of neighboring property, and radio reception, in accordance with the zoning
regulations and the zoning map;
         (b)   Any part of an antenna tower is removed from all lot lines a
distance of at least one-sixth of its height or its separation from other
property by an intervening street;
         (c)   The proposed height of the tower is reasonably necessary to
render satisfactory service to all parts of the city, and Randolph and
adjoining counties; and
         (d)   Any transmission equipment to be housed in a residential
district is technically necessary for satisfactory and reasonable economical
transmission.
   (B)   Before granting such appeals, the Board shall submit the application
to the Planning Commission for a report in writing; provided, that antenna
towers to be erected to a greater height than any limit prescribed by these
regulations for buildings in the city shall require approval of the Mayor and
Council.
(1991 Code, § 21-74)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.232  POWERS RELATIVE TO NONCONFORMING USES.
   The Board may grant permits with respect to nonconforming uses as follows.
   (A)   If no structural alterations are made, the Board may permit a
nonconforming use to be changed to another nonconforming use; provided, that
the Board finds that such proposed use will not more adversely affect the
present character or future development of the neighborhood.
   (B)   If no structural alterations are made, the Board may permit a
nonconforming use of a part of a building to be extended throughout the
building; provided, that the Board finds that such extension will not adversely
affect the present character or future development of the neighborhood in
accordance with the zoning regulations.
(1991 Code, § 21-75)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 152.245  MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   The Board shall hold at least one meeting each month. Four members shall
constitute a quorum of the Board, but a lesser number may meet and adjourn.
(1991 Code, § 21-76)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.246  CASES BEFORE THE BOARD.
   (A)   Each appeal to the Board shall be made on the appropriate forms and
all information called for by such form shall be furnished by the appellant or
applicant. At the time of filing such appeal, any fee required by the Mayor and
Council shall be paid to the City Collector and Treasurer.
   (B)   Appeals, including all applications for variances or specific
exceptions, unless made on an appropriate form properly filled out with all
required data attached, shall not be accepted for hearing.
(1991 Code, § 21-77)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.247  THE DOCKET AND CALENDAR.
   (A)   Each appeal, filed in proper form with the required date, shall be
numbered serially, docketed, and shall be placed upon the calendar of the Board
by the Secretary thereof.
   (B)   Appeals shall be heard in the order in which they appear on the
calendar; except, that an appeal or application may be advanced for hearing by
order of the Board for good cause shown.
   (C)   The calendar of cases to be heard shall be posted in the office of the
City Clerk ten days before the meeting. Notice of the hearing of an appeal
shall be given by mailing a notice ten days before such hearing to the
appellant or applicant at the address stated in the appeal, and such other
notice shall be given to such other interested property owners or persons as
may be directed by the Chairperson or Acting Chairperson of the Board.
(1991 Code, § 21-78)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.248  HEARINGS.
   (A)   The applicant or appellant may appear in his or her own behalf or be
represented by an attorney or agent at the hearing. In the absence of any
personal appearance on behalf of the appellant or applicant, the Board may, in
its discretion, proceed to dispose of the matter on the record before it.
   (B)   At the hearing the order of procedure shall be as follows:
      (1)   Appellant or applicant;
      (2)   Building Official, Mayor, member or members of the Council or other
administrative officers;
      (3)   Interested property owners or other interested persons; and
      (4)   Appellant’s rebuttal.
(1991 Code, § 21-79)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.249  REHEARING.
   (A)   No rehearing of any decision by the Board shall be had except on
motion by a member of the Board to reconsider, made not later than the first
meeting succeeding the meeting at which the resolution was acted on and carried
by not less than four affirmative votes. If a rehearing is granted, notice
shall be given as in the case of an original hearing.
   (B)   Any applicant whose appeal has been denied by the Board may institute
a new appeal not less than one year from the date upon which the Board took
action upon the previous appeal.
(1991 Code, § 21-80)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.250  ADVICE.
   No informal requests for advice or moot questions shall be considered by the
Board.
(1991 Code, § 21-81)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
§ 152.251  FEE FOR FILING OF AN APPEAL.
   Any person, except an association created for civic purpose and not for
profit, filing an appeal to the Board under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 8,
Art. 24, and the regulations for the height, area and use of buildings in the
city as provided in this chapter, shall pay the City Collector and Treasurer,
with such appeal, a fee set by Council. If such appeal is based solely upon an
alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, determination or refusal
made by the Building Official, the Mayor or the City Clerk, or any other
official or body, and such appeal is sustained by the Board, the Board shall
direct the refund of the fee paid. The Board shall not consider any appeal
filed by any person, except an association created for civic purposes and not
for profit, unless the fee required has been paid.
(1991 Code, § 21-82)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1959; Ord. 162, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 152.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating these regulations, the penalty for the violation
of which is not provided for by the provisions of this chapter or W.Va. Code §
8A-7 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300 per day
for each and every day such violation is permitted to continue.
(1991 Code, § 21-9)
   (B)   Any person violating §
152.005 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100.
(1991 Code, § 21-5)
(Ord. passed 3-5-1959)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   FRANCHISES
      
IV.   VACATIONS
      
V.   ZONING
      
VI.   RENAMING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
VII.   PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
      
VIII.   EASEMENTS
TABLE I:  AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
O2002- 5-   Approving the execution of a loan agreement with the West Virginia Solid
05     16-  Waste Management Board.
       2002
O2002- 5-   Authorizing the execution of a bulk water purchase agreement with the
02     23-  Huttonville Public Service District.
       2002
       11-  Authorizing the purchase of the Verizon microwave tower located at the top
0-023  4-   of High Street for future use as part of the city’s infrastructure system.
       2004
       10-  Authorizing participation in WVML municipal revenue enhancement program and
037    20-  the execution of an intergovernmental agreement for the exchange of
       2005 information among the city, the WVML, Inc. and participating municipalities.
       12-  Providing for the cooperation of the city with the Randolph County
088    4-   Commission for the implementation of an E9-1-1 addressing and mapping within
       2008 the city, in connection with the statewide addressing and mapping project.
249    2-1- Accepting the conditions of the memorandum of understanding between the city
       2018 and the Randolph County Solid Waste Authority regarding glass recycling.
           
 
TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-    1-2- Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     1992 city, commonly known as the Law Offices of Wallace, Rose & Harris.
-    1-2- Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     1992 city, commonly known as The Mountain School.
     7-   Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
-    21-  city, commonly known as the Elkins Regional Convalescent Center, Inc.
     1994
O97- 12-  Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
12   4-   city, commonly known as Bridgewater Estates, situated in the Leadsville District.
     1997
O99- 2-4- Changing the boundary of the First Ward of city to included 22.1 acres, more or
01   1999 less, annexed by a minor boundary adjustment.
0-   - -  Incorporating those certain streets within Bridgewater Estates into the city
0033 2005 limits.
O-   3-3- Incorporating those certain lots known as the Bruce Street Extension into the city
028  2005 limits.
O-   1-
039  19-  To incorporate and annex the Graceland Hills Subdivision into the city.
     2006
085  - -  Annexing Colonial Estates. LLC into the city.
     2008
     10-  To incorporate and annex the Davis Trust Company “Beverly Pike” Branch into the
082  16-  city.
     2008
          Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     10-  city, known as all that certain tract or parcel of land consisting of a portion of
083  16-  a highway, right-of-way of U.S. 219 and a portion of County Route 11 (Laurel
     2008 Mountain Road) and a portion of the Old Western Maryland right-of-way that runs
          north from the existing city boundary to the end of roadway improvements on the
          north side of Corridor “H”.
          Pursuant to petition authorized by Dave Clark, Program Manager of Highland
095  - -  Community Builders, Inc., regarding a subdivision known as Highland Meadows,
     2009 developed by Highland Community Builders, Inc., to incorporate and annex such
          property into the city.
     1-7- Entering the fact that the petition from Michael R. Price, President/CEO of Davis
091  2009 Trust Company, requesting annexation of Davis Trust Company, “Beverly Pike” Branch
          is “sufficient in every respect” pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-6-4(g).
     1-7- Entering the fact that the petition from Sharon L. Teter, President of Colonial
092  2009 Estates, LLC, requesting annexation of Colonial Estates, LLC is “sufficient in
          every respect” pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-6-4(g).
          Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
          city, known as all that certain tract or parcel of land consisting of a portion of
     1-7- highway known as County Route 21/5 (North Flood Control Road); a portion of highway
093  2009 known as County Route 21 (Georgetown Road); a portion of highway known as County
          Route 21/5 (South Flood Control Road); and a portion of highway known as County
          Route 23/1 (Haddix Road); all of that tract or parcel of land situated in
          Leadsville District.
          Pursuant to petition authorized by Randolph Allan, President of the Randolph
094  1-7- Historical Society regarding a cemetery owned by the Randolph Historical Society,
     2009 located in the Elkins flood control area to incorporate and annex such property
          into the city.
     2-   Pursuant to petition authorized by Karen Jacobson, a member of Wilson Lane
096  19-  Development, LLC, regarding a subdivision known as Highland Meadows, to incorporate
     2009 and annex such property.
          Pursuant to petition authorized by Mark Doak, President/CEO of Davis Health System,
     6-   on behalf of Davis Health System’s Board of Directors, regarding a certain tract of
101  18-  property owned by Health Facilities, Inc., a subsidiary of Davis Health Systems,
     2009 and known as Davis Health System’s Direct Care Facility to incorporate and annex
          such property into the city.
     7-   Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
102  16-  city, known as Wilson Lane.
     2009
     7-   Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
103  16-  city, known as a certain tract or parcel of land encompassing all of that tract or
     2009 parcel of land situate approximately 600 feet south of the west end of Wilson Lane
          on the east bank of the Tygart Valley River.
          Pursuant to petition authorized by Charles H. Friddle, III, Manager, Local Affairs
106  9-3- of Allegheny Power, an Allegheny Energy Company, regarding certain real property
     2009 known as the Elkins Service Center of Allegheny Power, and annex such property into
          the city.
          Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     9-   city, so as to include all of that tract or parcel of land consisting of the
107  20-  highway right-of-way of U.S. Routes 33 and 250 west from the existing city boundary
     2009 at Goff Street to a point 200 feet west of the west end of County Route 11 in the
          community of Crystal Springs.
          Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     1-   city, so as to include all of that tract or parcel of land being a strip of land
108  21-  known as Georgetown Road that begins at the existing city boundary at or near the
     2010 Elkins Stockyard and extends northwesterly to the existing city boundary at the
          flood control.
     8-5- Annexing 4.20 acres of property, more or less, pursuant to a petition from Mayor
115  2010 Duke Talbott, on behalf of the city, to include all of the land and appurtenances
          situated in the Beverly District.
          Annexing 39.9 acres, more or less, owned by Randolph County Board of Education,
116  8-5- which is the location of Elkins High School, Randolph County Technical Center and
     2010 Midland Elementary School, into the city, to include all of the land and
          appurtenances situated in the Beverly District.
          Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     9-   city, to include North Elementary School and connecting streets, which is all of
117  30-  that tract or parcel of land situated in the Leadsville District, consisting of
     2010 Kennedy Street in Highland Park, a portion of Secondary Route 1/7 and two parcels
          that makeup the North School property.
     9-   Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
118  30-  city, which is all of that tract or parcel of land situated in Leadsville District
     2010 consisting of a one block section of Harrison Avenue, all of Nathan Street, the
          Third Ward School property and a portion of a closed alley adjacent to the school.
          Pursuant to a petition authorized by Karen Jacobson, Executive Director, Randolph
     4-4- County Housing Authority, on behalf of the Randolph County Housing Authority,
166  2013 regarding a certain tract of property owned by Randolph County Housing Authority,
          and known as the Highland Park Apartments and the Youthbuild Campus, to incorporate
          and annex such property into the city.
          Pursuant to petition authorized by Dave Clark, Executive Director, Woodlands
     4-   Development Group, on behalf of the Woodlands Development Group, regarding a
179  17-  certain tract of property owned by Woodlands Development Group, and known as a
     2014 1.68-acre tract, more or less, located on Wilson Lane, adjacent to the Tygart
          Valley Limited Partnership property, to incorporate and annex such property into
          the city.
     12-
268  19-  Annexing part of Harrison Avenue and the former Texaco Station on Harrison Avenue.
     2019
     12-  Annexing property located on Wilson Lane known commonly as the former Reidbord
269  19-  Plant.
     2019
     12-  Annexing property located on Wilson Lane commonly known as Tygart Valley
270  19-  Apartments.
     2019
         
 
TABLE III:  FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        11-16-1995  Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Triax Cablevision
                     USA, L.P. for a term of 15 years.
                     Authorizing a franchise agreement between City Monongahela
                     Power Company (doing business as Allegheny Power) and the
089      12-18-2008  city, for the purposes of transmitting and distributing
                     electric current for light, heat and power and data and
                     video services to any point within the corporate limit,
                     for a period of 20 years.
                     Renewing a franchise agreement with Cequel III
201      10-8-2015   Communications II, LLC (doing business as Suddenlink
                     Communications), for a period of five years.
                     Approving the transfer of control of the cable television
                     franchise and cable television system now held by Cequel
202      10-8-2015   Corporation, the parent of Cequel III Communications II,
                     LLC (doing business as Suddenlink Communications) to
                     Altice N.V.
                    
 
TABLE IV:  VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
       9-5- Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain alley running west of Ninth
-      1991 Street between Lots Nos. 432, 434, 438, 440 and 442 of Block 38 on the north
            and Lots Nos. 433, 435, 437, 439, 441 and 443 of Block 39 on the south.
       11-  Vacating an alley that runs east of Harrison Avenue between Lots 1 and 2 of
-      21-  Block 4 of the B.L. Hinkle Addition.
       1991
       11-
-      21-  Vacating a portion of Tannery Drive.
       1991
       12-  Vacating, abandoning and closing Ninth Street between Harrison Avenue and
-      5-   Gorman Avenue.
       1991
096-07 5-2- Abandoning the alley dividing the property owned by Virginia Boyer.
       1996
097-05 6-5- Approving the vacation of a portion of Coal (Cole) Avenue and Henry Avenue.
       1997
       12-  Vacating that portion of Railroad Avenue lying north of Thirteenth Street
O97-13 18-  and adjoining property of the Woodford Oil Company and Southern States
       1997 Elkins Cooperative, Inc.
       3-   Vacating a ten-foot wide alley adjoining Weese Street and running through
O99-05 18-  the Coffman Addition to the city.
       1999
O99-07 5-6- Vacating three parcels of real estate comprising a portion of Graceland
       1999 Drive.
       9-   Vacating a strip of real estate comprising a portion of a 15-foot unopened
O99-10 16-  alley running from Lough Avenue to Wees Street.
       1999
O2000- 7-   Vacating a portion of Key Street lying southeast of Vista Avenue and
08     20-  northwest of Weese Street.
       2000
O2001- 6-   Vacating a 12-foot wide alley lying east of those lots comprising the O.C.
02     21-  Daniels Subdivision.
       2001
O2001- 9-   Vacating a 20-foot wide alley lying to the west of Lots 22 and 23 of Block 7
05     10-  of the Dowell Addition.
       2001
       8-   Vacating a parcel of real estate containing 0.004 acre, comprising a portion
O02-06 15-  of High Street.
       2002
0-024  1-1- Authorizing the closure of an alley that connects Fourth Street with
       2004 Randolph Avenue as a public right-of-way.
       11-  Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain alley running east of Railroad
058    2-   Avenue between Block 40 and Triangle No. 7 of Block 47 as depicted on the
       2006 original map of the city.
       3-   Restricting usage of an unimproved alley right-of-way beginning parallel to
060    15-  Wilson Street and connecting Worth and Glendale Avenues.
       2007
       12-  Vacating, abandoning and closing and relinquishing certain easements and
135    15-  rights- of-way in and under the area which was formerly Ninth Street between
       2011 Harrison Avenue and Gorman Avenue.
            Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain alley lying west of Eighth
       12-  Street and east of Ninth Street (now abandoned) between Lots Nos. 416, 418,
136    15-  420, 422, 424, 426, 428 and 430 of Block 36 of the city on the north and Lot
       2011 Nos. 417, 419, 421, 423, 425, 427, 429 and 431 of Block 39 of the city on
            the south.
       12-  Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain public road or way 30 feet in
137    15-  width over, across and through the land of Davis Memorial Hospital from
       2011 Gorman Avenue to a 20-foot alley.
       12-  Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain part of Hemlock Avenue as
138    15-  shown on the plat of the revised maps showing Bruce Lee Kennedy’s Addition
       2011 to the city between Sycamore Street and Spruce Avenue, as shown and
            designated as Parcel B on the plat of survey.
            Amending Ord. 096- 07, which abandoned an unused alley, that the entire
            unnamed alley dividing Lots 1082, 1083, 1084, 1085 and 1086 of Block 107
168    5-2- from Lots 1053 and 1054 of Block 116 of the Valley Improvement Company
       2013 Addition is hereby abandoned with the exception of any rights, easements or
            privileges that the city may have to erect and/or maintain utility services
            through and over said alley.
            Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain public alleyway 15 feet in
218    9-1- width across and through the lands of Ken M. Watring and Brenda Watring,
       2016 Elkins Metro Corporation and Speedway Super America, LLC from Wees Avenue to
            Wilmoth Avenue.
       8-   Vacating, abandoning and closing a portion of that certain public right-of-
243    17-  way known as Stoddard Avenue.
       2017
       6-   Vacating, abandoning and closing a portion of certain public rights-of-way
261    18-  known as Summit Street Extension and the alley between 194 Summit Street and
       2019 210 Summit Street.
           
 
TABLE V:  ZONING
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
            The certain parcel of land described as approximately two blocks bounded by
       4-6- Lough Street, Yokum Street, Wilmoth Avenue, an unopened street and an unopened
-      1995 alley being parallel to and between Harrison Avenue and Yokum Street and
            extending from Lough Street to Wilmoth Avenue, be rezoned for commercial use,
            constituting a change from its prior use as a B-Residential area.
            Changing from residential use to commercial use of real estate which is bounded
       11-  by Harrison Avenue, Robert E. Lee Avenue, Yokum Street and Wilmoth Avenue (an
O2002- 21-  unopened street), such area being comprised of Blocks 1 and 8 of the Wees Park
07     2002 Addition to the city; approximately one-half of said area has been, prior to
            said petition, zoned for commercial use and this ordinance will not,
            consequently, affect that portion of the described real estate.
       1-   Rezoning the following parcels of land within the city from their current
025    20-  designation of B-Residential to Commercial:
       2005
            1.  The one-half block area bounded by Second Street, John Street, First Street
          and a 20-foot alley. The alley lies between and runs parallel to John Street
            and Henry Avenue, and it connects First and Second Streets;
            2.  The one-half block bounded by Scott Street, Davis Street, Cherokee Street
          and a 20-foot alley. The alley lies between and runs parallel to Davis and
            Graham Streets, and it connects Scott and Cherokee Streets; and
            3.  The one block of property bounded by Davis Street, John Street, Graham
          Street and Scott Street, which is substantially occupied by the offices of WIC
            Nutrition Program.
035    9- - Rezoning of an area on North Randolph Street for commercial use from its prior
       2005 use as a B-Residential area.
       12-  Rezoning of a one block area on Eleventh Street for commercial use from its
038    15-  prior use as a B-Residential area.
       2005
055    9-7- Rezoning Graceland Hills Subdivision from B-Residential to Restricted
       2006 Residential (A-Residential).
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 92-1 as the Law Offices of Wallace,
141    17-  Ross & Harris to C-Commercial.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 92-2 as The Mountain School to B-
142    17-  Residential.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 94-5 as the Elkins Regional
143    17-  Convalescent Center to B-Residential.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 97-12 as the Bridgewater Estates to
144    17-  B-Residential.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 082 as the Davis Trust Company
145    17-  “Beverly Pike” Branch to C-Commercial.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 085 as the Colonial Estates LLC to B-
146    17-  Residential.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 096 as a subdivision known as
147    17-  Highland Meadows to B-Residential.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 101 as Davis Health System’s Direct
148    17-  Care Facility to C-Commercial.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 106 as the Elkins Service Center of
149    17-  Allegheny Power to C-Commercial.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 115 as part of the H.G. Kump property
150    17-  to C-Commercial.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 116 as the Randolph County Board of
151    17-  Education- Midland property to C-Commercial.
       2012
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 117 as Kennedy Street in Highland
152    17-  Park, a portion of Secondary Route 1/7 and two parcels that make up the North
       2012 School property to B-Residential.
       5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 118 as a one block section of
153    17-  Harrison Avenue, all of Nathan Street, the Third Ward School property and a
       2012 potion of a closed alley adjacent to the school to B-Residential.
       6-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 083 as North Randolph Avenue to C-
156    21-  Commercial.
       2012
       6-
157    21-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 102 as Wilson Lane to B-Residential.
       2012
158    7-5- Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 103 as 3.67 acres/wastewater ponds to
       2012 B-Residential.
       4-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 166 as that certain tract of property
174    17-  owned by Randolph County Housing Authority and known as the Highlands Park
       2014 Apartments to Tract One as B-Residential and Tract Two as C-Commercial.
           
 
TABLE VI:  RENAMING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-      5-1- Naming an alleyway extending from Heavner Avenue on the south to and unnamed
       1997 alley on the north to be known as Bethany Lane.
       7-   Assigning the name Linda Lane to a previously unnamed alley which runs from
O98-04 16-  Sayre Street (on the west) to Moore Street (on the east).
       1998
O98-08 9-3- Assigning the name Mary’s Way to a previously unnamed alley which runs from
       1998 Second Street (on the south) to Third Street (on the north).
       11-  Assigning the name Physicians’ Way to a previously unnamed alley which runs
O98-09 19-  from Porter Avenue (on the southeast) to Barnard Avenue (on the northwest).
       1998
       12-  Assigning the name Flood Control Road to a previously unnamed road which runs
O99-13 2-   from Andrews Street (on the north) to the city limits (on the south).
       1999
       1-6- Assigning the name Slaughterhouse Hill Road to a previously unnamed road which
O99-15 2000 begins at Thorne Avenue (near Thorne Avenue’s intersection with Diamond Street)
            and runs northeasterly to the city limits.
O2000- 4-   Assigning the name Easy Street to a previously unnamed street being parallel to
04     18-  and between the Tygart Valley River and Cole Avenue, which runs from South
       1999 Twelfth Street (on the north) to Fourteenth Street (on the south).
O03-   - -  Declaring a portion of old sewer plant access road a public street and naming
003    2003 that street Jones Drive.
O03-   4- - Renaming that street currently referred to as Fifteenth Street Extension to be
001    2003 known as Tom Waller Drive.
036    9-1- Assigning the name Martin Street to an extension of Fourth Street that will
       2005 access the property of the former railroad yard.
       8-
105    20-  Designating a roadway recently annexed into the city as North Randolph Avenue.
       2009
       12-
122    16-  Officially designating Oak Crest Drive.
       2010
           
 
TABLE VII:  PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
       3-
097-02 26-  Approving the purchase of private property described as:
       1997
          1.  All of Lot 34 and the southernmost four feet off of Lot 33 in Block 5 of
            the city; and
          2.  Lot 35 and the northern ten feet of Lot 36, in Block 5 of the city.
       12-  Providing for the purchase of town Lots 28, 30, 31 and 32, Block 4 and parcel
O99-14 30-  of real estate east of Lots 30, 31 and 32 of Block 4.
       1999
O2002- 4-4- Authorizing the purchase of two tracts of real estate each containing 18
01     2002 acres, more or less, situated in the Glendale Addition.
062    4-5- Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed of exchange with Dorsey and Charlotte
       2007 Heckler, exchanging 0.01 acres adjacent to Diamond Street.
       5-1- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a quitclaim deed providing for an
075    2008 easement across the eastern boundary of Lots 39 and 40 of Block E of the
            Hillside Addition.
       8-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed conveying property, formerly used by
078    21-  the city as a landfill, to the Williams’ family heirs.
       2008
       11-
184    20-  Authorizing the purchase of the closed Elkins National Guard Armory.
       2014
           
 
TABLE VIII:  EASEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a perpetual easement to the Huttonsville Public
                     Service District, the easement being situated in Randolph
007      9-18-2003   County, specifically Leadsville District, Sheet 126,
                     Parcel 30.02 as shown on the tax maps of Randolph County,
                     and further described in Deed Book 229, Page 367.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to West Virginia Code
References to 1991 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO WEST VIRGINIA CODE
 
W.Va. Code Cites Code Section
Ch. 1, Art. 5B            51.46
2-2-3                     10.02
2-2-4                     10.02
2-2-5                     10.02
2-2-7                     10.02
2-2-8                     10.06
2-2-9                     10.06
2-2-10                    10.02
2-2-10(a)                 10.02
2-2-10(b)                 10.02
2-2-10(c)                 10.02
2-2-10(d)                 10.02
2-2-10(i)                 10.02
2-2-10(p)                 10.02
2-2-10(q)                 10.02
2-2-10(r)                 10.02
2-2-10(z)                 10.04
2-2-12                    10.04
                          Charter § 11,
                          34.16,
Ch. 3                     35.01,
                          35.02,
                          35.15,
                          35.26
Ch. 3, Art. 1             Charter § 10
3-1-2a                    35.15
3-1-3                     35.03
3-1-6                     Charter § 9,
                          35.06
3-1-19                    35.15
3-1-20                    35.15
3-1-21                    35.15
3-1-23                    35.06
3-1-24                    35.15
3-1-27                    Charter § 9,
                          35.05
3-1-28                    35.17
3-1-30                    35.17
3-1-46                    35.17
3-1-30a                   35.17
Ch. 3, Art. 2             Charter § 10
3-2-1 et seq.             35.04
Ch. 3, Art. 3             35.22
3-3-1                     35.23
3-3-13                    35.22
3-4A-1 et seq.            35.19
3-4A-14                   35.17
3-5-7(f)                  35.10
3-5-10                    35.15
3-5-11                    35.12
3-5-13a                   35.16
3-6-2(d)(2)               35.16
3-6-3                     35.16
3-6-4a                    35.13
3-6-5                     35.13
Ch. 5, Art. 1             30.03
Ch. 5, Art. 7             30.03
5-7-1 through 5-7-10      30.03
5-7-2                     30.03
5-7-2(d)                  30.03
5-7-3                     30.03
5-7-5(a)(5)               30.03
5-7-5(c)                  30.03
5-7-5(d)                  30.03
5-7-6                     30.03
5-10-1 through 5-10-51    30.04
5-10-16                   30.04
5-16-1 et seq.            110.067
5A-3-9                    30.20
Ch. 6                     Ch. 32
6-1-3                     Ch. 32
6-2-1 et seq.             30.01,
                          34.04
6-2-11                    30.01,
                          34.04
6-6-7                     Ch. 32
Ch. 6, Art. 9A            31.02
6-9A-4                    31.02
7-1-3U                    151.016
Ch. 7, Art. 10            90.13
Ch. 7, Art. 18            110.108
7-22-1 et seq.            110.108
Ch. 8                     Charter,
                          Ch. 30
8-1-1                     10.02
8-1-2                     10.02
8-1-3                     72.080
                          31.27,
                          33.077,
8-1-5a                    34.01,
                          92.037,
                          110.100
8-1-6                     Charter
8-3-16                    34.16
Ch. 8, Art. 4             152.251
8-5-6                     Charter § 11
8-5-7                     Ch. 31,
                          152.210
8-5-7(a)                  Charter § 4
8-5-7(b)                  Charter § 4
8-5-7(c)                  Charter § 6,
                          32.15
8-5-8                     Ch. 31,
                          Ch. 32
                          Ch. 31,
8-5-9                     Ch. 32,
                          32.15
                          Charter § 14,
                          Ch. 31,
8-5-10                    Ch. 32,
                          32.15,
                          35.24
8-5-11                    Ch. 32,
                          90.13
                          30.02,
8-5-12                    Ch. 31,
                          Ch. 32
8-5-13                    Charter § 10,
                          35.04
8-5-14                    34.16
8-5-15                    Charter § 12,
                          35.20
8-5-17                    Charter § 13,
                          35.21
Ch. 8, Art. 5A            34.01
Ch. 8, Art. 6             92.055
8-6-4(g)                  TSO II
Ch. 8, Art. 6A            92.037
                          Charter § 22,
8-9-1                     31.02,
                          31.06
8-9-1 through 8-9-3       Charter § 26
8-9-2                     Charter § 25
                          Charter § 23,
8-9-3                     Charter § 24,
                          31.01,
                          31.06
                          32.15,
8-10-1                    Ch. 34,
                          Ch. 37,
                          37.02
8-10-2                    Ch. 37
8-10-2(b)                 37.03
8-10-2(c)                 37.03
8-10-2b(c)                150.037
                          Charter § 23,
8-10-3                    31.01,
                          32.36
8-11-1 et seq.            Ch. 31,
                          31.20
                          10.99,
8-11-1                    31.03,
                          37.12
8-11-1a                   37.12
8-11-2                    70.35
8-11-4                    31.20
8-11-4(b)                 10.01,
                          150.035
8-11-5                    70.35
8-12-1 et seq.            Charter § 28,
                          Ch. 31
8-12-2                    Ch. 70,
                          Ch. 93
8-12-2(a)                 Ch. 112
8-12-2(c)                 31.03
8-12-5(1) to (5)          Ch. 93
8-12-5(2)                 93.045
8-12-5(4)                 Ch. 70,
                          Ch. 72
8-12-5(10)                Ch. 50,
                          91.020
8-12-5(13)                90.02
8-12-5(13) to (15)        Ch. 92
8-12-5(15)                Charter § 42
                          Ch. 50,
                          Ch. 91,
                          91.020,
8-12-5(23)                91.080,
                          Ch. 92,
                          92.015,
                          Ch. 150
                          Ch. 90,
8-12-5(26)                90.25,
                          90.45
8-12-5(27)                90.05
8-12-5(28)                92.015,
                          Ch. 150
8-12-5(29)                93.090
8-12-5(32)                51.30,
                          Ch. 52
8-12-5(33)                Ch. 52
8-12-5(38)                33.015
8-12-5(39)                33.015
8-12-5(43)                Ch. 52,
                          91.004
8-12-5(44)                Ch. 92
8-12-5(45)                31.03
8-12-5(46)                30.01,
                          34.04
8-12-5(48)                31.03,
                          Ch. 34
8-12-5(55)                10.99,
                          31.03
8-12-7                    30.05
8-12-10                   30.20
8-12-13 through 8-12-15   Ch. 150
8-12-13                   92.015,
                          Ch. 150
8-12-14                   92.015,
                          150.020
                          91.081,
8-12-15                   92.015,
                          150.002
8-12-16                   Ch. 150,
                          150.177
8-12-18(b)                31.27
                          Ch. 34,
8-12-19                   34.03,
                          Ch. 52,
                          91.004
8-13-1                    Charter § 34,
                          32.37
                          Charter § 28,
8-13-4                    Charter § 36,
                          Ch. 110
                          Ch. 110,
8-13-5                    110.055,
                          110.056
                          Ch. 36,
8-13-5a                   36.37,
                          110.108
8-13-6                    110.108
8-13-7                    111.002
8-13-10                   90.26
8-13-13                   36.15,
                          92.070
8-13-15                   32.16,
                          36.36
8-13-16                   32.16
8-13-22                   32.16
8-13-25                   110.089
Ch. 8, Art. 13-c          110.111
8-13C-1 et seq.           110.100
8-13C-6                   110.110—
                          110.112
8-13C-7                   110.110
8-14-1 et seq.            Ch. 34
8-14-1                    Ch. 34
8-14-3                    34.03
8-14-6 through 8-14-23    34.01
8-14-7                    34.01
8-14-15                   34.01
                          Ch. 92,
8-15-1                    92.035,
                          Ch. 150
8-15-2                    92.035
8-15-3                    92.035
8-15-4 to 8-15-8          92.035
8-15-9 et seq.            92.035
8-15-11 through 8-15-27   92.037
8-15-12                   92.037
Ch. 8, Art. 16            33.078,
                          33.113
8-16-1                    71.20
8-16-2                    71.20
8-16-4                    33.110
                          Ch. 52,
8-17-1 et seq.            Ch. 93,
                          93.025
Ch. 8, Art. 18            93.007
                          Charter § 28,
8-18-1 et seq.            Ch. 52,
                          Ch. 93,
                          93.025
8-18-1                    Ch. 52
8-18-22                   Ch. 52
Ch. 8, Art. 21            33.060
8-21-1 to 8-21-14         33.050
8-21-10                   33.053
Ch. 8, Art. 22            34.15,
                          92.055
8-22-1                    30.04
8-22-16 to 8-22-28        34.15,
                          92.055
8-22-16                   34.15,
                          92.055
8-22-16(e)                34.15,
                          92.055
8-22-17                   34.16,
                          92.056
8-22-18                   34.16,
                          92.056
8-22-19                   34.15,
                          92.055
8-22-20                   34.15,
                          37.11
8-22-20(e)                92.055
Ch. 8, Art. 22A           34.15,
                          92.055
8-33-3                    33.077
8-38-1 et seq.            110.108
Ch. 8A                    Charter
Ch. 8A, Art. 2            33.035
8A-2-1 et seq.            33.030
8A-2-1                    33.030
8A-2-3                    33.031
8A-2-7                    33.036
8A-2-8                    33.036
8A-2-9                    33.032
                          33.030,
8A-7                      Ch. 152,
                          152.002,
                          152.999
8A-7-1                    Ch. 152
8A-8-1 et seq.            152.210
8-13-26                   110.089
Ch. 10, Art. 1            33.015,
                          33.016
10-1-2                    33.016
Ch. 10, Art. 1A           33.015
10-2-1 to 10-2-5          33.050
Ch. 11                    32.37
Ch. 11, Art. 1            Charter § 34
11-1-1                    110.101
Ch. 11, Arts. 2 through 6 Charter § 31
                          151.001,
11-3-3A                   151.060,
                          151.092
11-3-6                    32.37
11-8-5                    32.37
11-8-9                    Charter § 30
                          110.101,
Ch. 11, Art. 9            110.112,
                          110.113
11-9-14                   Charter § 30
                          110.101,
Ch. 11, Art. 10           110.111,
                          110.113
11-10-5d                  110.074
11-10-11                  110.110
Ch. 11, Art. 12           Charter § 28,
                          Charter § 36
11-12-2                   110.014
                          Charter § 28,
11-12-4                   Charter § 36,
                          Ch. 110
Ch. 11, Art. 13           110.055
11-13-25                  Ch. 110,
                          110.055
Ch. 11, Art. 14c          110.106
                          110.101,
                          110.102,
Ch. 11, Art. 15           110.106,
                          110.108,
                          110.113
11-15-1 et seq.           36.52,
                          110.100
11-15-3c                  110.106
                          110.101,
Ch. 11, Art. 15a          110.103,
                          110.108,
                          110.113
11-15A-1 et seq.          110.100
                          110.101,
Ch. 11, Art. 15b          110.103,
                          110.113
11-15B-1 et seq.          110.100
11-15B-33                 110.110
11-15B-34                 110.105
11-15B-35                 110.109
Ch. 11, Art. 16           111.020,
                          111.024
11-16-2                   111.001,
                          111.020
11-16-4                   111.022
11-16-12                  111.020
11-16-13                  111.020
11-16-17                  111.022
11-16-18                  111.050
11-16-19                  111.051
Ch. 11A                   Charter § 34
11A-1-15                  Charter § 30,
                          Charter § 31
11A-2-2                   Charter § 28
11A-3-1 et seq.           Charter § 33
15-20-2                   Charter § 36
Ch. 16, Art. 1            51.46
16-13-1 et seq.           Ch. 52
16-13-1                   Ch. 52
16-13-16                  52.08
Ch. 17                    70.01,
                          72.166
17-2A-1                   72.041
17-24A-3 et seq.          Ch. 91
Ch. 17A                   70.01
17A-1-1 et seq.           Ch. 70
17-A-1-1(ii)              73.65
Ch. 17B                   70.01
17B-1-1 et seq.           Ch. 70
17B-2-2                   72.166
Ch. 17C                   70.01
17C-1-1 et seq.           Ch. 70
17C-2-7                   Ch. 70
17C-2-8                   Ch. 70
17C-2-8(a)(1)             Ch. 72
17C-4-7                   72.206
17C-5-2(1)                72.060
17C-5-2(e)                72.060
17C-5-2(f)                72.060
17C-5-2(g)                72.060
17C-5-2(k)                72.060
17C-5-2(m)                72.060
17C-5-2a                  72.061
17C-5-3                   72.062
17C-6-2                   72.006,
                          72.075
                          Ch. 70,
17C-6-3                   72.006,
                          72.075
17C-6-3a                  72.006
17C-6-5                   72.006
17C-8-5                   Ch. 70
17C-11-2                  73.20
17C-11-3                  73.21
17C-11-4                  73.28
17C-11-5                  73.33
17C-11-6                  73.23
17C-11-7                  73.24
17C-12-2                  72.042
17C-12-5                  72.142
17C-12-6                  72.003
17C-12-8                  72.186
17C-13-1 et seq.          Ch. 72
17C-15-19(d)              71.51
17C-15-26                 72.023,
                          72.144
17C-16-1 et seq.          Ch. 70
17C-16-2(a)               72.166
17C-19-2                  71.08
17C-19-8                  37.06
Ch. 17D                   70.01
17D-1-1 et seq.           Ch. 70
19-4-1 et seq.            110.069
19-9-1 et seq.            Ch. 90
19-16a-7                  151.016
19-18-1 et seq.           Ch. 90
19-18-1 through 19-18-3   90.45
19-20-1 et seq.           90.25
19-20-2                   32.37,
                          90.26
19-20-4                   90.26
19-20-6a through 19-20-8a 90.45
19-20A-1 et seq.          90.25,
                          90.26
19-20A-4                  90.28
20-1-2                    90.07
20-2-1 et seq.            90.07
20-3-5                    92.002
20-4-3                    72.062
Ch. 20, Art. VII          130.040
21-9-4                    151.075
21-11-3                   151.092
21-11-10                  151.092
Ch. 29, Art. 3            92.036
29-3-1 et seq.            Ch. 92
29-3-1 to 29-3-30         92.015
29-3-4a                   92.015
29-3-4b                   92.015
29-3-5                    92.015
29-3-12                   150.181
29-3-21a                  130.005
29-3E-10                  130.008
Ch. 29, Art. 3A           92.035
29-3E-2(5)                130.008
Ch. 29a                   71.50,
                          111.050
29A-1-1 et seq.           111.050
Ch. 30, Art. 13           151.016
30-13-1 et seq.           151.016
Ch. 32                    Charter § 28,
                          Charter § 36
Ch. 32 § 1(s)            Charter § 28
Ch. 32 § 1(t)            Charter § 28
Ch. 32 § 29              Charter § 36
33-25A-1 et seq.          110.067
Ch. 42                    Charter § 37
Ch. 47                    Charter § 42
Ch. 50                    Charter § 20
Ch. 54                    Charter § 37,
                          33.078
Ch. 56                    93.007
Ch. 59, Art. 3            31.20,
                          33.081
Art. 59-3                 93.072
                          31.25,
59-3-1 et seq.            31.26,
                          36.16
59-3-2                    150.179
60-1-5                    111.001
60-1-7                    111.020
Ch. 60, Art. 3 et seq.    111.002
60-3-9d                   111.002
60-6-9                    111.004
                          111.002,
Ch. 60, Art. 7            111.035,
                          111.050,
                          111.999
                          110.069,
60-7-1 et seq.            111.035,
                          111.050
60-7-2                    111.001
60-7-6                    111.038
60-7-7                    111.038
60-7-12                   111.035
                          111.002,
Ch. 60, Art. 8            111.003,
                          111.050
60-8-1 et seq.            111.050
Ch. 60-A                  72.060
60-A-1-1 et seq.          72.060
Ch. 61                    130.040
61-2-9                    130.002
61-2-26                   130.001
Ch. 61, Art. 3            130.004,
                          130.057
61-3-13                   130.013
61-3-27                   90.05,
                          90.06
61-3-30                   130.003
61-3A-1 et seq.           130.016
Ch. 61, Art. 4            130.057
Ch. 61, Art. 5            130.057
61-5-17                   130.010
Ch. 61, Art. 6            130.057
61-6-17                   130.005
Ch. 61, Art. 7            130.057
                          Charter § 28,
61-7-1                    10.99,
                          130.057
61-7-2                    Charter § 28
61-7-5                    30.01,
                          34.04
61-7-10                   130.056
61-8-15                   111.004
61-8-19                   90.05,
                          90.08
61-8B-10                  130.009
Title 110                 110.115
                          
 
REFERENCES TO 1991 CODE
 
1991 Code 2020 Code
1-1      10.01
1-2      10.02
1-3      10.03
1-4      10.04
1-5      10.05
1-6      10.06
1-7      10.99
1-8      10.08
1-9      10.09
1-10     10.10
1-11     10.11
1-12     10.12
2-1      30.01
2-2      30.02
2-3      30.20
2-4      30.21
2-5      30.03
2-6      30.04
2-6.1    30.05
2-7      31.01
2-8      31.02
2-9      31.03
2-10     31.04
2-11     31.05
2-12     31.06
2-13     31.20
2-14     31.21
2-15     31.22
2-16     31.23
2-17     32.01
2-18     32.15
2-19     32.35
2-20     32.36
2-21     32.37
2-22     32.16
2-23     32.18
2-24     32.19
2-25     32.20
2-26     33.001
2-26.1   33.002
2-27     33.015
2-28     33.016
2-29     33.030
2-30     33.031
2-31     33.032
2-36     33.035
2-37     33.050
2-38     33.051
2-39     33.052
2-40     33.053
2-41     33.054
2-42     33.055
2-43     33.056
2-44     33.057
2-45     33.058
2-46     33.059
2-46.1   33.060
2-47     33.075
2-48     33.076
2-49     33.077
2-50     33.078
2-51     33.079
2-52     33.080
2-53     33.081
2-54     33.082
2-55     33.083
2-56     33.084
2-56a    33.095
2-56b    33.096
2-56c    33.097
2-56d    33.098
2-56e    33.099
2-57     33.110
2-58     33.111
2-59     33.112
2-60     33.113
2-61     33.114
2-62     33.115
2-63     33.116
3-1      111.001
3-2      111.002
3-2.1    111.003
3-3      111.004
3-4      111.005
3-5      111.020
3-6      111.021
3-7      111.022
3-8      111.023
3-9      111.024
3-10     111.035
3-11     111.036
3-12     111.037
3-13     111.038
3-14     111.999
3-15     111.039
4-1      90.01
4-2      90.02,
         90.99
4-3      90.03
4-4      90.04
4-5      90.05
4-6      90.06
4-7      90.07
4-8      90.08
4-9      90.09
4-10     90.10
4-11     90.11
4-12     90.12
4-13     90.13
4-14     90.25
4-15     90.26
4-16     90.27
4-17     90.28
4-18     90.30,
         90.99
4-19     90.45
4-20     90.46
4-21     90.47
4-22     90.48
4-23     90.49
4-24     90.50
4-25     90.51
5-1.1    150.002
5-2      150.001
5-3      150.020
5-4      150.021,
         150.022
5-5      150.023
5-6      150.024
5-6.1    150.003
5-6.2    150.004
5-6.3    150.005
5-7      150.035
5-8      150.036,
         150.999
5-10     150.065
5-11     150.066
5-12     150.067
5-13     150.068
5-14     150.069
5-15     150.070
5-28     150.110,
         150.999
6-1      110.001
6-2      110.002
6-3      110.003
6-4      110.004
6-5      110.005
6-6      110.006
6-7      110.007
6-8      110.008
6-9      110.009
6-10     110.010
6-11     110.011
6-12     110.012
6-13     110.013
6-14     110.014
6-14.01  110.025
6-14.02  110.026
6-14.03  110.027
6-14.03a 110.028
6-14.04  110.029
6-14.05  110.030
6-14.06  110.031
6-14.07  110.032
6-14.08  110.033
6-14.09  110.034
6-14.10  110.035
6-14.11  110.036
6-14.12  110.037
6-14.13  110.038
6-14.14  110.039
6-14.15  110.040
6-15     110.055
6-16     110.056
6-17     110.057
6-18     110.058
6-19     110.059
6-21     110.060
6-22     110.061
6-23     110.062
6-24     110.063
6-25     110.064
6-26     110.065
6-27     110.066
6-28     110.067
6-30     110.068
6-31     110.069
6-32     110.070
6-33     110.071
6-34     110.072
6-35     110.073
6-36     110.074
6-37     110.075
6-38     110.076
6-39     110.077
6-40     110.078
6-41     110.079
6-42     110.080
6-43     110.081
6-44     110.082
6-45     110.083
6-46     110.084
6-47     110.085
6-48     110.086
6-49     110.087
6-51     110.088
6-52     110.100
6-53     110.101
6-54     110.102
6-55     110.103
6-56     110.104
6-57     110.105
6-58     110.106
6-59     110.107
6-60     110.108
6-61     110.109
6-62     110.110
6-63     110.111
6-64     110.112
6-65     110.113
6-66     110.114
6-68     110.115
6-69     110.116
7A-1     113.01
7A-2     113.02
7A-3     113.03
7A-4     113.04
7A-5     113.05
7A-6     113.06
7A-7     113.07
7A-8     113.08
7A-9     113.09
7A-10    113.10
7A-11    113.11
7A-12    113.12,
         113.99
7A-13    113.13
8-5      92.001
8-6      92.002,
         92.999
8-7      92.003
8-8      92.015
8-9      92.016
8-10     92.017
8-11     92.018
8-12     92.019
8-13     92.020
8-14     92.021
8-15     92.999
8-16     92.035
8-17     92.036
8-18     92.037
8-19     92.038
8-20     92.039
8-21     92.040
8-22     92.055
8-23     92.056
9-1      91.020
9-2      91.021
9-3      91.022
9-4      91.023
9-5      91.024
9-6      50.01
9-7      50.02
9-8      50.03
9-9      50.05
9-10     50.06
9-11     50.07
9-12     50.08
11-1     37.01
11-2     37.02
11-3     37.04
11-4     37.05
11-5     37.06
11-6     37.07
11-7     37.08
11-8     37.09
11-9     37.11
11-9.1   37.12
11-10    37.25
11-11    37.26,
         37.99
11-12    37.27
11-13    37.28
11-14    37.29
12-1     91.001
12-2     91.002
12-3     91.003
12-4     91.004
12-5     91.005
12-6     91.006
12-7     91.007
12-8     91.080
12-9     91.081
12-10    91.082
12-11    91.083
12-12    91.084
12-13    91.085
12-14    91.086
13-1     130.001,
         130.999
13-1.1   130.002
13-2     130.003
13-3     130.004
13-4     130.005
13-5     130.006
13-5.1   130.007
13-5.2   130.008,
         130.999
13-5.3   130.009
13-6     130.010
13-6.1   130.011
13-7     130.012
13-7.1   130.013
13-8     130.014
13-9     130.015
13-9.1   130.016,
         130.999
13-10    130.017
13-11    130.018
13-12    130.019
13-13    130.020
13-14    130.021
13-15    130.055
13-16    130.056
13-17    130.057
13-18    131.15
13-19    131.16
13-20    131.17
13-21    131.18
13-22    131.19
13-23    131.20
13-24    131.99
14-1     34.01
14-2     34.02
14-3     34.03
14-4     34.04
14-5     34.15
14-6     34.16
15-1     36.30
15-2     36.31
15-3     36.32
15-4     36.33
15-5     36.34
15-6     36.35
15-7     36.36,
         36.99
15-8     36.37
16-6     52.08
17-1     112.15
17-2     112.16
17-3     112.17
17-5     112.18
17-6     112.19
18-1     93.001
18-2     93.002
18-3     93.003
18-4     93.004
18-5     93.005
18-6     93.006,
         93.999
18-7     93.007,
         93.999
18-8     93.008
18-9     93.009
18-10    93.090
18-11    93.010
18-12    93.011
18-12.1  93.012
18-13    93.025
18-14    93.026,
         93.999
18-15    93.027
18-16    93.028
18-17    93.029
18-18    93.030
18-19    93.031
18-20    93.032
18-21    93.033
18-22    93.034
18-23    93.045
18-24    93.046
18-25    93.047
18-26    93.048
18-27    93.049
18-28    93.050
18-29    93.051
18-30    93.052
18-31    93.053
18-32    93.054
18-33    93.055
19-1     72.001
19-2     72.002
19-4     72.003
19-5     72.004
19-6     72.005
19-7     72.006
19-8     72.007
19-9     71.01
19-10    71.02
19-11    74.07,
         Ch. 76, Sch. I
19-12    71.03
19-13    71.04
19-14    71.05
19-15    71.06
19-16    71.07
19-17    71.08
19-18    71.09
19-19    71.20
19-20    71.21
19-21    71.22
19-22    71.23
19-23    71.24
19-24    71.25
19-25    71.26
19-26    71.27,
         71.99
19-27    71.28,
         71.99
19-28    71.29
19-29    71.30
19-30    71.31
19-31    71.99
19-32    73.01
19-33    73.02
19-34    73.03
19-35    73.04
19-36    73.05
19-37    73.06
19-39    73.07
19-40    73.08
19-41    73.09
19-42    73.99
19-48    73.20
19-49    73.21
19-50    73.22
19-51    73.23
19-52    73.24
19-53    73.25
19-54    73.26
19-55    73.27
19-56    73.28
19-57    73.29
19-58    73.30
19-59    73.31
19-60    73.32
19-61    73.33
19-62    72.008
19-63    72.020
19-64    72.021
19-65    72.022
19-66    72.023
19-67    72.024
19-68    72.025
19-69    72.040
19-70    72.041
19-71    72.042
19-72    72.043
19-73    72.044
19-74    72.045
19-75    72.046
19-76    72.060,
         72.999
19-77    72.061
19-78    72.062,
         72.999
19-79    72.075
19-80    72.076
19-81    72.077
19-82    72.078
19-83    72.079
19-84    72.080
19-85    72.081
19-86    72.095
19-87    72.096
19-88    72.097
19-89    72.098
19-90    72.099
19-91    72.100
19-92    72.101
19-93    72.102
19-94    72.103
19-95    72.104
19-95.1  72.105
19-96    72.106
19-97    72.120
19-98    72.121
19-99    72.122
19-100   72.123
19-101   72.124
19-102   72.125
19-103   72.127
19-104   72.128
19-105   72.129
19-106   72.140
19-107   72.141
19-108   72.142
19-109   72.143
19-110   72.144
19-111   74.01
19-112   74.02
19-113   74.03
19-114   74.04
19-115   74.05
19-116   74.06
19-117   74.07
19-118   73.45
19-119   73.46
19-120   73.47
19-121   73.48
19-122   73.49,
         73.99
19-123   73.50
19-124   73.51
19-125   71.45
19-126   71.47
19-127   71.48
19-128   71.49
19-129   71.50,
         71.99
19-130   71.51
19-131   72.155
19-132   72.156
19-133   72.157
19-134   72.158
19-135   72.159
19-136   72.160
19-137   72.161
19-138   72.162
19-139   72.163
19-140   72.164
19-141   72.165
19-141.1 72.166
19-142   70.99
19-143   70.15
19-144   70.16
19-145   70.17
19-146   70.18
19-147   70.19
19-148   70.20
19-149   70.21
19-150   70.22
19-151   70.23
19-152   70.01
19-153   72.180
19-154   72.181
19-155   72.182
19-156   72.183
19-157   72.184
19-158   72.185
19-159   72.186
19-160   72.200
19-161   72.201
19-162   72.202
19-163   72.203
19-164   72.204
19-165   72.205
19-166   72.206
19-167   72.207
19-168   72.208
19-169   72.209
20-1     51.01
20-2     51.02
20-3     51.03
20-4     51.04
20-5     51.05
20-6     51.06
20-7     51.07,
         51.99
20-8     51.08
20-9     51.09,
         51.99
20-10    51.10
20-11    51.11
20-12    51.12
20-13    51.13
20-14    51.14
20-15    51.15
20-16    51.16
20-17    51.17,
         51.99
20-18    51.30
20-19    51.31
20-20    51.32
21-1     152.001
21-2     152.002
21-3     152.003
21-4     152.004
21-5     152.005,
         152.999
21-6     152.006
21-7     152.007
21-8     152.008
21-9     152.999
21-10    152.020
21-11    152.021
21-12    152.022
21-13    152.023
21-14    152.024
21-15    152.025
21-16    152.027
21-17    152.028
21-18    152.040
21-19    152.041
21-20    152.042
21-20.1  152.043
21-20.2  152.044
21-21    152.055
21-22    152.056
21-23    152.057
21-24    152.058
21-25    152.059
21-26    152.060
21-27    152.061
21-28    152.062
21-29    152.075
21-30    152.076
21-31    152.077
21-32    152.090
21-33    152.105
21-34    152.106
21-35    152.107
21-36    152.108
21-37    152.109
21-38    152.110
21-39    152.125
21-40    152.126
21-41    152.140
21-42    152.155
21-43    152.156
21-44    152.157
21-45    152.158
21-46    152.159
21-47    152.160
21-48    152.161
21-49    152.162
21-50    152.163
21-51    152.164
21-52    152.165
21-53    152.166
21-54    152.180
21-55    152.181
21-56    152.182
21-57    152.183
21-58    152.184
21-59    152.195
21-60    152.196
21-61    152.197
21-62    152.198
21-63    152.199
21-65    152.210
21-66    152.211
21-67    152.212
21-68    152.213
21-69    152.214
21-70    152.215
21-71    152.216
21-72    152.217
21-73    152.230
21-74    152.231
21-75    152.232
21-76    152.245
21-77    152.246
21-78    152.247
21-79    152.248
21-80    152.249
21-81    152.250
21-82    152.251
         
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
98-06    - -        71.99
                    33.031,
–      6-5-1947   33.032,
                    33.034
–      7-1-1947   111.002
–      2-17-1949  91.023
–      7-28-1949  52.08
–      12-1-1949  90.01
–      5-18-1950  93.006,
                    93.999
                    50.01—
–      6-15-1950  50.03,
                    50.06—
                    50.08
                    91.020,
–      6-15-1950  91.022—
                    91.024
–      11-29-1950 30.03
–      4-16-1953  30.03
–      5-7-1953   92.055
–      10-5-1953  52.08
–      8-5-1954   52.08
–      4-5-1956   71.24
                    110.001,
–      6-20-1957  110.005,
                    110.011,
                    110.013
–      8-1-1957   91.001
–      10-16-1958 130.001,
                    130.999
–      3-3-1959   93.007,
                    93.999
                    152.001,
                    152.002,
                    152.004—
                    152.008,
                    152.020—
                    152.028,
                    152.040—
                    152.044,
                    152.055—
                    152.062,
                    152.075—
                    152.077,
                    152.090,
                    152.105—
                    152.110,
–      3-5-1959   152.125,
                    152.126,
                    152.140,
                    152.155—
                    152.166,
                    152.181—
                    152.183,
                    152.195—
                    152.199,
                    152.210—
                    152.217,
                    152.230—
                    152.232,
                    152.245—
                    152.251,
                    152.999
–      3-19-1959  93.007,
                    93.999
–      5-21-1959  71.03
–      3-3-1960   92.037
–      4-7-1960   150.022
–      5-5-1960   91.021
–      4-6-1961   71.24
–      6-15-1961  111.022
–      9-20-1962  Ch. 76, Sch. I
–      11-15-1962 92.036
–      3-7-1963   92.002,
                    92.999
–      6-6-1963   111.002
–      10-17-1963 150.065—
                    150.070
–      6-17-1965  111.002
–      7-1-1965   92.015
–      7-1-1965   150.035
–      3-17-1966  52.08
–      4-7-1966   73.20—
                    73.33
–      10-20-1966 33.015
                    111.001,
–      6-1-1967   111.035—
                    111.039,
                    111.999
–      11-2-1967  37.08,
                    37.09
–      1-8-1968   152.181,
                    152.184
–      2-1-1968   33.050—
                    33.059
–      12-5-1968  50.01
–      12-5-1968  91.020
–      3-5-1970   33.110—
                    33.116
–      4-2-1970   92.015
–      9-17-1970  152.180,
                    152.181
–      11-19-1970 90.30,
                    90.99
                    36.30—
–      5-3-1971   36.37,
                    36.99
                    90.03,
–      3-2-1972   90.13,
                    90.28
–      9-7-1972   93.001
–      8-16-1973  130.019
–      5-2-1974   91.005
–      9-5-1976   33.075—
                    33.084
–      5-18-1978  93.012
–      8-18-1978  150.110,
                    150.999
–      7-5-1979   92.001
–      7-19-1979  32.19
                    33.051,
–      7-19-1979  33.060,
                    33.115
–      7-19-1979  70.01
                    72.166,
                    72.180—
–      7-19-1979  72.186,
                    72.200—
                    72.209
–      7-19-1979  150.110,
                    150.999
                    152.001,
                    152.023,
–      7-19-1979  152.024,
                    152.040—
                    152.044
–      11-1-1979  30.20
                    131.15—
–      3-6-1980   131.20,
                    131.99
–      7-17-1980  152.025
                    35.06,
–      12-4-1980  35.14,
                    35.18—
                    35.22
–      5-7-1981   32.16
                    110.002,
–      5-21-1981  110.028,
                    111.038
                    130.002,
                    130.013,
–      5-21-1981  130.016,
                    130.056,
                    130.057,
                    130.999
–      6-18-1981  110.039
–      6-18-1981  111.002
–      7-16-1981  111.003
–      9-3-1981   90.26
                    150.002,
–      4-1-1982   150.021,
                    150.024
                    152.006,
–      4-1-1982   152.195,
                    152.197,
                    152.199
–      9-2-1982   111.003
–      1-6-1983   37.01
–      3-17-1983  72.061
–      8-18-1983  111.002
                    72.060—
–      9-15-1983  72.062,
                    72.999
–      1-5-1984   33.095—
                    33.099
–      2-16-1984  110.033
–      3-15-1984  52.08
–      3-15-1984  110.040
                    113.01—
–      7-5-1984   113.13,
                    113.99
–      7-19-1984  150.004
–      8-1-1985   113.06,
                    113.08
–      3-6-1986   70.01
–      7-3-1986   110.005
                    73.01—
–      9-4-1986   73.09,
                    73.99
–      12-18-1986 35.14
–      2-5-1987   110.039
–      8-6-1987   37.12
–      8-4-1988   150.005
–      7-6-1989   91.005
–      1-17-1991  130.070
–      5-2-1991   Ch. 76, Sch. I
–      5-16-1991  Ch. 76, Sch. I
–      5-16-1991  Ch. 75, Sch. I
–      8-15-1991  Ch. 75, Sch. II
–      9-5-1991   TSO IV
–      11-21-1991 TSO IV
–      11-21-1991 TSO IV
–      11-21-1991 Ch. 75, Sch. III
–      11-21-1991 Ch. 76, Sch. I
–      12-5-1991  TSO IV
–      1-2-1992   TSO II
–      1-2-1992   TSO II
–      1-2-1992   51.31
–      1-16-1992  30.06,
                    30.99
–      3-5-1992   50.05
–      3-5-1992   50.09
–      4-2-1992   Ch. 75, Sch. I
–      4-16-1992  50.10,
                    50.99
–      7-2-1992   Ch. 76, Sch. I
–      7-16-1992  Ch. 75, Sch. I
–      7-16-1992  Ch. 76, Sch. I
–      7-16-1992  51.31
                    92.015—
–      9-17-1992  92.021,
                    92.999
–      1-7-1993   Ch. 75, Sch. I
–      1-7-1993   Ch. 75, Sch. I
–      3-4-1993   93.091
–      3-18-1993  51.31
–      8-5-1993   130.071
–      9-16-1993  131.01,
                    131.99
–      10-21-1993 Ch. 75, Sch. I
                    114.30—
–      11-18-1993 114.35,
                    114.99
–      1-6-1994   Ch. 75, Sch. I
–      3-17-1994  110.034,
                    110.999
–      5-5-1994   90.28
                    111.050,
–      5-19-1994  111.051,
                    111.999
–      7-7-1994   52.08
–      7-21-1994  TSO II
–      8-18-1994  73.49,
                    73.99
–      4-6-1995   TSO V
–      7-20-1995  Ch. 76, Sch. I
–      8-17-1995  Ch. 75, Sch. I
–      9-7-1995   71.24
–      10-19-1995 Ch. 75, Sch. IV
–      11-16-1995 TSO III
96-01    1-18-1996  71.24
096-02   3-11-1996  150.024
                    131.35—
096-03   4-4-1996   131.37,
                    131.99
096-06   4-16-1996  71.07
096-07   5-2-1996   TSO IV
096-09   8-1-1996   Ch. 75, Sch. I
096-10   9-19-1996  130.040
O96-11   10-17-1996 130.056,
                    130.999
097-01   2-4-1997   36.50,
                    36.53
097-02   3-26-1997  TSO VII
097-03   3-26-1997  93.025
–      5-1-1997   TSO VI
097-05   6-5-1997   TSO IV
097-08   8-7-1997   72.167
O97-06   12-4-1997  71.46,
                    71.99
O97-11   12-4-1997  Ch. 76, Sch. I
O97-12   12-4-1997  TSO II
O97-13   12-18-1997 TSO IV
O98-02   7-2-1998   Ch. 76, Sch. I
O98-03   7-2-1998   Ch. 75, Sch. III
O98-04   7-16-1998  TSO VI
O98-05   8-20-1998  Ch. 75, Sch. III
O98-08   9-3-1998   TSO VI
098-10   9-17-1998  130.012,
                    130.999
098-09   11-19-1998 TSO VI
O99-01   2-4-1999   TSO II
O99-05   3-18-1999  TSO IV
O2000-04 4-18-1999  TSO VI
O99-06   4-20-1999  90.47
O99-07   5-6-1999   TSO IV
O99-09   6-17-1999  71.46,
                    71.99
O99-10   9-16-1999  TSO IV
O99-11   11-4-1999  Ch. 76, Sch. I
O99-12   11-4-1999  Ch. 76, Sch. I
O99-13   12-2-1999  TSO VI
O99-14   12-30-1999 TSO VII
O99-15   1-6-2000   TSO VI
O2000-02 2-17-2000  Ch. 76, Sch. I
O2000-07 7-20-2000  Ch. 76, Sch. I
O2000-08 7-20-2000  TSO IV
O2000-09 8-3-2000   Ch. 75, Sch. III
O2000-10 8-3-2000   Ch. 75, Sch. III
O2000-11 8-17-2000  Ch. 76, Sch. I
O2000-12 9-7-2000   Ch. 76, Sch. I
O2000-13 1-4-2001   Ch. 75, Sch. I
O2001-02 6-21-2001  TSO IV
O2001-03 6-21-2001  73.65,
                    73.99
O2001-05 9-10-2001  TSO IV
O2001-07 10-18-2001 Ch. 75, Sch. III
O2002-03 - -2002    Ch. 75, Sch. I
O2002-04 - -2002    Ch. 75, Sch. I
O2002-01 4-4-2002   TSO VII
O2002-05 5-16-2002  TSO I
O2002-02 5-23-2002  TSO I
O02-06   8-15-2002  TSO IV
O2002-07 11-21-2002 TSO V
O03-003  - -2003    TSO VI
O03-001  4- -2003   TSO VI
O03-004  6-17-2003  Ch. 76, Sch. I
006      9-4-2003   93.012
005      9-18-2003  112.01
007      9-18-2003  TSO VIII
0-024    1-1-2004   TSO IV
O-008    1-15-2004  50.05
O-009    1-22-2004  50.11,
                    50.99
                    71.02,
O-010    2-6-2004   Ch. 75, Sch. I,
                    Ch. 76, Sch. I
                    114.01—
O-011    3-18-2004  114.18,
                    114.99
                    91.040—
O-013    3-18-2004  91.054,
                    91.999
015      5-20-2004  70.99
                    91.025,
O-017    6-17-2004  91.026,
                    91.999
018      6-17-2004  71.46,
                    71.99
019      7-15-2004  71.07
021      11-4-2004  70.99
0-023    11-4-2004  TSO I
031      - -2005    150.069
0-0033   - -2005    TSO II
025      1-20-2005  TSO V
O-026    2-17-2005  152.141
O-27     3-3-2005   51.45—
                    51.54
O-028    3-3-2005   TSO II
O-034    8-4-2005   130.022,
                    130.999
035      9- -2005   TSO V
036      9-1-2005   TSO VI
037      10-20-2005 TSO I
038      12-15-2005 TSO V
O-039    1-19-2006  TSO II
O-040    1-19-2006  Ch. 75, Sch. I
022      2-6-2006   52.08
O-041    5-18-2006  150.035
O-042    6-1-2006   110.042
O-44     6-1-2006   37.30
045      6-1-2006   110.041
046      6-15-2006  32.17
049      7-6-2006   92.071
                    72.126,
                    72.999,
O-53     7-20-2006  130.023,
                    130.024,
                    130.999
047      8-17-2006  152.141
054      9-7-2006   110.042
055      9-7-2006   TSO V
043      9-21-2006  35.01—
                    35.27
057      10-19-2006 52.08
058      11-2-2006  TSO IV
060      3-15-2007  TSO IV
061      3-15-2007  130.056,
                    130.999
062      4-5-2007   TSO VII
063      9-6-2007   51.31
066      9-20-2007  36.15—
                    36.18
064      10-18-2007 36.50,
                    36.53
065      10-18-2007 36.01
068      11-1-2007  92.004,
                    92.999
081      - -2008    Ch. 75, Sch. III
084      - -2008    92.041,
                    92.999
085      - -2008    TSO II
087      - -2008    Ch. 76, Sch. I
070      1-3-2008   110.055—
                    110.088
074      4-3-2008   37.31
075      5-1-2008   TSO VII
076      7-3-2008   93.092—
                    93.102
078      8-21-2008  TSO VII
079      8-21-2008  Ch. 75, Sch. III
082      10-16-2008 TSO II
083      10-16-2008 TSO II
086      12-4-2008  90.29,
                    90.99
088      12-4-2008  TSO I
089      12-18-2008 TSO III
095      - -2009    TSO II
                    150.125—
097      - -2009    150.138,
                    150.999
100      - -2009    150.195—
                    150.198
091      1-7-2009   TSO II
092      1-7-2009   TSO II
093      1-7-2009   TSO II
094      1-7-2009   TSO II
096      2-19-2009  TSO II
098      5-7-2009   130.025,
                    130.999
101      6-18-2009  TSO II
102      7-16-2009  TSO II
103      7-16-2009  TSO II
104      8-6-2009   90.14,
                    90.99
105      8-20-2009  TSO VI
106      9-3-2009   TSO II
107      9-20-2009  TSO II
108      1-21-2010  TSO II
109      4-1-2010   37.32
                    92.015—
110      4-1-2010   92.021,
                    92.999
111      4-1-2010   51.09,
                    51.99
113      6-3-2010   50.05
                    151.001—
                    151.004,
                    151.015,
                    151.016,
                    151.030—
                    151.034,
                    151.045—
                    151.049,
                    151.060—
114      6-17-2010  151.063,
                    151.075,
                    151.090—
                    151.099,
                    151.110,
                    151.111,
                    151.125,
                    151.126,
                    151.140,
                    151.999
115      8-5-2010   TSO II
116      8-5-2010   TSO II
119      8-19-2010  51.31
117      9-30-2010  TSO II
118      9-30-2010  TSO II
120      10-21-2010 72.126,
                    72.999
122      12-16-2010 TSO VI
                    90.65—
121      1-20-2011  90.67,
                    90.99
126      6-17-2011  32.15
131      9-1-2011   150.150—
                    150.160
132      11-3-2011  51.31
133      11-17-2011 31.05
134      12-1-2011  150.036,
                    150.999
135      12-15-2011 TSO IV
136      12-15-2011 TSO IV
137      12-15-2011 TSO IV
138      12-15-2011 TSO IV
140      1-19-2012  150.035
141      5-17-2012  TSO V
142      5-17-2012  TSO V
143      5-17-2012  TSO V
144      5-17-2012  TSO V
145      5-17-2012  TSO V
146      5-17-2012  TSO V
147      5-17-2012  TSO V
148      5-17-2012  TSO V
149      5-17-2012  TSO V
150      5-17-2012  TSO V
151      5-17-2012  TSO V
152      5-17-2012  TSO V
153      5-17-2012  TSO V
154      6-21-2012  51.31
155      6-21-2012  52.08
156      6-21-2012  TSO V
157      6-21-2012  TSO V
158      7-5-2012   TSO V
159      9-20-2012  150.024
160      11-5-2012  92.041,
                    92.999
162      12-20-2012 152.251
163      2-7-2013   35.23
164      2-21-2013  35.18
165      3-21-2013  30.02
166      4-4-2013   TSO II
167      4-4-2013   31.06
168      5-2-2013   TSO IV
169      7-18-2013  50.05
170      7-18-2013  35.01
                    150.125—
171      10-17-2013 150.138,
                    150.999
172      10-17-2013 152.141
176      3-6-2014   50.04
177      3-6-2014   91.026
175      3-20-2014  30.20
174      4-17-2014  TSO V
179      4-17-2014  TSO II
                    92.070—
                    92.078,
178      6-19-2014  92.080,
                    92.081,
                    92.999
181      8-21-2014  150.035
                    36.50—
180      9-4-2014   36.62,
                    36.99
184      11-20-2014 TSO VII
185      11-20-2014 93.070—
                    93.076
188      2-5-2015   30.02
189      3-19-2015  150.035
190      3-19-2015  71.06
191      3-19-2015  92.055
192      3-19-2015  34.15
193      5-7-2015   Ch. 75, Sch. II
                    150.085—
194      6-12-2015  150.099,
                    150.999
                    92.071—
195      7-2-2015   92.079,
                    92.999
196      7-2-2015   150.035
197      7-2-2015   51.31
199      9-3-2015   Ch. 75, Sch. III
200      9-24-2015  50.05
201      10-8-2015  TSO III
202      10-8-2015  TSO III
203      10-8-2015  92.071,
                    92.073
205      1-7-2016   34.04
208      3-17-2016  92.071,
                    92.080
206      4-7-2016   112.01
207      4-7-2016   34.04
209      5-5-2016   Ch. 75, Sch. I
                    91.065—
210      5-19-2016  91.069,
                    91.999
212      6-16-2016  110.042
                    150.150—
213      6-16-2016  150.160,
                    150.999
214      6-30-2016  130.008,
                    130.999
215      7-21-2016  150.035
216      8-4-2016   150.037,
                    150.038
217      8-4-2016   91.066
218      9-1-2016   TSO IV
221      9-15-2016  110.042
222      9-15-2016  91.026
219      11-3-2016  130.999,
                    131.99
                    130.085,
223      11-3-2016  130.086,
                    130.999
220      12-15-2016 110.089
226      12-15-2016 110.074
227      12-15-2016 130.087,
                    130.999
228      12-15-2016 111.080—
                    111.084
229      2-16-2017  30.05
230      3-2-2017   31.24—
                    31.27
231      3-2-2017   34.01
232      3-2-2017   92.037
233      3-2-2017   33.077
234      3-2-2017   35.01
235      4-6-2017   93.092—
                    93.102
236      5-18-2017  110.055—
                    110.088
237      5-18-2017  Ch. 75, Sch. I
238      6-1-2017   37.03
239      6-1-2017   33.030—
                    33.036
241      6-15-2017  34.04
242      8-3-2017   130.056,
                    130.999
243      8-17-2017  TSO IV
245      9-7-2017   111.065,
                    111.066
244      9-21-2017  37.10
246      10-19-2017 92.018
247      12-7-2017  36.51,
                    36.53
248      12-7-2017  110.100—
                    110.116
249      2-1-2018   TSO I
250      2-1-2018   31.28
251      2-1-2018   34.01
                    130.100,
252      3-1-2018   130.101,
                    130.999
253      5-3-2018   70.35—
                    70.41
254      6-7-2018   150.175—
                    150.183
                    152.001,
                    152.020,
                    152.026,
                    152.055,
255      6-21-2018  152.056,
                    152.061,
                    152.075,
                    152.125,
                    152.126
256      8-16-2018  151.016,
                    151.090
257      11-1-2018  52.08
258      2-7-2019   31.07
260      5-2-2019   34.04
261      6-18-2019  TSO IV
                    52.01—
262      8-15-2019  52.07,
                    52.99
                    112.35—
264      9-19-2019  112.43,
                    112.99
266      11-21-2019 52.08
267      11-7-2019  112.36,
                    112.39
268      12-19-2019 TSO II
269      12-19-2019 TSO II
270      12-19-2019 TSO II
271      3-4-2020   150.035
                   
 
