CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF HUNTINGTON, WEST VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Republished in 2015 by Order of the Council 
Adopted: July 11, 2016 
Effective: July 11, 2016 
____________ 
I, Steve Williams, Mayor of Huntington, West Virginia, pursuant to West Virginia Code 8-11-4(b) and Section 3.15 of the Charter, hereby certify that the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Huntington, West Virginia, as revised, rearranged, compiled, renumbered as to sections, recodified and printed herewith in component codes are correctly set forth and constitute the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, West Virginia, 2015 as amended to December 22, 2014. 
/s/ /s/ Steve Williams 
      Mayor   ____________ 

CITY OF HUNTINGTON, WEST VIRGINIA ROSTER OF OFFICIALS (June 30, 2018) 
CITY COUNCIL 
At Large - Carol Polan 
At Large - Rebecca Howe 
District 1 - Joyce Clark 
District 2 - Charles McComas 
District 3 - Alex Vence 
District 4 - Jennifer Wheeler 
District 5 - Tonia K. Page 
District 6 - Mark A. Bates 
District 7 - Mike Shockley 
District 8 - Tom McGuffin 
District 9 - Tina Brooks 
ADMINISTRATION 
Steve Williams, Mayor 
Cathy Burns, City Manager 
Kathy Moore, Finance Director 
Scott Damron, City Attorney 
Jim Insco, Director of Public Works 
Cheryl Henderson, Municipal Judge 
Kim Bailey, Purchasing Director 
Scott Lemley, Director of Development & Planning 
Barbara Miller, City Clerk 
Sherry Lewis, Director of Human Resources 
Hank Dial, Police Chief 
Jan K. Rader, Fire Chief 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a Republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code, as supplemented through February 28, 2010, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Part, Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The arrangement and numbering of the Codified Ordinances into component codes, chapters, articles and sections are based on an adoption of the decimal numbering system which is in accord with the best accepted practice in instituting a codification. Each section is self-identifying as to code, article and section number. For example, 305.06 indicates that the code number is 3, the article number is 305 (or the 5th article within code 3), and the section number is .06. The code and article numbers appear left of the decimal, with the code number preceding the first two digits left of the decimal, and the article number being all digits left of the decimal. The section number appears right of the decimal. As another example, 113.10 indicates the code number is 1, the article number is 113 (or the 13th article within code 1), and the section number is 10. 
    This numbering system has the advantage of inherent flexibility in allowing for an almost endless amount of expansion. Codes, chapters, and articles initially are odd-numbered, thus reserving the use of even numbers for future legislation. Sections within articles are consecutively numbered, except that penalty provisions are usually assigned the number .99. Newly created sections subsequent to the original codification may be indicated by three digits right of the decimal in the event the law properly belongs between two consecutively numbered sections. For example, newly created 575.061, 575.062 and 575.063 follow 575.06 and precede 575.07 to be placed in their logical position. 
    Section histories enable a user to trace the origin of the law contained in the section. The history indicates the derivation by reference to either its passage date and the ordinance number originally assigned to it at that time, or to its inclusion in any prior code. Sections without histories indicate that the section contains new matter which was ordained by the Adopting Ordinance which enacts the Codified Ordinances. 
    The Comparative Section Table is included to show the disposition of every ordinance included in the Codified Ordinances. It indicates whether a given ordinance was consolidated with another into one section or split into two or more sections. Cross references direct the user to subject matter reasonably related to material contained within a given article. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a part of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the part. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President of Supplements and Peggy Lamar, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Barbara Miller for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Huntington, West Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 2015. 
AN ORDINANCE OF COUNCIL ADOPTING AND RE-ENACTING THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON . 
    WHEREAS, the Charter of the City of Huntington requires that the official Code be re-codified periodically; and 
    WHEREAS, the Code has recently been re-codified in such a manner that the up-to-date code shall be available on line free to all members of the public; and 
    WHEREAS, the most recent codification has been available to the public for a period in excess of ninety days as required by Sec. 3.15 of the Charter prior to enacting the final ordinance re-enacting the re-codification, 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON, CABELL AND WAYNE COUNTIES, WEST VIRGINIA, as follows: 
    Section 1. The ordinances of the City of Huntington, West Virginia, of a general and permanent nature, as revised, codified, rearranged and consolidated into component codes, chapters, articles and sections are hereby approved, adopted and enacted as the Codified Ordinances of Huntington, West Virginia, 2016. 
    Section 2. The enactment of the Codified Ordinances shall not be construed to affect a right or liability accrued or incurred under any legislative provisions prior to the effective date of such enactment, or an action or proceeding for the enforcement of such right or liability. Such enactment shall not be construed to relieve any person from punishment for an act committed in the violation of any such legislative provisions, nor to affect an indictment or prosecution therefor. For such purposes, any such legislative provisions shall continue in full force notwithstanding its repeal for the purpose of revision and re-codification. 
    Section 3. The re-enact provided above shall not affect: 
(1)  The grant or creation of a franchise, license, right, easement or privilege. 
(2)  The purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property. 
(3)  The appropriation or expenditure of money or promise or guarantee of payment. 
(4)  The assumption of any contract or obligation. 
(5)  The issuance and delivery of any bonds, obligations or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(6)  The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges. 
(7)  The establishment, naming, vacating or grade level of any street or public way. 
(8)  The dedication of property or plat approval. 
(9)  The annexation or detachment of territory. 
(10)  Any legislation enacted subsequent to December 31, 2014. 
    Section 4. The original text of each individual ordinance contained in the re-codification an on line shall be considered secondary to the records held in the office of the Clerk. Any discrepancy in the language of any ordinance contained in the re-codification is subject to verification with the Clerk's records. If there is a discrepancy, the Clerk's records are to be considered superior and irrefutable proof of the true language of the ordinance. 
SPONSORED BY COUNCILMAN SCOTT CASERTA 
APPROVED AS TO FORM BY SD 
FIRST READING 6-27-2016 - ORDERED ADVERTISED 
SECOND READING 7/11/2016 - ADOPTED UNANIMOUSLY (8 yeas and 3 absent - CLARK, JACKSON AND THACKER) 
DATE June 11, 2016 
/s/ Lisa Adkins, Asst City Clerk 
      BARBARA MILLER, 
      CITY CLERK   DATE June 13, 2016 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Date of Ordinance Included/Omitted Supp. No.  1-12-15(1) Included 1  1-26-15(1) Included 1  1-26-15(2) Included 1  1-26-15(3) Included 1  1-26-15(4) Included 1  4-13-15(1) Included 1  4-13-15(2) Included 1  4-13-15(3) Included 1  4-13-15(4) Included 1  4-13-15(5) Included 1  4-13-15(6) Included 1  4-27-15(1) Included 1  5-11-15(1) Included 1  5-26-15(1) Included 1  6- 8-15(1) Included 1  6- 8-15(2) Included 1  6-22-15(1) Included 1  7-13-15(1) Included 1  7-27-15(1) Included 1  9-28-15(1) Included 1  9-28-15(2) Included 1  9-28-15(3) Included 1  9-28-15(4) Included 1 11-23-15(1) Included 1 11-23-15(2) Included 1 12-28-15(1) Included 1  1-11-16(1) Included 1  1-25-16(1) Included 1  1-25-16(2) Included 1  2-22-16(1) Included 1  2-22-16(2) Included 1  2-22-16(3) Included 1  4-11-16(1) Included 1  4-11-16(2) Included 1  4-25-16(1) Included 1  6-27-16(1) Included 1   1-25-16(3) Included 2   9-12-16(1) Included 2   9-12-16(2) Included 2   9-12-16(3) Included 2   9-26-16(1) Included 2   9-26-16(2) Included 2 11-28-16(1) Included 2 12-12-16(1) Included 2 12-27-16(1) Omitted 2 12-27-16(2) Included 2   4-10-17(1) Included 2   5- 8-17(1) Included 2   6-12-17(1) Included 2   9-11-17(1) Included 2   9-25-17(1) Included 2 12-26-17(1) Included 2   1-22-18(1) Included 2   4- 9-18(1) Included 2   4- 9-18(2) Included 2  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Huntington Charter was approved by the voters on June 4, 1985. Dates appearing in parentheses following section headings indicate those sections were subsequently amended, added or repealed on the date given. 

ARTICLE TWELVE - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
ARTICLE ONE - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS 

SECTION 1.1. - INCORPORATION. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Huntington, West Virginia, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established, shall continue to be a municipal corporation under the name of "The City of Huntington" and in the manner provided by law. 
SECTION 1.2. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be the "strong-mayor plan". All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter or by general law. 
SECTION 1.3. - POWERS OF CITY. 
    This City, incorporated under this Charter, shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities of its class by the constitution and laws of the State of West Virginia, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted. 
SECTION 1.4. - CONSTRUCTION. 
    The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City and the specific mention of particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this Article. 
ARTICLE TWO - MAYOR 

SECTION 2.1. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR. 
    The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall exercise all powers and perform all duties vested in or imposed upon him or her by this Charter, ordinance, general law or rule necessarily implied therefrom in order to carry out the functions of his or her office. The Mayor shall exercise directly, or through his or her authorized and duly appointed representatives, supervision over all executive and administrative work of the City. The Mayor shall report to Council, at least annually, upon the state of the City and may recommend to Council such measures as he or she deems to be in the best interests of the City and its inhabitants. The Mayor shall appoint City officers and employees as provided by law, this Charter or ordinance and may, except where prohibited or otherwise provided by general law, this Charter, ordinance or any duly adopted merit or civil service systems, remove any City officer or employee at his or her pleasure, whether such officer or employee was appointed by the Mayor with or without the approval of Council. Except as otherwise provided by general law, the Mayor shall appoint members of independent boards, agencies or commissions, which appointments shall be subject to the approval of Council; provided, however, no individual shall be eligible for reappointment to any such board, agency, or commission who has previously served three full and consecutive terms on such board, agency or commission unless a period of time equal to a full term thereon shall have passed since the expiration of said individual's last previous term of office. 
SECTION 2.2. - ELECTION AND TERM OF MAYOR. 
    The qualified electors of the City shall elect the Mayor from the City at large in the manner provided in Article Eleven of this Charter, to serve for a term of four years. No person who shall have previously been elected for three full and consecutive terms as Mayor shall be eligible to succeed himself or herself in that office and the Mayor shall not, during his or her term of office, hold any other public office or position, be a member of any political executive committee. 
SECTION 2.3. - QUALIFICATIONS OF MAYOR. 
    Prior to his or her election, the Mayor shall be a citizen of the United States and the State of West Virginia, and shall be a resident and qualified elector of the City. He or she shall be at least twenty-five years of age at the time of his or her election and shall remain a resident of the City during his or her term or terms of office. 
SECTION 2.4. - ACTING MAYOR. 
    In case of the Mayor's temporary absence, he or she shall designate, by order delivered to the City Clerk prior to his or her absence, any officer of the City, except members of Council, to serve as Acting Mayor; provided that, in the event the Mayor fails to so designate an Acting Mayor, the Director of the Department of Administration and Finance shall serve as Acting Mayor. 
SECTION 2.5. - VACANCY IN OFFICE. 
    A vacancy in the office of Mayor, occurring for any reason, shall be filled in the same manner as that provided for filling vacancies in Council as set out in Section 3.13 of this Charter; except Council shall not select a member of Council to fill a vacancy and in the event Council should fail to fill a vacancy within thirty days after its occurrence, the members of Council shall receive no further compensation until such vacancy shall have been filled and no funds shall issue for such compensation which would ordinarily have accrued during the period of noncompliance. 
SECTION 2.6. - COMPENSATION. 
    The Mayor shall be compensated at the rate of seventy-five thousand six hundred dollars per annum. Council may, by ordinance, change the salary of the Mayor, but no ordinance shall be effective to reduce or increase the Mayor's salary during his or her current term of office. 
(Ord. of 12-30-2008) 
SECTION 2.7. - SUBMISSION OF ORDINANCES TO MAYOR; VETO POWER. 
    Within ninety-six hours after the adjournment of any Council meeting, the City Clerk shall present to the Mayor the record of proceedings of the meeting and all ordinances and resolutions adopted at the meeting. The Mayor, within seven days of receipt by him or her of an ordinance or resolution, shall return it to the City Clerk with his or her approval signature, with his or her written veto, or the Mayor may not act. If the ordinance or resolution is signed by the Mayor, it shall become operative as specified in the ordinance. If the ordinance is disapproved by veto, the Mayor shall attach thereto a written statement explaining the reasons for his or her veto. If the Mayor does not act, the ordinance or resolution shall become operative at noon on the seventh calendar day after it is received by the Mayor. Ordinances or resolutions vetoed by the Mayor shall be presented by the City Clerk to Council for its consideration at its next regular meeting and should Council then or thereafter adopt the ordinance or resolution by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of all its members, it shall be operative upon the date specified by Council, but in no event less than fifteen days after the date of final passage. If no operative date is so specified, it shall become operative at noon on the fifteenth calendar day after the date of final passage. The Mayor's veto power shall extend to disapproving or reducing any individual appropriation item in the budget or any ordinance or resolution, but shall not extend or apply to any appropriation or resolution authorized pursuant to Section 3.16 of this Charter. 
SECTION 2.8. - MAYOR SHALL ATTEND COUNCIL MEETINGS. 
    The Mayor shall attend every meeting of Council, may attend any meeting of its committees and may express his or her views, orally or in writing, on matters pending before Council. The Mayor shall have no right to introduce any motion, resolution, ordinance or amendments thereto, nor to vote on questions before Council. Provisions of Sections 3.13 and 14.17 pertaining to attendance at meetings shall apply to the Mayor. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
ARTICLE THREE - COUNCIL 

SECTION 3.1. - POWERS. 
    All legislative powers of the City shall be vested in Council which shall be the governing body of the City. 
SECTION 3.2. - NUMBER, SELECTION AND TERMS. 
    The City shall have a Council consisting of eleven members. Eleven council members shall be elected, one from each of the nine municipal election districts hereinafter described and two members elected at-large. Each of the nine district Council members shall be elected by the qualified electors residing in the particular district from which he or she is to be elected, to serve for a term of four years. Each at-large Council member shall be elected by the qualified electors residing in the entire City for a term of four years. However, no more than one at-large Council member shall be a resident of any one municipal election district at the time of his or her election. In no case shall any member of Council serve more than three full and consecutive terms as a Council member. All elections for members of Council shall be conducted according to the provisions set forth in Article Eleven of this Charter. 
SECTION 3.3. - MUNICIPAL ELECTION DISTRICTS DEFINED. 
    The City shall be divided into nine municipal election districts as the basis for electing district Council members. The boundaries, population and designation of the nine initial Council districts are specified in Appendix "A" of this Charter and shall remain in effect until changed in accordance with provisions set forth in Section 3.5 of this Charter. 
SECTION 3.4. - MUNICIPAL ELECTION PRECINCTS DEFINED. 
    The municipal election precincts contained in the municipal election districts referred to in Section 3.3 of this Charter shall mean the voting precincts as they lie within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington fixed by reference to and in accordance with the division of Cabell County into precincts by Order of the County Commission of Cabell County, West Virginia, in effect for all State and County elections on the effective date of this Charter and fixed by reference to and in accordance with the division of that portion of Wayne County lying within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington into precincts by Order of the County Commission of Wayne County, West Virginia, in effect for all State and County elections on the effective date of this Charter. Within three months after their election and qualification, the members of the first Council elected under this Charter, shall cause to be made and kept a detailed map of the City showing the boundaries of the municipal election districts and precincts described in Sections 3.3 and 3.4 of this Charter and each subsequent Council shall cause such map to be kept, maintained and revised as appropriate. The initial such map and any revised such map shall be approved and promulgated by Council in the same manner as provided for the adoption of ordinances. 
SECTION 3.5. - COUNCIL REDISTRICTING. 
    It shall be the duty of Council to redistrict the City, by ordinance, within a period of six months after the official publication by the United States Bureau of the Census of the population of the area embraced by the City as revealed in such official census. Each municipal election district shall be made to contain as nearly as practicable, consistent with general law, an equal number of municipal residents and an equal number of qualified electors of the City as determined from the registered voters at the last general municipal election. In addition, Council shall not create or establish a municipal election district that is not compact and contiguous and in compliance with Chapter 3, Article 1, Section 6 of the Official Code of West Virginia. In no case shall Council fail to pass a redistricting ordinance, if necessitated by the provisions of this Charter, later than six months preceding the primary election or any regular election in which a seat on Council is at stake. If, at the commencement of the six month period prior to such election, Council shall have failed to redistrict the City as herein required, the members of Council shall forfeit all further compensation until such ordinance shall have been lawfully adopted; and no funds shall issue for such compensation which would ordinarily have accrued during the period of noncompliance. Within the limits established above, Council may redistrict the City by ordinance at any more frequent intervals it may deem appropriate based upon any other more timely information that may become available. 
SECTION 3.6. - QUALIFICATIONS. 
    Prior to his or her election, all members of Council shall be citizens of the United States and the State of West Virginia, shall be a qualified elector and resident of the City and of his or her respective district and shall, during his or her term of office remain a resident of the district from which he or she is elected or has been appointed to represent; provided, however, no redistricting of the City shall affect the term of any Council member during his or her then existing term of office. A Council member shall not, during his or her term of office, hold any other public office, be a member of any political executive committee nor be an employee of the City. 
SECTION 3.7. - ORGANIZATION OF COUNCIL; OFFICERS; RULES; EMPLOYEES; MEETINGS. 
    Council shall meet in the Council chambers at City Hall for organization at 7:30 p.m. local time on the Monday next following the date its members assume office, at which time it shall elect one of its members as Chairperson and one of its other members as Vice-Chairperson, both of whom shall serve at the will and pleasure of Council. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and shall, together with all other Council members, have the right to vote in Council. In the event of the Chairperson's absence, disability, or disqualification to act, the Vice-Chairperson shall act as Chairperson. A majority of the total number of Council members shall constitute a quorum for any purpose not requiring more than a majority vote of Council. Council shall determine and adopt its own rules governing its officers and employees, for the organization of committees and respecting the transaction of its business; except that, whenever in the conduct of any business of Council, a vote is required by Council, all members present shall vote on the issue, question, motion, resolution or other business and no vote of abstention, disqualification, pass or other similar such vote shall be permitted except as provided by Charter or general law. Council shall meet regularly on the second and fourth Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m. local time in the Council Chambers at City Hall, excepting only when a regularly scheduled Council meeting shall occur on a legal holiday. Council shall, in that event, meet at such time as prescribed by Section 14.8 of this Charter, but not less frequently than herein prescribed. Special meetings may be called at any time, upon reasonable notice by the Mayor or the Chairperson of Council, and shall be so called by the Chairperson upon the request of a majority of all members of Council. The requirement of reasonable notice, may be satisfied by delivering to each member of Council a written notice of the time, place and purpose of the special meeting in the method provided by law for the service of process in a civil action at least twelve hours prior to the time set for the meeting or by such other method as Council may by ordinance provide. No other meetings of Council, except as herein provided, shall qualify for any purpose under this Charter. Council may designate the City Auditorium, or such other appropriate and convenient location, as the Council Chambers for purposes of conducting its regular meetings and any special meetings that may be called pursuant to the provisions herein. 
(Ord. 2-8-93) 
SECTION 3.8. - CITY CLERK. 
    Council shall appoint a City Clerk who shall give notice of its meetings, keep the journal of its proceedings, authenticate by his or her signature and record in full, in a book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions and perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter, Council, or general law. The City Clerk shall serve at the will and pleasure of Council. 
SECTION 3.9. - ORDINANCES; PROCEDURE. 
    Every act of Council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Prior to the enactment of any ordinance, the Council shall cause notice of the proposed adoption of said ordinance to be published as a Class I-O legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of general law; the notice shall state the subject matter and general title or titles of such proposed ordinance, the date, time and place of the proposed final vote on the adoption of the ordinance, and the place or places within the City where such proposed ordinance may be inspected by the public. A reasonable number of copies of the proposed ordinance shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and be made available for public inspection. Said notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. All other procedures for enacting ordinances shall be performed in the manner provided in Chapter 8, Article 11 of the West Virginia Code. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
SECTION 3.10. - COUNCIL MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC. 
    The meetings of Council shall be open to the public; provided, however, Council may hold a closed, executive session, for the purpose of discussing any matter authorized by law; and also provided the procedure used to hold such executive session conforms to the requirements of Chapter 6, Article 9A of the Official Code of West Virginia, together with any other applicable law. 
SECTION 3.11. - COUNCIL TO BE JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS. 
    Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its members, consistent with the provisions of this Charter and general law, and for such purpose Council shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require production of records. 
SECTION 3.12. - CREATION OF DEPARTMENTS OR OFFICES; CHANGE IN DUTIES. 
    Council may create, change or abolish offices, departments, divisions, boards or agencies, other than the offices, departments, divisions, boards and agencies created by this Charter. Either Council or the Mayor may assign additional functions or duties to offices, departments, divisions, boards or agencies established by Council or by this Charter, but the Mayor may not discontinue such duties or functions without the approval of Council. Neither the Mayor nor Council shall discontinue or reassign to any other office, department, division, board or agency any function or duty assigned by this Charter to a particular office, department, division, board or agency. 
SECTION 3.13. - VACANCIES IN COUNCIL. 
    If a Council member absents himself or herself from forty or more percent of the meetings scheduled in accordance with Section 3.7 herein in any twelve month period, ceases to possess any of the qualifications required by this Charter, becomes physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent that he or she is unable to properly perform the functions of the office or is convicted of a felony or any crime involved moral turpitude, he or she shall be disqualified from holding the office of Council member and such office shall thereby become vacant and shall be so declared by Council forthwith. Any Council member may be removed from office under the provisions of general law. If a Council member absents himself or herself from forty or more percent of Council meetings as provided herein, such absence shall, ipso facto, constitute neglect of duty. If a vacancy on Council shall occur as aforesaid or by reason of death, resignation, removal or other cause, such vacancy shall be filled as follows: The remaining members of Council shall select a citizen with requisite qualification by a majority vote of its remaining members at a meeting held not less than fifteen nor more than thirty days following the declaration of such vacancy, who shall be a resident of the same district as that in which the Council member resided whose seat was vacated. The person so appointed shall hold office for the unexpired term or until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified. In the event Council shall fail to choose a qualified successor, as provided herein, the Mayor shall appoint a person with the requisite qualifications to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term or until his or her successor has been elected and qualified. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 3.14. - COMPENSATION. 
    Each member of Council shall receive the sum of three hundred dollars for each Council meeting scheduled and attended pursuant to Section 3.7 herein; provided, however, the annual compensation of any Council member shall, in no event, exceed the sum of seven thousand two hundred dollars per annum. Council shall, by ordinance, address itself to the issue of compensation for the Mayor and Council members at least once every four fiscal years, commencing with action by Council prior to the fiscal year ending June 30, 1988, and the resulting ordinance shall not become effective for one year from its adoption. Thereafter, Council shall address and so act upon the issue by the end of each fourth fiscal year. If Council should fail to act on the issue within the time prescribed herein, the members of Council shall receive no further compensation until such ordinance shall have been adopted and no funds shall issue for such compensation which would ordinarily have accrued during the period of noncompliance. In no case shall any change in the salary of Council members or of the Mayor become effective during the current term of any Council member or Mayor. In no event shall any Council member receive compensation for any meeting which he or she did not attend. 
(Ord. 12-27-04) 
SECTION 3.15. - CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES. 
    Council shall, within five years of the effective date of this Charter and at least every eight years thereafter, cause to be prepared a Code with an adequate index containing all ordinances of general application which are appropriate for continuation as law. Such Code may be prepared by the City Attorney or Council may contract for its preparation by professional persons or by organizations experienced in the revision and codification of ordinances or statutes. When the Code, or any general revision thereof, shall have been prepared, Council shall cause copies of the same to be prepared and made available for public distribution. No ordinance approving such Code or revision shall be adopted until ninety days have elapsed following the date on which Council shall have noted in its official journal the availability of copies of such proposed Code to the public nor until compliance with all applicable law. The Code and general revisions thereof need not be printed in the official journal, but Council shall cause the Code and revisions to be published and distributed to the public at such reasonable price as may be established. All ordinances of general application, adopted after the approval of the Code, shall be adopted as amendments to the Code, shall indicate the section numbers to be assigned to the text of such ordinance in the Code and shall be indexed accordingly therein. Until such Code is prepared, adopted and distributed, the City Clerk shall make available to any person requesting it, at a cost to be fixed by Council, copies of all presently effective City ordinances and all ordinances which may be subsequently adopted. 
SECTION 3.16. - INVESTIGATIONS; POWERS TO CONDUCT. 
    Council shall have power to conduct investigations of the operation of any office, department, division, agency or board administering the affairs of the City and of any subject upon which it may legislate. Council shall have power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses and compel the production of records pertinent to any investigation conducted pursuant to this section of the Charter. 
SECTION 3.17. - IMPEACHMENT POWERS. 
    Council shall have authority to initiate impeachment proceedings, by resolution, against the Mayor, member of Council or against any appointee of the Mayor, by a two-thirds vote of the members of Council. A three-fourths vote of the members of Council shall be required to convict any person so impeached. Conviction under this section shall be grounds for removal from office in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or general law. In the event an impeachment resolution is adopted by Council, as specified herein, it shall state with clarity and particularity each offense of which the person is accused, in terms sufficient to constitute due and proper notice to such person of the nature of the offense or offenses charged. 
SECTION 3.18. - APPROVAL OF APPOINTEES; VETO POWER. 
    Unless otherwise provided by general law, Council shall have power to veto, by a two-thirds vote of its members, any appointee designated by the Mayor to any office, department, or division provided for in this Charter, so long as such veto power is duly exercised within thirty days from receipt by Council, of notice of the Mayor's designated appointee. If Council fails to act within the time period prescribed herein, such designated appointee shall be deemed approved by Council. 
SECTION 3.19. - EXECUTION AND ENFORCEMENT. 
    Council shall hold the Mayor accountable for the execution and enforcement of those provisions of the Charter pertaining to the Mayor's non-discretionary duties. Alternate remedies failing, Council may on a majority vote of the entire Council require the Mayor to forfeit all further compensation until such provisions shall have been lawfully executed; and no funds shall issue for such compensation which would ordinarily have acccrued during the period of noncompliance. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
ARTICLE FOUR - CITY ATTORNEY 

SECTION 4.1. - QUALIFICATIONS, SELECTION AND TENURE. 
    There shall be a City Attorney who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of West Virginia, who shall have practiced therein for at least five years, he or she shall be a resident and qualified elector of the City and duly qualified to practice before the Circuit Courts of Cabell and Wayne Counties. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council and may be removed by the Mayor only with the approval of Council. The City Attorney shall serve for a term not to extend beyond the term of the Mayor appointing him or her. 
SECTION 4.2. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The City Attorney shall perform all duties and exercise all powers which shall be imposed or conferred upon him or her by this Charter, Council, or the Mayor. Except as otherwise provided by law, he or she shall act as attorney for Council, the Mayor and municipal boards or commissions for which legal counsel has not otherwise been provided. At the direction of the Mayor, the City Attorney shall also act as attorney for any other municipal officer or employee in connection with the performance of his or her official duties. Upon request, he or she shall furnish Council, the Mayor and any municipal board or commission making a written request therefore a written opinion upon any question of law concerning or affecting the affairs of the City. Except where other legal counsel is provided as herein set out, the City Attorney shall prosecute all actions for and defend all actions against the City; prosecute all cases brought before or appealed from the Municipal Court; and maintain and preserve as permanent records of the City Attorney's office all legal files, records and papers pertaining to the legal affairs of the City for which he or she is responsible. The City Attorney shall also conduct such investigations as he or she shall deem necessary concerning the facts in any litigation in which he or she acts as attorney for the City, the Mayor, the Council, any municipal board, agency or commission, or any municipal officer or employee. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 4.3 - ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEYS. 
    The City Attorney may recommend and the Mayor may employ one or more attorneys to assist the City Attorney in the discharge of his or her official duties. Such Assistant City Attorney or Attorneys shall possess the same qualifications, except as to the length of professional experience, as the City Attorney and under the direction and supervision of the City Attorney, shall assist the City Attorney in his or her duties. 
SECTION 4.4. - SPECIAL COUNSEL. 
    Whenever the exigencies of the business of the City require, either the Mayor or the Council shall have power, within the limits of available budgeted funds, to employ special counsel to represent either the Mayor or the Council as the case may be in the performance of their respective official duties, or in the prosecution or defense of litigation in which the Mayor or the Council is involved. Such employment shall be governed by written agreement with the employed attorney, which agreement shall define the compensation to be paid, the work to be performed by the attorney, the term of employment, and the circumstances under which the agreement may be terminated by either party to the agreement. This section will not abrogate the rights of the City or its insurance carriers under the terms of any contract of insurance. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
ARTICLE FIVE - MUNICIPAL COURT 

SECTION 5.1. - JURISDICTION. 
    There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have criminal jurisdiction over violations of City ordinances, the criminal jurisdiction of a Magistrate of the State of West Virginia and such other jurisdiction, authorized by law. 
SECTION 5.2. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE, QUALIFICATIONS. 
    The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of West Virginia. He or she shall have practiced law in the State for at least five years, shall be a resident and qualified elector of the City and admitted to practice before the Circuit Courts of Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia. 
SECTION 5.3. - METHOD OF SELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE. 
    The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor for a term which shall not extend beyond the term of the Mayor appointing him or her. 
SECTION 5.4. - ACTING MUNICIPAL JUDGE. 
    In the event of the temporary absence of the Municipal Judge, the Mayor shall serve as Acting Municipal Judge or shall appoint a person with the same qualifications required of the Municipal Judge, to serve as Acting Municipal Judge, during such absence. 
SECTION 5.5. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE, POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The Judge of the Municipal Court shall preside over the Municipal Court and, with respect to offenses over which the Municipal Court has jurisdiction, he or she shall have all the powers and duties which a Magistrate has with regard to violation of the criminal law of the State of West Virginia. The Municipal Judge shall have power to issue warrants, upon complaint under oath of any person or officer, for the arrest of anyone charged with any municipal offense within the jurisdiction of the Court or for search and seizure in connection with violation of a municipal ordinance. The Municipal Judge shall try and determine all cases over which the Court has jurisdiction and, within the limits prescribed by ordinance or general law, shall have power to punish by fine, imprisonment or both. The Municipal Judge shall have power to summon persons or subpoena witnesses for the trial of any case before the Court, to compel the attendance of police officers of the City or to require the Chief of Police to enforce all judgments or orders entered by the Court in the exercise of its powers. In Municipal Court proceedings for the recovery of fines or for the enforcement of penalties fixed by ordinance or other law, the Court shall, so far as applicable, conform to the provisions of general law governing civil proceedings before a Magistrate of the State of West Virginia. The Municipal Judge shall have such other powers and duties as Council may by ordinance provide pursuant to general law. 
SECTION 5.6. - MUNICIPAL COURT, PROCESS. 
    All warrants and other process and orders of the Municipal Court shall be signed by the Municipal Judge and may be directed to the Chief of Police, to be executed by him, her or by one of his or her subordinates at any place within the police jurisdiction of the City. The officer executing any such warrant, process or order shall have the same liability as a County Sheriff of the State of West Virginia in the performance of like duties or services. 
SECTION 5.7. - FINES AND FEES. 
    All fines and fees received by the Municipal Court shall be paid over to the Department of Administration and Finance to be disposed of as prescribed by ordinance or general law. 
ARTICLE SIX - TAXATION 

SECTION 6.1. - TAXING POWERS PRESERVED. 
    The City shall have every power to tax, license, franchise and charge which it had immediately prior to the effective date of this Charter, including the powers given to it under the Official Code of West Virginia. The City shall continue to impose and collect every tax, license, franchise, fee and charge which is being imposed by the City immediately prior to the effective date of this Charter, until the same is revised, modified or repealed by Council. 
SECTION 6.2. - CONSTRUCTION. 
    The powers of the City under this Article shall be construed liberally in favor of the City and the specific mention of particular powers in this Article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this Article. 
ARTICLE SEVEN - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

SECTION 7.1. - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS; QUALIFICATIONS, SELECTION AND TENURE. 
    There shall be a Department of Public Works the head of which shall be the Director of Public Works who shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The Director of Public Works shall be a person of proven executive and administrative ability, may be a professional engineer registered by the State of West Virginia and shall have training and experience in the field of public works. 
(Ord. of 4-27-09; Ord. of 8-11-14(4), § 1) 
SECTION 7.2. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    Under the direction and control of the Mayor, the Director of Public Works shall, except as otherwise provided by general law: Supervise construction, repair and maintenance of all streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways; direct the operation, repair and maintenance of all municipal public works; and perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by this Charter, the Mayor or Council. 
SECTION 7.3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS. 
    With the assistance of the City Engineer, as hereinafter provided, the Director of Public Works shall issue permits for and conduct inspections of buildings, construction, plumbing, electrical, elevator and other building installations. 
SECTION 7.4. - CITY ENGINEER; QUALIFICATIONS, SELECTION AND TENURE. 
    Within the Department of Public Works, there may be a City Engineer who shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The City Engineer shall be a professional engineer registered by the State of West Virginia and shall have experience and training in the field of municipal engineering. 
(Ord. of 4-27-09) 
SECTION 7.5. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The City Engineer shall: Act as engineering adviser to the Mayor, Council and municipal agencies, commissions and boards unless otherwise provided by law; provide engineering services for the City in the construction, purchase and maintenance of its facilities, public works and equipment, except such services for the City as are performed by independent contractors or assigned to other offices, departments or agencies of the City and to the extent that such services are performed by independent contractors, to inspect and certify, prior to acceptance thereof or payment therefor, the satisfactory performance of all work done for the City by independent contractors; supervise and regulate the issuance of permits for construction; supervise and regulate the inspection of buildings, construction, electrical, plumbing, elevator and other building installations; maintain and preserve, as custodian for the City, all records, plats, maps, specifications, and similar documents pertaining to the public works, property, improvements and streets of the City; and furnish upon request, at such fee as may be established by ordinance, certified copies, of any such material pertaining to the engineering affairs of the City for which he or she is responsible. 
ARTICLE EIGHT - PLANNING AND ZONING 

SECTION 8.1. - PLANNING COMMISSION. 
    There shall be a Huntington Planning Commission which shall consist of not less than five nor more than fifteen citizens all of whom shall be residents of the City. Council shall establish, by ordinance, the exact number which shall compose the Commission. The members of the Commission shall be appointed and possess the qualifications established by Chapter 8A, of the Official Code of West Virginia and shall hold their office for the terms prescribed by said law. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(2) ; Ord. of 7-27-15(1) ) 
SECTION 8.2. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The Commission established herein shall be governed by Chapter 8A, of the Official Code of West Virginia and shall have all powers and duties prescribed by said law, this Charter and ordinance in conformity therewith. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(2) ; Ord. of 7-27-15(1) ) 
SECTION 8.3. - VACANCIES. 
    A vacancy shall be deemed to exist on the Commission whenever any member shall die, resign, be removed, fail to meet the requirements of Section 14.17 of this Charter or cease to possess any other qualification required by this Charter or general law. 
SECTION 8.4. - MEETINGS. 
    The Commission shall meet at such times as prescribed by general law and by its rules, but not less frequently than once every other month. All meetings of the Commission at which any final action is taken shall be open to the public and the Commission shall provide by its rules a method whereby citizens of the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such meeting in regard to any matter then under consideration. A permanent written record of its resolutions, findings and determinations shall be maintained by the Commission and shall be available to the public upon request. A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for any purpose not requiring more than a majority vote. 
SECTION 8.5. - DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    There may be a Director of Planning who shall be appointed by the Commission. The Director shall be qualified by special training and experience in the field of city planning. He or she shall provide technical advice to the Commission, may also be designated its executive secretary and shall perform such other duties as the Commission, Mayor or Council may direct. 
SECTION 8.6. - CONTINUITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION. 
    The Planning Commission heretofore established shall continue to operate as though authorized under the terms of Chapter 8A, of the Official Code of West Virginia. All action lawfully taken prior to the adoption of this Charter is hereby validated and continued in effect until amended or repealed in the manner provided herein or by general law. The membership of the existing Commission shall continue until changed by general law, ordinance or this Charter. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(2) ; Ord. of 7-27-15(1) ) 
SECTION 8.7. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTION. 
    The Commission shall prepare a comprehensive plan and submit it to Council for its consideration and action. Thereafter, the Commission shall submit to Council its amendments to the comprehensive plan for consideration and action; provided, however, if Council shall fail to act upon said matters the Commission submits to it within ninety days after the date that such plan or amendments thereto shall have been first submitted, the same shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 8.8. - EFFECT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. 
    Before final action shall be taken by Council on the location or design of any street, park, parkway, playground, public memorial, public building, structure or any other public area or project, the Commission shall have previously submitted to Council a written report with recommendations regarding same. Such reports shall also contain a statement as to whether such project is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 8.9. - PLAN AND PLATTING CONTROL. 
    To the extent authorized by general law, the Commission shall have control of plans and plats of land within the City and beyond the territorial limits thereof as far as is reasonably necessary to protect the City against inadequately planned streets, highways, sewers and territory; provided, however said control shall not apply to land outside the City over which platting control is in some other authority. All plans, plats and replats of land, laid out in building lots and streets, intended to be dedicated to public use, shall be submitted to the Commission for its consideration and no such plan, plat or replat shall be of any legal effect or filed in the offices of the Clerk of the County Commission and the County Assessors of Cabell or Wayne Counties, depending on the county wherein the platted land lies, until such plan, plat or replat shall have endorsed upon it the fact that it has been first submitted to the Commission and by the Commission duly approved; provided, however, that official acceptance of streets and all other rights-of-way intended to be dedicated to public use shall be submitted to City Council by resolution for City Council's approval. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 8.10. - OFFICIAL MAP. 
    Council shall, by ordinance, establish an official map of the City which shall indicate the location of all existing public streets and such other data as Council may deem appropriate. 
SECTION 8.11. - MODIFICATION OF OFFICIAL MAP. 
    After the establishment of an official map, all street locations, plats or replats approved by Council shall be deemed amendments to the official map and shall be placed thereon. 
SECTION 8.12. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeals consisting of five members, appointed in the manner provided by Chapter 8A, of the Official Code of West Virginia. Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall possess the qualifications prescribed by said law and shall be appointed for terms established therein. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(2) ; Ord. of 7-27-15(1) ) 
SECTION 8.13. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be governed by and shall have all powers and duties prescribed by Chapter 8A, of the Official Code of West Virginia, this Charter and ordinance in conformity therewith. In addition however, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have power to employ independent legal counsel to aid in the performance of its duties. 
( Ord. of 4-13-2015(2) ; Ord. of 7-27-15(1) ) 
SECTION 8.14. - CONTINUITY OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals heretofore established shall continue to operate as though authorized under the terms of Chapter 8A, of the Official Code of West Virginia. All action lawfully taken prior to the adoption of this Charter is hereby validated and continued in effect until amended or repealed in the manner provided by general law. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(2) ; Ord. of 7-27-15(1)) 
ARTICLE NINE - DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE 

SECTION 9.1. - CITY MANAGER; QUALIFICATIONS, SELECTION AND TENURE. 
    There shall be a Department of Administration and Finance the head of which shall be the City Manager who shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The City Manager shall be a person of proven executive and administrative ability. 
(Ord. of 8-11-14(2), § 1) 
SECTION 9.2. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    Under the supervision, direction and control of the Mayor, the City Manager shall have supervision and control of the work and management of the Division of Finance, Division of Purchasing, Division of Personnel, Division of Data Processing and such other duties as the Mayor may require of him or her. 
(Ord. of 8-11-14(2), § 1) 
SECTION 9.3. - FINES AND FEES SHALL BE PAID TO DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE. 
    All fines and fees received by any officer or employee of the City shall be paid over to the Department of Administration and Finance daily or at intervals Council may specifically prescribe. 
SECTION 9.4. - DIVISION OF FINANCE, DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION OF FINANCE, QUALIFICATIONS. 
    There shall be a Division of Finance the head of which may be the Director of the Division of Finance. The Director of the Division of Finance shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have experience in budgeting and financial control. 
SECTION 9.5. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The Director of the Division of Finance shall have authority and shall be required to: Collect or provide for the collection of all taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City and receive all other moneys payable to the City, except as otherwise provided by general law; maintain custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the City and deposit funds in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of Council or, if no such resolution be adopted, in such depositories as may be designated by the Mayor; supervise the disbursement of all moneys and control all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; maintain a general accounting system for the City and each of its offices, departments, divisions and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department, division and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the City budget each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations chargeable against it and the unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each office, department, division and agency of the City to be made daily or at such intervals as he or she may deem expedient; except as otherwise provided by general law, maintain custody of all investment funds of the City, or in possession of the City in a fiduciary capacity, and of all bonds and notes of the City and receive and deliver City bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; supervise all special assessments for the City or any of its agencies and give notice of special assessments as may be required by law; prepare all municipal bond issues; assist the Mayor as he or she may require in the preparation of monthly and yearly financial reports and in the preparation of the budget; conduct or provide for the conducting of a complete and accurate annual physical inventory of all City owned equipment of the initial purchase value of one hundred dollars or more; provided, however, Council may, by ordinance, provide for the increase or decrease of the purchase value amount herein specified; and perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by this Charter, ordinance or general law. 
SECTION 9.6. - ACCOUNTING SUPERVISION AND CONTROL. 
    The Director of the Division of Finance shall also have authority and shall be required to: prescribe the forms of receipts, requisitions, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by the offices, departments, divisions and agencies of the City; examine and approve all contracts and other documents by which the City incurs financial obligation; inspect, audit and approve, before payment, all purchase orders, bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidence of claims, demands or charges against the City; and inspect and audit any account or record of financial transaction which may be maintained in any office, department, division or agency of the City, apart from or subsidiary to, the accounts kept in the office of the Director of the Division of Finance. 
SECTION 9.7. - DIVISION OF PURCHASING; DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION OF PURCHASING, QUALIFICATIONS. 
    There shall be a Division of Purchasing the head of which may be the Director of the Division of Purchasing who shall have knowledge and experience in the field of municipal purchasing. 
SECTION 9.8. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The Director of the Division of Purchasing shall have authority and shall be required to: Contract for and purchase all supplies, materials, equipment and services required for each office, department, division or agency of the City; prepare or maintain, endorse and publish specifications with respect to supplies, materials and equipment required by the City; inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment to determine their quality, quantity and conformity with specifications and provide for the distribution thereof to the appropriate office, department, division or agency; have charge of storerooms and warehouses; and transfer to and between offices, departments, divisions and agencies or sell surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, materials and equipment. 
SECTION 9.9. - COMPETITIVE BIDDING. 
    Before the Director of the Division of Purchasing shall make any purchase or contract for supplies, materials or equipment, he or she shall give ample opportunity for competitive bidding under such rules and regulations as Council shall prescribe; provided, however, Council shall not except any contract, purchase or sale from the requirement of competitive bidding. 
SECTION 9.10. - DIVISION OF PERSONNEL, DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION OF PERSONNEL, QUALIFICATIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    There shall be a Division of Personnel the head of which may be the Director of the Division of Personnel who shall be experienced in personnel management and whose powers and duties shall be prescribed by Council. 
SECTION 9.11. - PERSONNEL POLICY. 
    Employment, appointments and promotions in the administrative service of the City shall be made according to merit and fitness. No person in the employment of the City or seeking employment with the City shall be appointed, employed, compensated, promoted, reduced, removed or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his or her race, sex, religion, age, handicap or national origin. 
SECTION 9.12. - PERSONNEL POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR. 
    The Mayor, or his or her subordinate, shall cause to be prepared, and timely reviewed and revised, personnel rules which shall be considered by Council and adopted as proposed, or amended by Council and adopted, by ordinance, or referred to the Mayor for additional study and resubmission. The rules shall provide: for the classification of all City positions based on the duties, authority and responsibility of each position with adequate provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted; methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment, employment or promotion; the hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for sick and vacation leave; the policy and procedure governing persons holding provisional appointments; the policy and procedure governing relationships with employee organizations; the policy regarding in-service training programs; grievance procedures, including procedure for the hearing of grievances and for the reduction in force and removal of employees; and any other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of the City personnel system. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, whenever it is deemed necessary, the officer or body having authority to appoint an officer or employee may appoint a temporary officer or employee; provided, however, such temporary appointment shall not extend beyond a term of one hundred twenty days. There shall be no extension of any temporary appointment. 
(Ord. of 8-11-14(5), § 1) 
SECTION 9.13. - PERSONNEL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL. 
    Except as otherwise provided by general law or this Charter, Council shall fix the salaries of City employees and officers and may, by ordinance, define the duties of any City officer or employee. Neither Council nor any member thereof shall direct, interfere or obstruct the appointment or removal of any City employee, except an employee whom Council is authorized to employ and remove under the provisions of this Charter or general law. Except for the purpose of inquiry, Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Mayor and neither Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the Mayor either publicly or privately. Violation of the provisions of this section by any Council member shall constitute official misconduct. Nothing herein contained however, shall prohibit any Council member from bringing to the attention of the Mayor any fact or circumstance which may indicate misconduct or deficiency on the part of any personnel. 
SECTION 9.14. - EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT AND BENEFIT FUND. 
    Council may, by ordinance, establish and provide for the maintenance of any employee retirement and benefit fund in accordance with general law; provided, however, until amended or repealed, all existing ordinances concerning pensions and pension funds shall continue in full force and effect and nothing contained herein shall in any way affect the continuation or validity of any pension already being paid or funded by the City. 
SECTION 9.15. - RESTRICTIONS. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, no person who holds an elected public office shall, at the same time, be an employee or an elected or appointed officer of the City. 
SECTION 9.16. - PROHIBITIONS. 
    Except as otherwise provided by general law, no person in city government service shall directly or indirectly solicit any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political purpose whatever from any person holding a position or in the employ of City government and except for the Mayor and members of Council, no employee of the City shall take any active part in the management or promotion of any political party or political campaign. Any person who willfully violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to such punishment as Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe and such person shall, for a period of five years, be ineligible for any municipal appointment or employment and if he or she is an officer or employee of the City at the time of such violation, he or she shall forfeit the office or position he or she holds. 
SECTION 9.17. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION. 
    In accordance with general law, Council shall provide, by ordinance, for an Affirmative Action Program for any or all positions of City employment. 
SECTION 9.18. - DIVISION OF DATA PROCESSING, DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION OF DATA PROCESSING, QUALIFICATIONS. 
    There shall be a Division of Data Processing the head of which may be the Director of the Division of Data Processing who shall be a person of training and experience in the fields of data processing and computer sciences. 
SECTION 9.19. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The Director of the Division of Data Processing shall have authority and shall be required to provide all computer and other data processing services required by any office, department, division or agency of the City. 
ARTICLE TEN - BUDGET AND FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

SECTION 10.1. - FISCAL YEAR. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July of each calendar year and end on the last day of June of the following calendar year. 
SECTION 10.2. - SUBMISSION OF BUDGET AND BUDGET MESSAGE. 
    On or before the fifteenth day of February of each year, the Mayor shall submit to Council the budget for the next fiscal year and an accompanying message. In addition, within sixty days from the beginning of each fiscal year, the Mayor shall ascertain the true carry-over balance of accounts of the City and shall submit to Council amendments to the budget reflecting same. 
SECTION 10.3. - BUDGET MESSAGE. 
    The Mayor's budget message shall explain the budget, both in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs. It shall outline proposed financial policies of the City for the next fiscal year, describe important features of the budget, indicate all major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues together with the reason for such changes, summarize the City's debt position and include such other material as the Mayor deems desirable. 
SECTION 10.4. - BUDGET. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and activities for the next fiscal year and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such form and contain such information as the Mayor deems desirable or Council may require. In organizing the budget the Mayor shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity and object. It shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents, shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the next fiscal year and shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate sections: proposed expenditures for current operations during the next fiscal year, detailed by office, department, division and agency in terms of their respective work programs and the proposed method of financing such expenditures; proposed capital expenditures during the next fiscal year detailed by office, department, division and agency when practicable, and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and anticipated net surplus or deficit for the next fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the City and the proposed method of its disposition. Subsidiary budgets for each City utility, board, agency or commission, giving detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to the budget. Without respect to the net surplus or deficit of any utility operated by the City, the total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income. 
SECTION 10.5. - CAPITAL PROGRAM. 
    The Mayor shall prepare and submit to Council a five-year capital program concurrently with the submission of the annual budget. The capital program shall include: a clear general summary of its contents; a list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. This information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 10.6. - COUNCIL ACTION ON BUDGET. 
    Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City the general summary of the budget together with a notice stating the times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public and the time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. After the public hearing, Council shall meet upon call by the Chairman for work sessions on the budget whether to adopt the budget with or without amendment. Provisions of Sections 3.13 and 14.17 pertaining to attendance at meetings shall apply to the budget work sessions. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit; provided, however, no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income. Council shall adopt the budget and enter its order adopting the statutory levy estimate and laying the levies on the third Tuesday of April in the fiscal year currently ending. In addition, Council shall also amend and revise the budget pursuant to the requirements of Section 10.2 of this Charter. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriation of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. 
(Ord. 5-8-89; Ord. 3-8-93) 
SECTION 10.7. - COUNCIL ACTION ON CAPITAL PROGRAM; NOTICE AND HEARING. 
    Council shall publish the general summary of the capital program concurrently with the publication of the annual budget in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. Council shall also publish therewith a notice stating the times and places where copies of the capital program are available for inspection by the public and the time and place for a public hearing on the capital program. Said public hearing shall be held not less than two weeks after such publication. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 10.8. - ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGET. 
    At such time as the Mayor shall specify, each department, division, office or agency shall submit work programs for the next fiscal year showing the requested allotments of its appropriation by periods within the year. The Mayor shall review and authorize such allotments, with or without revision, as early as possible in the fiscal year. He or she may revise such allotments during the year if he or she deems it desirable and shall revise them in accord with any supplemental, emergency, reduced or transferred appropriations, subject to any limitations imposed by general law. 
SECTION 10.9. - TRANSFERS OF APPROPRIATIONS. 
    Except as otherwise provided by general law, the Mayor may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department, division or agency. At the request of the Mayor and within the last three months of the budget year, Council may, by resolution, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department, division or agency to another. 
ARTICLE ELEVEN - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

SECTION 11.1. - GENERAL ELECTION LAWS TO CONTROL; TERMS OF OFFICERS. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of general law with respect to primary and general elections, so far as applicable, shall govern the method of nominating and electing the Mayor and members of Council, whose terms of office shall be concurrent and run for a period of four years, provided that, the terms of office for the Mayor and members of Council elected in the 1997 general election shall run for a period of three years and six months commencing on the first day of July, 1997, and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2000, and said term shall constitute a full term of office. All subsequent terms of office for the Mayor and members of Council shall run for a period of four years. 
SECTION 11.2. - MUNICIPAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES. 
    Each Municipal Executive Committee shall be composed of those members of the County Executive Committees of Cabell and Wayne Counties whose geographical jurisdiction as county executive committee members includes areas of the City. Municipal Executive Committee members shall serve for terms concurrent with their respective terms as county executive committee members. 
SECTION 11.3. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    Municipal Executive Committees shall be governed by Chapter 8, Article 5, Section 14, of the Official Code of West Virginia and shall have all powers and duties prescribed by said law, this Charter and ordinance in conformity therewith. 
SECTION 11.4. - PRIMARY ELECTIONS; TIME, PLACE AND CERTIFICATES OF CANDIDACY. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein concerning the first officers to be elected under this Charter, primary elections shall be held at the voting places in each of the election districts of the City for the purpose of nominating candidates for the office of Mayor and all Council members for the next general election on the first Tuesday in April in the year 1989 and on such day in each fourth year thereafter, provided that, beginning in the year 2000, the primary election shall be held on the same day in said year as the primary election for the State of West Virginia and the County of Cabell, and on such day in each fourth year thereafter. Any eligible person desiring nomination for any municipal elected office to be filled at such election shall file with the City Clerk a certificate declaring himself or herself to be a candidate for the nomination for office, together with payment of the filing fee as hereinafter prescribed, which certificate and filing fee must be received by the City Clerk after midnight on the first day of January next preceding the primary election day or if mailed, shall be postmarked after that hour and before midnight on the thirty-first day of January next preceding the primary election day or if mailed, shall be postmarked before that hour and which certificate shall be in form or effect as follows: 
"CERTIFICATE OF CANDIDACY 
    I, ____________ , hereby certify that I am a candidate for the nomination for and election to the office of ____________ to represent the ____________ district or city at-large (circle one), and the ____________ political party. I desire my name printed on the official ballot to be voted at the primary election to be held on the ____________ day of May, 20 ____________ . I hereby certify that I am a legally qualified elector of The City of Huntington, ____________ County, West Virginia; that my residence is located at ____________ in said City; that I am eligible to hold the said office; and that I am a candidate for said office in good faith. 
      CANDIDATE SIGNATURE         PRINT NAME       Signed and acknowledged before me this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
      Notary Public in and for Cabell or Wayne Counties, West Virginia, (or some other officer qualified to administer oaths)"       Every person who becomes a candidate in any such primary election shall, at the time of filing such certificate of candidacy, pay a filing fee as follows: a candidate for Mayor shall pay a fee of two hundred fifty dollars; a candidate for Council member shall pay a fee of sixty dollars. Council may, by ordinance, change the filing fees specified herein. No person shall file more than one Certificate of Candidacy in any primary election. 
SECTION 11.5. - GENERAL ELECTIONS; TIME AND PLACE. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein concerning the election of the first officers to be elected under this Charter, general elections for the offices of Mayor and all Council members shall be held on the first Tuesday in June in the year 1989 and on such day in each fourth year thereafter. The officers elected thereat shall assume office on the first day of July of the year in which such general election is held with their terms to expire as soon as their successors have been elected and qualified. Beginning in the year 2000, general elections for the offices of Mayor and all Council members shall be held on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November of such year, and on such day in each fourth year thereafter. The officers elected thereat shall assume office on the first day of January of the year next after such general election is held with their terms of office to expire as soon as their successors have been elected and qualified. 
SECTION 11.6. - FIRST OFFICERS UNDER THIS CHARTER; NOMINATIONS, ELECTION AND TERMS. 
    The first primary municipal election under this Charter shall be held on Tuesday, September 10, 1985, and the first general municipal election shall be held on Tuesday, November 5, 1985, to elect a Mayor and all Council members provided for under this Charter, whose terms shall begin on January 1, 1986, and expire as soon as their successors have been elected and qualified. The certificates of candidacy for such first primary municipal election shall be filed after midnight July 1, 1985, and before midnight on July 31, 1985, or if mailed, postmarked after midnight July 1, 1985, and before midnight July 31, 1985. The dates of all subsequent primary and general elections and filings of certificates of candidacy shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 11.1, 11.4 and 11.5 of this Charter. 
SECTION 11.7. - MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED. 
    No candidate for office shall be declared elected to any office under this Charter without having received as a candidate in the immediately preceding general election a majority of the votes cast for that particular office; provided, however, nothing herein shall apply to candidates for the office of at-large Council member. 
SECTION 11.8. - DETERMINATION OF ELECTION RESULTS. 
    Every qualified elector shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for the office of Mayor, one candidate for the office of district Council member to represent the district in which the qualified elector resides and two candidates for the office of at-large Council member. No person shall be elected to City office without being nominated in the manner provided herein at a partisan primary election to be held at the times and places specified in Sections 11.5 and 11.7 of this Charter. Immediately upon the expiration of the time for filing Certificates of Candidacy as required by Sections 11.5 and 11.7 of this Charter, the City Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the City the names of the candidates as they will appear on the ballot for the primary election. Names of the candidates for each nomination shall be placed on the ballot and in addition to the requirements of Section 11.10 of this Charter, the ballot shall contain instructions to vote for one nominee or candidate, except where the offices to be filled are for Council members at-large, in which case the instructions shall inform the voter to vote for two nominees or candidates. Voters shall be counted as provided by general election law. In primary elections, the candidates representing each political party and receiving the highest number of votes for nomination for Mayor and each district Council member office shall be nominated. As to the offices of at-large Council members in primary elections, the candidates representing each political party and receiving the highest and next highest number of votes with no more than one residing in any one of the municipal election districts set out in Section 3.3 of this Charter shall be nominated. In general elections the names of the successful nominees shall be placed on the ballot. In the general election, the nominee receiving the highest number of votes for election to the offices of Mayor and each district Council member office shall be elected. As to the offices of at-large Council members in general elections, the two nominees receiving the highest and next highest number of votes with no more than one residing in any one of the municipal election districts set out in Section 3.3 of this Charter shall be elected to the offices of Council member at-large. 
SECTION 11.9. - BALLOTS FOR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS. 
    The ballot to be used in all municipal elections shall contain the names of all candidates, specify their respective residence address and the election district wherein such residence is located together with their political party affiliation, unless such candidate is independent from any political party, in which case the ballot shall so state. The order in which names of nominees and candidates appear on the ballot shall be determined by drawing of lot. The City Clerk shall conduct said drawing in accordance with the requirements of general law. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to prepare the ballot for all regular and special municipal elections in accordance with the provisions of general law and not less than ten days prior to any election, the City Clerk shall cause a sample ballot to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the City. 
SECTION 11.10. - APPOINTMENT OF ELECTION OFFICIALS. 
    It shall be the duty of the Municipal Executive Committees to nominate qualified electors to serve as precinct election officials during a municipal election and the Municipal Executive Committees shall publicly encourage qualified electors to apply for nomination. The Municipal Executive Committees shall submit their nominations to Council not less than thirty days prior to the election in which the election officials are to serve. After determining that the qualified electors nominated by the Municipal Executive Committees possess the qualifications set forth by the general election laws of the State of West Virginia and not less than twenty days prior to the election in which the election officials are to serve, Council shall appoint the qualified persons nominated by the Municipal Executive Committees to serve as election officials in said election. In the event Council shall determine that any person nominated by the election commission is not qualified to serve as an election official or in the event any person appointed by Council shall refuse to serve as an election official, Council shall proceed to fill the vacancy at the earliest possible time by the same procedure. 
SECTION 11.11. - ELECTION OFFICIALS; COMPENSATION. 
    A uniform election board consisting of three commissioners and two clerks, shall be appointed as aforesaid to serve in each voting precinct of the City during a municipal election. Each election board shall be composed of one clerk representing each political party and at least one commissioner representing each political party. By resolution adopted not less than forty-five days prior to each election, Council shall determine the compensation to be paid to the precinct commissioners and clerks, but in no event shall such compensation exceed the compensation payable under general law to precinct election officials serving during a general election of the State of West Virginia. 
SECTION 11.12. - REGISTRATION RECORDS, RETURN OF BALLOTS AND SUPPLIES, CANVASSING RETURNS, ELECTION CONTESTS. 
    At least three days before a municipal election, the City Clerk shall procure from the Clerk of the County Commissions of Cabell and Wayne counties the necessary registration records and shall deliver them, together with all ballots and other election supplies, to the election official in each precinct designated by Council. The election officials shall, as soon as possible after the closing of the polls, return to the City Clerk the ballots, tally sheets, certificates of the result of the election, registration records, poll books, ballot boxes and any other election supplies. On the first Monday following the election, Council shall canvass the returns of the election and declare and certify the result within five days thereafter. In case of a contest, Council shall be judge of the election, nomination and qualification of all candidates. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Council may, by resolution, contract with the County Commissions of Cabell and Wayne counties or the Clerks thereof, to furnish, distribute, receive and store the ballots and other election supplies, or any part thereof, and to provide facilities for the canvassing of ballots. 
SECTION 11.13. - USE OF VOTING DEVICES. 
    In addition to any other requirements for the conduct of municipal elections, Council shall contract with the County Commissions of Cabell and Wayne counties for the use, in all municipal elections, of any electronic, mechanical or other voting devices available to, owned by or used by such counties for the conduct of county, state and national elections. 
SECTION 11.14. - REGULATIONS OF ELECTIONS. 
    Council shall make regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter, for the proper conduct of municipal elections and for the prevention of fraud in such elections. 
SECTION 11.15. - QUALIFIED ELECTOR DEFINED. 
    The term "qualified elector" as used in this Charter shall mean a citizen having the qualifications required by general law to vote in the City and who is at that time registered to vote. 
ARTICLE TWELVE - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

SECTION 12.1. - INITIATIVE. 
    Qualified electors of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to Council and if Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a City election; provided, however, such power shall not extend to the budget, capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees. 
SECTION 12.2. - REFERENDUM. 
    Qualified electors of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by Council of any adopted ordinance and if Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a City election; provided, however, such power shall not extend to the budget, capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees. 
SECTION 12.3. - PETITIONS. 
    Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least ten percent of the total number of qualified electors at the last general municipal election. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil in the handwriting of the signer and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation, the full text of the ordinance proposed and shall cite by title the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that he or she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. Except as may be otherwise provided by general law, referendum petitions must be filed within thirty days after adoption by Council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
SECTION 12.4. - PROCEDURE. 
    There shall appear on all petitions the names and addresses of three qualified electors who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Any one of the three qualified electors or an attorney-at-law acting on their behalf, may file such petitions by delivering the assembled instrument to the City Clerk together with a designation of one address, of one such elector or the attorney-at-law, to which all notices are to be sent and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing by title the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Within twenty days after the petition is filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee at the address so provided, by certified mail. A petition certified insufficient may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend with the City Clerk within two days after receiving the copy of his or her certificate and files a supplemental petition upon additional papers within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplemental petition shall comply with the requirements of Section 12.3 and within five days after it is filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the designated individual by certified mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitions' committee does not elect to amend or request Council review under this section within the time required, the City Clerk shall promptly present his or her certificate to Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file with the City Clerk a request that it be reviewed by Council. Council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it and Council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall nevertheless be subject to judicial review. Whenever required, the burden of proof shall be on the City Clerk to establish the insufficiency of any petition. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon judicial review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose, except in the case of referendum when the applicable time limit has expired. 
SECTION 12.5. - REFERENDUM PETITIONS; SUSPENSION OF EFFECT OF ORDINANCE. 
    When a referendum petition is timely filed with the City Clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when there is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, the petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, Council repeals the ordinance or upon final certification of the results of the City election favoring the ordinance sought to be repealed. 
SECTION 12.6. - ACTION ON PETITIONS. 
    When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided for the enactment of ordinances or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the electors of the City. The election on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty days and not later than one year from the date of the final Council vote thereon. If no regular City election is held within the period prescribed in this section, Council shall provide for a special election. Otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that Council may provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
SECTION 12.7. - RESULTS OF ELECTION. 
    If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances adopted by Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
SECTION 12.8. - POWER OF RECALL. 
    Qualified electors, authorized to vote for the particular office, shall have the power to recall the Mayor or any member of Council whether elected by popular vote or selected to fill a vacancy and may exercise such power by filing with the City Clerk a petition signed by qualified electors, authorized to vote for the particular office, equal in number to at least twenty percent of the total number of qualified electors, authorized to vote for the particular office, at the last general municipal election. The petition shall meet the applicable requirements of Sections 12.3 and 12.4 of this Charter, shall contain a demand for the removal of the subject officer or officers and shall contain a general statement of the reasons for which the removal is sought. 
SECTION 12.9. - ELECTION UNDER RECALL PETITION. 
    If the petition is certified sufficient in accordance with the applicable requirements set out in Sections 12.3 and 12.4 of this Charter, Council shall cause a special election to be held not less than thirty days nor more than ninety days from the date of such certification, unless a general municipal election shall occur within one hundred twenty days from such date. The published notice of such election shall contain the reasons for demanding the recall in not more than two hundred words and a justification by the subject officer within the same limits; provided, however, if the petition seeks to recall more than one officer, each may provide a justification of not more than two hundred words. Ballots shall be in the following form: 
"Shall be removed (from Council) (as Mayor) of The City of Huntington? 
____________ For the recall of ____________ 
____________ Against the recall of ____________ ." 
    Upon certification of the results of the election, if a majority of those voting on the question have favored recall, the office of the individual so recalled shall be vacant. 
SECTION 12.10. - FILLING VACANCY CAUSED BY RECALL. 
    When a vacancy occurs as the result of a recall election or when an officer resigns after a recall petition certified by the City Clerk to be sufficient is presented to Council, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Charter relating to the filling of vacancies in the respective office involved. 
SECTION 12.11. - LIMITATIONS ON RECALL. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against any officer within six months after he or she takes office nor within six months prior to the end of his or her term. No officer shall be subjected to more than one recall election during a term of office. 
ARTICLE THIRTEEN - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 

SECTION 13.1. - INTERIM CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. 
    On and after the effective date of this Charter, the City Manager, as heretofore constituted, shall exercise such powers and duties as are given the chief executive by this Charter. The City Manager shall so serve until the first Mayor under this Charter shall have been elected and qualified, at which time his or her appointment and office shall terminate. 
SECTION 13.2. - CONTINUITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL AND OFFICES. 
    All persons holding other administrative positions in City government at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in such position and in the performance of their duties until dismissed or removed by the Mayor or other empowered authority. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the City by general law shall, if such office, department or agency is abolished by this Charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by Council, unless otherwise provided in this Charter. 
SECTION 13.3. - CONTINUITY OF GOVERNING BODY. 
    On and after the effective date of this Charter, the members of Council, as heretofore constituted, shall exercise such powers and duties as are given to Council by this Charter generally, and for conducting the first election for Mayor and members of Council as set out in Article Eleven of this Charter. Such Council shall so serve until members of the first Council under this Charter shall have been elected and qualified, at which time their terms of office shall terminate. 
SECTION 13.4. - CONTINUITY OF OFFICES, DEPARTMENTS, DIVISIONS, AGENCIES OR BOARDS. 
    Any other office, department, division, agency or board provided for in this Charter with a name or with powers and duties the same or substantially the same as those of an office, department, division, agency or board heretofore existing shall be deemed to be a continuation of such heretofore existing office, department, division, agency or board until changed by competent authority. Any provision in the law, rule, regulation, contract, grant or other document relating to such heretofore existing office, department, division, agency or board shall, so far as not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, apply to such office, department, division, agency or board provided for by this Charter. 
SECTION 13.5. - TRANSFER OF RECORDS AND PROPERTY. 
    All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office, department, division, agency, board or part thereof, all the powers and duties of which are assigned to any other office, department, division, agency or board by this Charter, shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department, division, agency or board to which such powers are so assigned. If part of the powers and duties of any office, department, division, agency, board or part thereof are by this Charter assigned to another office, department, division, agency or board, all records, property and equipment relating exclusively thereto shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department, division, agency or board to which such powers and duties are so assigned. 
SECTION 13.6. - SUCCESSION IN INTEREST; PENDING ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS. 
    The City of Huntington, as successor in interest to the present municipal corporation of the same name, shall succeed to, own, possess and enjoy all property and all right, title and interest of every kind and nature vested in or belonging to such municipal corporation at the time this Charter becomes effective. No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time this Charter takes effect, brought by or against the City or any office, department, division, agency, board or officer thereof, shall be affected by the adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained. No such action or proceeding shall abate by reason of the fact that functions, powers and duties of any office, department, division, agency, board or officer party thereto may under this Charter be assigned or transferred to another office, department, division, agency, board or officer, but in that event, the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the office, department, division, agency or board to which such functions, powers and duties have been assigned or transferred under this Charter. 
SECTION 13.7. - EFFECT ON EXISTING LAW. 
    All existing ordinances and resolutions, administrative rules, regulations and practices, if not inconsistent or in conflict with this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or modified by competent authority. All ordinances, resolutions, administrative rules, regulations and practices that are inconsistent or in conflict with this Charter shall, unless sooner repealed or modified, continue in full force and effect for a period of sixty days and at the end of that period shall, to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict, be of no further force or effect. 
ARTICLE FOURTEEN - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION 14.1. - CHIEF OF POLICE. 
    The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council to serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The Chief of Police shall be a person of proven administrative ability with experience and training in law enforcement. Subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor, the Chief of Police shall be responsible for the supervision and administration of the Police Department and shall require of all police officers the proper discharge of their duties. He or she shall see to the protection of property and the preservation of peace, order and public safety throughout the City and shall cause all violators of City ordinances and of general law to be apprehended and brought to trial before the Municipal Court or other proper tribunal. Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, the Chief of Police shall also perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by this Charter, ordinance or general law. 
SECTION 14.2. - CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT. 
    The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council to serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be a person of proven administrative ability with experience and training in the suppression and prevention of fires. Subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor, the Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for the supervision and administration of the Fire Department and shall require of all firemen the proper discharge of their duties. He or she shall make such inspections of buildings and property throughout the City as may be necessary to discover fire hazards and shall take all proper measures to eliminate such hazards and shall keep an accurate record of all fires, inspections and fire hazards within the City. Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, the Chief of the Fire Department shall also perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by this Charter, ordinance or general law. 
SECTION 14.3. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Per election of 11-6-2012, section 14.3 has been eliminated. Formerly, such section pertained to residency requirement. 
SECTION 14.4. - RESIDENT DEFINED. 
    As used in this Charter, the term "resident" shall mean any individual who maintains a usual and bona fide place of abode within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington or within the boundaries of the territory referred to in this Charter, as the context may require, together with the intent to maintain said usual and bona fide place of abode for an indefinite period of time in the future. 
SECTION 14.5. - BONDS. 
    Before entering the duties of their office, each member of Council, the Mayor, the City Clerk, each member of the Election Commission and each Director or Chief of a City office, department, division or agency and such other personnel as Council may require, shall give bond for the faithful performance of their duties, payable to the City of Huntington, in such amounts and with such corporate surety as may be approved by Council. Council may provide for obtaining a blanket bond covering all City officers and employees, designating specific officers or employees whose bond shall be in excess of the amount of the blanket bond. The premiums on such bond or bonds shall be paid by the City after it has been ascertained that the premiums are not in excess of the premium schedule filed by the bonding company with the Commissioner of Insurance of West Virginia. All bonds shall be subject to approval by the City Attorney as to form and substance and when so approved, shall be endorsed with his or her signature. 
SECTION 14.6. - SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word of this Charter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity, constitutionality or application of any other portion of this Charter. 
SECTION 14.7. - REFERENCE TO LAW. 
    A reference contained in this Charter to the Official Code of West Virginia or a provision thereof, to any constitution, or a provision thereof or to general law shall be construed to mean the respective law as it exists on the effective date of this Charter or as it may thereafter be amended. Where additional parts are added to the subject matter of such law referred to in this Charter, the reference shall include such additional parts. 
SECTION 14.8. - SATURDAYS, SUNDAYS AND LEGAL HOLIDAYS. 
    Whenever the provisions of this Charter or any ordinance, rule, administrative regulation or order pursuant thereto, require that a meeting be held or that an act be done on any particular day of the month or within any period of time prescribed or allowed, if that day or the last day occurs on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the following day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday shall be deemed to be the one intended. 
SECTION 14.9. - LOSS OF QUALIFICATION BY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE; VACANCY CREATED. 
    In the event that any officer or employee of the City shall, subsequent to his or her election, appointment or employment, cease to possess any of the requisite qualifications provided for his or her office or position, there shall thereupon exist a vacancy in such office or position, to be filled pursuant to this Charter or other applicable law. 
SECTION 14.10. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST. 
    Any City officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct, indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the City or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the City or to any contractor supplying the City, shall make known that interest to the Mayor and Council and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his or her capacity as a City officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any City officer or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his or her office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale voidable by the Mayor or Council. A "substantial financial interest" as used herein, shall be deemed to be an interest amounting to more than five percent of the particular business enterprise or contract. 
SECTION 14.11. - CENTRAL GARAGE AND MOTOR POOL. 
    There shall be a central garage and motor pool system by which all vehicles and equipment shall be registered, stored, and controlled utilizing the most current technology and management programs. The Mayor or his or her designee shall establish and promulgate such rules and regulations respecting such system as to effect the greatest possible economy and efficiency in its operation. No vehicle shall be permanently assigned to any office, department, division, board, agency or individual thereof without prior approval by Council; provided, however, such approval by Council shall not be required of any vehicle assigned to the police or fire departments. Notwithstanding any provision contained herein, no City-owned vehicle shall be taken beyond the corporate limits of the City except in the performance of authorized official City business. 
(Ord. of 8-11-14(3), § 1) 
SECTION 14.12. - PUBLIC ACCESSIBILITY OF RECORDS. 
    All records and documents of every office, department, division, board, commission or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen, representative of a civic organization or representative of the press at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by Council; provided, however, records and documents authorized to be excluded under Chapter 29B, Article 1, of the Official Code of West Virginia or other applicable law shall not be subject to the requirements of this section. 
SECTION 14.13. - SALARY LIMITATION. 
    No officer or employee of the City shall be entitled to receive compensation for more than one position in City government even though he or she performs the duties of two or more positions therein. 
SECTION 14.14. - OATH, QUALIFICATION. 
    Before entering the duties of their office, each member of Council, the Mayor, the City Clerk, each member of the Election Commission and each Director or Chief of a City office, department, division or agency and such other personnel as Council may require, shall take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the City Clerk: 
    "I, ____________ , solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the constitution of the United States of America and of the State of West Virginia, and that I will, in all respects, observe the provisions of the Charter, ordinances, resolutions, regulations and rules of the City of Huntington, and will faithfully discharge the duties of ____________ to the best of my skill and judgment." 
    When such officer or employee shall have taken and filed such oath with the City Clerk and shall have given such bond as may be required, he or she shall be considered as having qualified for the position to which he or she was elected, appointed or hired; provided, however, if any person so elected, appointed or hired shall not qualify in the manner herein prescribed within fifteen days after he or she shall have been officially declared elected, appointed or hired, said office or position shall by reason thereof, become vacant. 
SECTION 14.15. - AUTHORITY TO CONVEY. 
    Except as otherwise provided by general law, Council may authorize the Mayor or other officer of the City to execute all deeds, conveyances and other instruments on behalf of the City of Huntington and such person shall have authority to execute such instruments in the name of the City of Huntington. 
SECTION 14.16. - ARTICLE AND SECTION TITLES. 
    The article and section titles or headings in this Charter are intended for convenience only and shall be construed a mere "catchwords" to indicate the content of the article or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be a part of the article or section. 
SECTION 14.17. - GENERAL ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT. 
    In addition to any attendance requirement contained in this Charter, if a member of any agency, board or commission authorized or created pursuant to this Charter or delegated authority by other law, absents himself or herself from forty or more percent of the regularly scheduled meetings of said agency, board or commission in any twelve month period, his or her office, position or appointment shall become vacant and such vacancy shall be filled according to applicable law. 
SECTION 14.18. - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    This Charter shall become effective July 1, 1985. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
SECTION 14.19. - AMENDMENTS. 
    This Charter may be amended as provided in Chapter 8 of the Official Code of West Virginia, as amended, as therein provided. 
(Ord. 5-8-89) 
APPENDIX A - ELECTION DISTRICTS 
    The nine municipal election districts shall be as follows: District One shall be composed of precinct numbers one A of Cabell County, West Virginia, together with precinct numbers fifty-nine, sixty, sixty-one and sixty-three of Wayne County, West Virginia, with a total population of Five Thousand and Eighty-eight (5,088); District Two shall be composed of precinct numbers one, two, three and five of Cabell County with a total population of Five Thousand One Hundred Eighty (5,180); District Three shall be composed of precinct numbers nine and eleven of Cabell County with a total population of Five Thousand Five Hundred Fifty-four (5,554); District Four shall be composed of precinct numbers four, six, six W and seven of Cabell County with a total population of Five Thousand Five Hundred Seventy (5,570); District Five shall be composed of precinct numbers ten, twelve, sixteen, seventeen and twenty-one of Cabell County with a total population of Six Thousand Five Hundred Ten (6,510); District Six shall be composed of precinct numbers thirteen, fourteen, eighteen, twenty-two, twenty-five and thirty-one of Cabell County with a total population of Six Thousand Five Hundred Eighty-seven (6,587); District Seven shall be composed of precinct numbers twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-eight and twenty-nine of Cabell County with a total population of Five Thousand Four Hundred Fifty-seven (5,457); District Eight shall be composed of precinct numbers nineteen, twenty and twenty-six of Cabell County with a total population of Five Thousand Two Hundred Twenty-six (5,226); District Nine shall be composed of precinct numbers twenty-seven, thirty, thirty-two, thirty-three and thirty-four zero one of Cabell County with a total population of Six Thousand Three Hundred Three (6,303). 
    The total population count as per Year 2000 Census report is Fifty-one Thousand Four Hundred Seventy-five (51,475). 
(Ord. 10-27-03) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Adoption 
Date Election Date Section Section 
this Charter 12-30-08 2.6  4-27-09 7.1 7.4 11- 6-12       Rpld 14.3  8-11-14(2) 11- 4-14 1 9.1, 9.2  8-11-14(3) 11- 4-14 1 14.11  8-11-14(4) 11- 4-14 1 7.1  8-11-14(5) 11- 4-14 1 9.12  4-13-15(2)  5-26-15 8.1, 8.2 8.6 8.12-8.14  7-27-15(1)  5-26-15 8.1, 8.2 8.6 8.12-8.14  
PART ONE - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
CHAPTER ONE - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 99 - PEOPLE'S BILL OF RIGHTS 

99.01 - PREAMBLE. 
    The people have inalienable rights that exceed the needs of the City of Huntington and are granted through the individual's ability to reason, right to be free, to question the governors of the City of Huntington and to act as sovereign have by declaration, rights recognized by Council as the basis of American Democracy and our chosen way of life. The essence of American Freedom is founded upon individual liberties, not granted by government, but retained by the sovereign. And therefore, the following actions affect the City of Huntington, council, mayor and its subordinate agencies, boards and committees. 
(Ord. 10-13-03) 
99.02 - THE RIGHT OF FREE SPEECH. 
    The people shall have the right to express their opinion and the City of Huntington shall not attempt to regulate content of speech. The City of Huntington, council, mayor and its subordinate agencies, boards and committees may regulate time, place and manner of speech, but not content. 
(Ord. 10-13-03) 
99.03 - RIGHT TO KEEP AND BEAR ARMS. 
    The people shall have the right to keep and bear arms within the City of Huntington under the laws of the United States of America and the State of West Virginia. 
(Ord. 10-13-03) 
99.04 - RIGHT TO DUE PROCESS. 
(a)  No one shall be compelled to testify against oneself or ones spouse nor be denied the rights of due process under the laws of the United States of America and the State of West Virginia. 
(b)  No person shall be held by the City of Huntington greater than 24 hours without charges being proffered. 
(c)  An individual has a right to be secure in his person from unreasonable searches and seizures and no warrants shall be issued without probable cause supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the items to be seized and the places to be searched. 
(d)  No stops, searches or inquiry can be made of any person based upon their race, religion, sex, age or ethnic origin. 
(Ord. 10-13-03) 
99.05 - RIGHT OF PRIVACY. 
(a)  No governmental agency shall invade the privacy of a person located within the City of Huntington by electronic eavesdropping, intercepting Internet transmissions, or by opening correspondence transmitted electronically, lest he be an officer of the law who has obtained a specific warrant for such searches. 
(b)  No law enforcement agency shall seek to invade any telephone, computer transmission or personal correspondence that is private between the sender and receiver without a warrant. 
(1)  Each invasion shall constitute a separate act and the individual perpetrating the act and those directing the invasion shall be equally subject to the penalty as stated in section 99.99. 
(Ord. 10-13-03) 
99.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any violation of Article 99 shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. 10-13-03) 
ARTICLE 101 - CODIFIED ORDINANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, § 3.15. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; maximum penalty permitted, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-5(57); authority to impose penalties, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-2(11). 

101.01 - DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS. 
(a)  All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the Municipality as revised, recodified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, chapters, articles and sections shall be known and designated as the Codified Ordinances of Huntington, West Virginia, 1986, for which designation "Codified Ordinances" may be substituted. Code, chapter, article and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances. 
(b)  All references to codes, chapters, articles and sections are to such components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic Code". Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "section" followed by the number, such as "Section 101.01". 
101.02 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless otherwise expressly provided or the context otherwise requires: 
(a)  Council means the legislative authority of the municipality. 
(b)  County means Cabell or Wayne County, West Virginia, as applicable to that portion of the city located therein. 
(c)  Land or lands and real estate or real property include lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all rights thereto and interests therein except chattel interests. 
(d)  Laws of the State includes the Constitution of the State and the Constitution of the United States, and treaties and laws made in pursuance thereof. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-10) 
(e)  Municipality or City means the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
(f)  Offense includes every act or omission for which a fine, forfeiture or punishment is imposed by law. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-10) 
(g)  Owner, when applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property. 
(h)  Person or whoever includes corporations, societies, associations and partnerships. 
(i)  Personal estate or personal property includes goods, chattels, real and personal, money, credits, investments and the evidences thereof. 
(j)  Preceding, succeeding or following used in reference to any section or sections of an article means next preceding, next succeeding or next following that in which such reference is made. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-10) 
(k)  Premises, as applied to property, includes land and building. 
(l)  Property or estate embraces both real and personal estate. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-10) 
(m)  Public place includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement. 
(n)  Registered mail includes certified mail. 
(o)  State means the State of West Virginia or any department, division, commission, board, educational or other institution of the State. 
(p)  Street includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways, viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality. 
(q)  Tenant or occupant, as applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises alone or with others. 
(r)  Written or in writing includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing, engraving, writing or otherwise. But when the signature of any person is required, it must be in his own proper handwriting, or his mark, attested, proved or acknowledged. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-10) 
101.03 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. 
(a)  General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(b)  Gender and plural. A word importing the singular number only may be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; a word importing the plural number only may be applied to one person or thing as well as to several; and a word importing the masculine gender only may be applied to females as well as males. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-10) 
(c)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, or if the last be a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday it shall also be excluded. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-3) 
(d)  Joint authority. Words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more persons confer such authority upon a majority of them, and not upon any less number. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-10) 
(e)  Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto. 
101.04 - REPEAL OF REPEALING ACT; EFFECT OF REPEAL. 
(a)  When a law which has repealed another is itself repealed, the former law shall not be revived without express words for that purpose. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-9) 
(b)  The repeal of a law, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any offense committed, or penalty or punishment incurred, before the repeal took effect or the law expired, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform as far as practicable to the laws in force at the time such proceedings take place, unless otherwise specially provided; and that if any penalty or punishment be mitigated by the new law, such new law may, with the consent of the part affected thereby, be applied to any judgment pronounced after it has taken effect. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-8) 
(c)  The repeal by any provision of the Codified Ordinances of an ordinance validating previous acts, contracts or transactions shall not affect the validity of such acts, contracts or transactions, but the same shall remain as valid as if there had been no such repeal, but no further. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-11) 
101.05 - CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES. 
    When reference is made to any section or group of sections of the Codified Ordinances, such reference shall extend to and include any amendment of or supplement to the section or group of sections so referred to or any section or sections hereafter enacted in lieu thereof; and unless otherwise provided, whenever a reference to a section or group sections is made in any amendment or supplement to any section of the Codified Ordinances hereafter enacted, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the section or sections as the same shall then stand or as thereafter amended. 
    Whenever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in such reference. 
    References in the Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized under designated sections of the Codified Ordinances include, in every case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by the Codified Ordinances. 
    If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and the last number or letters in the series are deemed to be included. 
101.06 - ACTS BY AGENT OR DEPUTY. 
    When a section requires that an act be done by an officer or person, it shall be sufficient if it be done by his agent or deputy, unless it be such as cannot lawfully be done by deputation. (W. Va. Code, § 2-2-5) 
101.07 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. 
    If the provisions of different codes, articles or sections of the Codified Ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a whole. 
101.08 - SEPARABILITY. 
    Each section of the Codified Ordinances and every part of each section is an independent section and part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause does not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof. 
101.09 - CHARGES FOR COPIES OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES. 
(a)  Purpose. In accordance with Section 3.15 of the Official Charter of the City of Huntington, it is the purpose of Section 101.09 to establish reasonable fees and charges for the provision of access to or copies of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington to avoid the necessity of using general public funds of the city to subsidize special services and benefits to a record requester. 
(b)  Copying fee. A fee of $1 per page for the first page (one side) and $0.50 for every page thereafter (each side) shall be charged for photocopying the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials and equipment. A hardbound transcript of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington shall cost $250 each. A softbound transcript of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington shall cost $200 each. A copy of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington in electronic format shall cost $75 each. 
(c)  Payment. All fees charged under this section shall be paid to the city clerk unless the requester has established an account, for purposes of billing and payment, with the city. All fees shall be placed in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09) 
101.99 - GENERAL PENALTY. 
    Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each day any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE 103 - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Election of Mayor, § 2.2; election of council, § 3.3 et seq.; nominations and elections, Art. Eleven, Appx. A. 
State Law reference- Municipal elections, W. Va. Code, § 3-11-2a; municipal voting precincts, W. Va. Code, § 3-1-6; municipal precinct registration records, W. Va. Code, § 3-1-27; absentee voting in municipal elections, W. Va. Code, § 3-3-13; integration of municipal elections with systems of permanent; registration, W. Va. Code, § 8-5-13; special elections, W. Va. Code, § 8-5-15a. 

103.01 - ABSENTEE VOTING REGULATIONS. 
    The provisions of West Virginia Code Article 3-3 are hereby adopted, by reference, by the city as the law to govern and control absentee voting in all elections to be held by the city; provided, however, that the following modifications shall be made to implement the provisions of the State Code so as to develop and provide a complete and satisfactory absentee system for the city: 
(a)  After each and every reference in such article to absentee voting because of absence from the county or being absent from the county, the words "and the City of Huntington" shall be inserted. 
(b)  The words "after regular business hours" in West Virginia Code § 3-3-2 shall mean after 5:00 p.m., local time, whether or not the municipal offices or the city clerk's office regularly closes at that hour. 
(c)  The application for absent voter's ballot set forth in West Virginia Code § 3-3-3, in addition to the requirements therein set forth, shall state that the applicant is or will have been a resident of the city for 60 days next preceding that date of the ensuing election. 
(d)  All references to the clerk of the circuit court of the county shall be interpreted as meaning the city clerk. 
(e)  At any election at which, under state law, the ballot for the election cannot be prepared except within 30 days of the election, the mailing of ballots required under West Virginia Code § 3-3-5 shall commence as promptly as possible after such ballots are available. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-3.1) 
103.02 - VOTER REGISTRATION. 
    The registration of voters and the use of registration books for use in municipal elections shall be governed by the permanent registration laws of the state; and the registration records of Cabell and Wayne Counties are hereby adopted for the several precincts in such counties which are situated within or partly within the limits of the city, as amended and corrected according to law, as the official registration records of the city for municipal elections. No person who is not registered on the permanent registration records of Cabell or Wayne County in a precinct which is wholly or partly within the corporate limits of the city, shall be permitted to vote at a municipal election. 
(1964 Code Sec. 1-13.1) 
103.03 - VOTING MACHINES. 
    Voting machines shall be used in the conducting of all municipal elections unless precluded or prohibited by operation of law. The clerk of the city is authorized and directed to make all necessary arrangements for use of voting machines in the conducting of any such election. 
(1964 Code Sec. 1-13.2) 
ARTICLE 105 - MUNICIPAL VEHICLES AND MOBILE EQUIPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Central garage and motor pool, § 14.11. 

105.01 - NAME OF CITY TO BE DISPLAYED. 
(a)  All city-owned motor vehicles and mobile equipment shall be plainly marked with the name "City of Huntington" and the number of such motor vehicle or piece of mobile equipment. Such lettering or marking shall be of a conspicuous color, and the letters thereof shall be not less than two inches high and not less than one inch wide and shall follow a general pattern or type of lettering as designated by the mayor. 
(b)  All cruiser cars and other motor vehicles or mobile equipment used by the police department shall also be so marked, except those cars that are operated by the detective bureau and used by that department for detective or secret work, which shall be marked on the inside of the motor vehicle on the instrument panel or other appropriate place plainly visible to persons in such automobile, with lettering similar to that required in subsection (a). 
(c)  All departments shall create a list by the 15th of each month requesting use of city vehicles for carriage of city employees to their residence or some other convenient location within the city limits of the City of Huntington when they are on call and/or duty other than normal working hours. 
(d)  At the determination of the chief of police a city police vehicle may be parked at a specified location to deter criminal activity and encourage a safer community. Upon authorization and placement of a police vehicle, the chief shall inform the mayor as to the location and purpose and expected results. 
(Ord. 1-22-01) 
105.02 - NUMBERS TO BE ASSIGNED. 
    The mayor shall assign a separate number to each motor vehicle and piece of motor equipment owned by the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-19) 
105.03 - TO BE USED ON CITY BUSINESS ONLY. 
    No city-owned motor vehicle or piece of mobile equipment shall be used except on business of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-20) 
105.04 - GOING BEYOND CORPORATE LIMITS. 
    No city-owned motor vehicle or piece of mobile equipment shall be taken outside the corporate limits of the city without permission or order for each particular trip so taken from the head of the department to which such motor vehicle or piece of mobile equipment is assigned, except police cars when in fresh pursuit. When such permission is granted, the procedure set out in this section shall be followed. 
    When the motor vehicle or mobile equipment is assigned to the police department, a written record shall be made to the desk sergeant showing time of departure, destination and reason for leaving the city. Upon the return a report shall immediately be made to such desk sergeant of the time of such return. 
    When the motor vehicle or mobile equipment is assigned to the fire department, a written record similar in form to that required for the police department shall be made at the office of the chief of the fire department. 
    When the motor vehicle or mobile equipment is assigned to the department of public works, a written record similar in form to that required for the police department shall be made to the clerk at the city garage. 
    All other persons duly authorized to leave the city in city-owned motor vehicles or mobile equipment who are assigned or work in the City Hall, shall make the report in manner and in form as required by the police department to the clerk at the city engineer's office, if available, and if not available, the report will be made to the police desk sergeant; and upon return the report will be made at the same place as the report was made when leaving. 
    The written records of the departure from the city of city-owned motor vehicles and mobile equipment shall be retained in the office of the head of the department to which such motor vehicle or mobile equipment is assigned for at least 60 days from the date of return from such trip. The head of each department shall be responsible for the proper making of such reports. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-21) 
105.05 - ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE. 
    The mayor shall enforce this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-22) 
105.06 - LEAVING CITY VEHICLES UNATTENDED. 
(a)  No person or employee of the city responsible for the care, safeguarding, use or operation of any motor vehicle belonging to the city, or to the possession of which the city is entitled, shall park, place or leave the vehicle unattended overnight upon or in any public street or alley in or out of the city limits, or upon or in any private alley, way or property, either in or out of the city limits, unless such place be designated, specified and described by appropriate regulation, signed by the mayor and filed with the city clerk, as a place authorized by him for the overnight storage of city-owned vehicular equipment. No city vehicle shall be taken outside of the city limits unless approved by a director or the mayor with exception of emergency vehicles answering a summons where life, limb or property of the public is at great risk. 
(b)  No person or employee of the city shall park or place any vehicle or vehicular equipment owned by the city or to the possession of which the city is entitled in any place which unreasonably exposes the equipment to undue risk of theft, pilferage, tampering, vandalism or improper or unauthorized use. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation shall encourage, aid, direct, assist or otherwise abet any other person in violating any of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The city employee designated by the mayor, from time to time, to be in charge of the city's motor pool shall keep a continuing and permanent record book assigning and naming the person or persons to whom any vehicle or vehicular equipment was last issued for use by such person or persons in the performance of his or their work assignments. 
(e)  Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of this section has been committed, the mayor or the city attorney may file an information for a warrant with the municipal court, which court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the case. 
(f)  Any city employee violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined $50 upon the first offense, second offense the employee shall be fined $100 and suspended five days without pay, and upon third offense the employee shall be terminated for gross negligence and will be subject to legal action, both criminal and civil. The city shall have the right to subrogate any and all claims caused while in violation of this ordinance and such violation shall be considered outside the scope of employment. In such instances where there is unauthorized use of a city vehicle, the city may deny insurance coverage to the employee driving the vehicle and can charge the employee reasonable rates for the use of said vehicle to include costs of any repair or recovery of the said vehicle to include legal fees and associated miscellaneous costs by the administration. 
(Ord. 1-22-01) 
ARTICLE 106 - CAPITAL ASSET POLICY 

106.01 - CAPITAL ASSET POLICY. 
(a)  The City of Huntington shall maintain a fixed asset accounting system. The fixed asset system shall maintain sufficient information to permit the following: 
(1)  The preparation of year-end financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(2)  Adequate insurance coverage. 
(3)  Control and accountability. 
(b)  Fixed assets are defined as those tangible assets of the city with (1) a useful life in excess of one year, (2) an initial cost equal to or exceeding $5,000, and (3) which the city intends to hold or continue in use over an extended period of time. If a single item does not meet the threshold amount, but is typically purchased in aggregate by the city, the finance division shall verify which items shall be classified as fixed assets and recorded at the time of purchase or acquisition. Further, some items may be identified as "controlled" assets that, although they do not meet all fixed asset criteria, are to be recorded on the fixed asset system to maintain control. 
(c)  Fixed assets shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Land. 
(2)  Land improvements. 
(3)  Buildings. 
(4)  Structures and improvements. 
(5)  Machinery and equipment. 
(6)  Furniture and fixtures. 
(7)  Vehicles. 
(8)  Infrastructure. 
(9)  Construction-in-progress. 
(10)  Transmission and distribution. 
(d)  Fixed assets shall be recorded at actual, or if not determinable, estimated purchase price or fair market value at the time of acquisition. The method(s) to be used to estimate such price or market value historical cost shall be established by the finance director. 
(e)  The finance director shall develop administrative guidelines to address the proper purchase, transfer, and disposal of fixed assets. Such assets shall be disposed of in such a manner as will be in the public interest and benefit the city. 
(1)  Disposition of real property and personal property. Disposition of real property and personal property shall be in accordance with section 107.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington or any subsequent ordinance in effect at the time of the proposed disposition. 
(f)  The finance director shall verify whether an expense should be recorded as an improvement to a fixed asset or maintenance cost. An improvement of a fixed asset significantly increases its value, life or capacity to serve, and should be capitalized and depreciated over its life. Maintenance restores a fixed asset to its original level of service and should not be capitalized. 
(g)  Depreciation is the allocation of the cost of a fixed asset over its estimated useful life. Depreciation shall be recorded for funded fixed assets using the straight line depreciation method. 
(h)  The following information shall be maintained for all fixed assets: 
(1)  Description (including whether the item was acquired in aggregate). 
(2)  Asset classification (land, building, equipment, etc.) 
(3)  Location. 
(4)  Purchase price/cost, or if not determined: 
A.  Estimated cost/purchase price, 
B.  Estimated fair market value, 
C.  Contract price (including all related charges to place the fixed asset in conditions or in its place for the intended use), or 
D.  Appraised value at the time of acquisition (if obtained by gift/donated). 
(5)  Vendor. 
(6)  Date purchased/acquired. 
(7)  Estimated useful life. 
(8)  Accumulated depreciation. 
(i)  This policy extends to all agencies of the city unless such agency has an approved board policy setting a capitalization threshold amount other than $5,000. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
ARTICLE 107 - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Division of purchasing, § 9.7 et seq.; conflict of interest, § 14-10. 
State Law reference- Purchasing, competitive bidding, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-10. 

107.01 - PURCHASING. 
(a)  The director of the division of purchasing shall make all purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and services as authorized by council in the manner prescribed by this section and subject to the limitations imposed by the Charter of the city and general law. 
(b)  The following terms, conditions and procedures shall be followed by the city and suppliers in the procurement of goods and services for the city: 
(1)  The director of the division of purchasing shall initiate the competitive bidding procedures, as set out in this section, sixty days prior to the expiration of any contract which requires the approval of council. Provided, however, that the mayor may waive the 60-day requirement if he finds such waiver to be necessary and in the best interests of the city. 
(2)  All purchases of supplies, materials and equipment and services shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged therewith; and such supplies, materials, equipment and services shall conform with specifications approved, established and enforced by the mayor. 
(3)  No purchase order shall be issued or contract executed, nor shall any other agreement purporting to obligate the city be entered into without a written approval signed by the director of the division of finance that there is sufficient unencumbered appropriation and allotment balance to cover the obligation. 
(4)  Before the director of the division of purchasing makes any purchase of or contract for supplies, materials and equipment, he shall give ample opportunity for competitive bidding under the general rules and regulations herein prescribed, and such further regulations as council may hereafter prescribe; nothing herein contained shall be construed as excepting individual contracts, purchases or sales from the requirement of competitive bidding, as required by the Charter. All such purchases, or the contracts for such purchases, shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder; provided, however, that any or all bids may be rejected in the manner and form prescribed in this article. 
(5)  "Split-bidding" is prohibited. The practice of "split-bidding" means the device of submitting multiple requisitions for the same supplies, materials, equipment or services where the sum of the cost of the several requisitions is equal to $15,000 or more, and splitting the department's requirements into several requisitions would thereby avoid the necessity for the city to require competitive sealed bids. The practice of split-bidding is hereby declared to be improper, illegal and against the public interest; and the head of the office, department or agency shall state on each requisition that such requisition represents the entire quantity presently known to be required and that the requisition is not a part of a device or scheme to avoid purchasing on competitive bidding or to otherwise evade the established purchasing procedures of the city. 
(6)  The city shall not accept the bid of any vendor or contractor who is in default on the payment of any taxes, licenses, fees or other monies of whatever nature that may be due the city from such vendor or contractor. 
(7)  A bidder, to qualify for an award of contract, shall have available experienced personnel to give adequate service on any equipment on which he submits a bid and shall maintain a supply of repair parts required for the maintenance of such equipment. 
(8)  Any capital expenditures, repairs, professional services or contracts for supplies costing more than $15,000 or any series of capital improvements, repairs, professional services or contracts for supplies constituting essentially a single project and costing in the aggregate more than $15,000 shall be executed by written contract except where such expenditure is authorized by council to be executed directly by the mayor in conformity with the detailed plans, specifications and estimates. All such contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after such public notice and competitive bidding as prescribed herein and after a public opening of bids as likewise provided herein. The mayor shall have the power to reject all bids and readvertise the same. Any alterations in any contract may be made when authorized by council upon the written recommendation of the mayor, and all contractors under the provisions hereof shall be required to give approved performance and payment bonds secured by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. 
(c)  Notice inviting bids shall be published as a class I legal advertisement. Such notice shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and written specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. Additional notice of such invitations to bid shall be posted on public bulletin boards in the municipal building. 
(d)  Bids shall be submitted sealed to the director of the division of purchasing and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Such bids shall be opened in public and in the presence of at least three persons, including a representative from the mayor and city clerk's office and at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids so received shall be posted on bulletin boards in the municipal building for public inspection, and sent to all bidders. This will be attested to by those present at the bid opening. 
(e)  Pursuant to the guidelines herein set out, the mayor shall have and hereby is granted the authority to reject any or all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract. 
(f)  In determining the lowest responsible bidder, as referred to in subsection (b)(4) hereof, in addition to price, the city shall consider the following non-exclusive factors in determining whether a bid is not only the lowest bid but the lowest responsible bid: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the services required along with the number of years bidder has been in business, familiarity with the project and bidder's record on similar projects; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference and whether bidder generally experiences cost overruns; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder and the continuity of the bidder's work force; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  Bidder's bonding record, compliance with Workers' Compensation laws, unemployment laws, federal and state prevailing wage laws, Fair Labor Standards Act, fringe benefit contribution requirements, safety laws and regulations and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  Bidder's compliance with completion details and the ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; 
(10)  Whether the bidder's work force is drawn mainly from area residents; 
(11)  The bidder's participation in a bona fide apprenticeship program approved by the U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and length of participation in said program; 
(12)  Bidder's involvement in a Drug Screening and Safety Program; 
(13)  Whether bidder furnishes hospitalization and pension benefits to their employees; 
(14)  Whether the bidder has a written non-discrimination policy in place; and 
(15)  Such purchase may be made from a vendor resident in the city if such bid does not exceed the lowest qualifying bid from a nonresident vendor by more than 4% of the latter such bid amount at the time the bid was submitted. A resident vendor is an individual, partnership, association or corporation maintaining an active bona-fide place of business within the city for a minimum of three years and maintaining therein a representative inventory of the commodities on which the bid is submitted, and in the case of a corporation, is duly qualified to do business and is in good standing under the laws of the state. 
All of the above factors, as supported by the accompanying contractor's qualification statement, will be considered by the City of Huntington in determining the "best" most qualified bid. No single criteria will be considered the controlling factor in determining whether a bid is, or is not, the "best" bid. If the recommended bid is not the lowest cost bid, all information as to why the recommended bidder was selected over the lowest bidder shall be presented to city council at the time the contract is on the council agenda for approval. 
(g)  The provisions of subsection (f) shall apply only to contracts for construction, reconstruction, demolition, repair, maintenance, paving or other similar activities which require approval of council exceeding $15,000. No contract, bid or project shall be divided, severed or otherwise altered to avoid the provisions of subsection (f) above. 
(h)  When deemed necessary, bid deposits shall be prescribed and noted in the public notices inviting bids. The deposit shall be in such amount as the director of the division of purchasing determines, and unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of the deposits where such have been required. A successful bidder shall forfeit any required deposit upon failure on his part to enter a contract within ten days after the award, if a specified time is not stated in the bid specifications. 
(i)  The mayor is hereby granted the authority to require payment and performance bonds before entering a contract, in such amount as he finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the procedures as set out in subsections (a) through (i) hereof, the director of the division of purchasing is hereby authorized with prior approval of the department of finance and administration of the state to purchase supplies and equipment for the city pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 8-12-10 when it is deemed that such purchases will result in a substantial saving to the city. 
(k)  Notwithstanding the procedures as set out in subsections (a) through (j) hereof, emergency purchases in the open market may be authorized by the mayor, in writing, for a department to purchase in the open market without filing requisition or estimate, specific commodities for immediate delivery to meet bona fide emergencies arising from unforeseen causes that relate to the health and safety of the public. A report of any such purchase, together with a record of the competitive bids, upon which it was based, shall be submitted at once to the mayor and council by the head of the department concerned, together with a full account of other circumstances of the emergency. 
For the purposes of this subparagraph, a bona fide emergency is hereby defined as a sudden and unexpected or unforeseen combination of occurrence, and circumstances resulting therefrom, which, for the protection of the public health or safety, demand immediate action or remedy, which constitute a pressing necessity, and which were not, and could not have been, reasonably anticipated in the exercise of reasonable judgment. 
(l)  Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, except for subsection (k) above, no purchasing contract shall be made or entered into by the mayor or by the purchasing officer of the city in any amount in excess of $15,000 without the approval of council of such purchase having been given prior to entering into such purchase contract. 
(m)  Within five days of the making of any emergency expenditures amounting, in the aggregate, to more than $15,000, the mayor shall report, in writing, the fact that such expenditures have been made. Such report shall be filed with the city clerk who shall promptly provide copies of the report to the members of council. Such report shall specify with particularity the amount of each expenditure, and to whom made, and shall be supported by copies of receipts and invoices relating thereto. The mayor shall also specify and describe in the report, with particularity, the facts which caused and constituted the emergency requiring such expenditures to be made. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
107.02 - SALE AND DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY. 
(a)  The mayor may require the director of the division of purchasing to transfer to or between departments supplies, materials and equipment. In the event any such transfer of supplies, materials and equipment shall exceed in value the sum of $15,000, the department head of the department making such transfer shall, through the office of the mayor, obtain advance approval for such transfer from council. The department head of the department making such transfer, when such transfer exceeds the sum of $15,000 shall also report such transfers through the mayor's office to council. When it is determined by the mayor that materials and/or equipment exist which are not needed by any city department, council may authorize the mayor to direct the sale thereof; and the proceeds from any sale or sales shall be deposited in the appropriate fund of the city. 
(b)  The director of the division of purchasing, duly authorized, may obtain competitive, formal or informal quotations for the sale and disposal of surplus, obsolete, unused materials or equipment. 
(1)  In any such event, the director of the division of purchasing shall cause notice of sale to be published as provided in W. Va. Code, § 8-12-18, giving a general description of the items to be sold or where bids are to be received and/or the time and place of the sale. 
(2)  Surplus is to be sold, as prescribed by W. Va. Code, § 8-12-18, to the highest and best bidder with the right retained by the city to reject any or all bids. 
(3)  At the time and place of sale of such surplus, sealed bids shall be submitted to the director of the division of purchasing and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Such bids shall be opened in public in the presence of at least three persons. Oral bids at a public auction may be considered by the director after giving proper notice of such fact. 
(4)  Depending on the nature of such surplus offered, the director of the division of purchasing may require that cash or a cashier's check in an amount equal to 15% of the price bid shall be deposited by the bidder at the time of making or submitting his bid. The person to whom any such bid is awarded, either by sealed bid or at public auction, shall consummate the purchase within five days from and excluding the day of the award of such bid. Should the successful bidder fail to consummate the purchase within the five-day period specified above, the cash deposit made by such bidder shall be forfeited to the city. 
(Ord. 12-28-09) 
107.03 - ASSISTANCE TO SMALL AND DISADVANTAGED BUSINESSES. 
(a)  As used in this article: 
(1)  "Disadvantaged business" means a small business which is owned or controlled by a majority of persons, not limited to members of minority groups, who have been deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive position in the economy because of social disadvantages. 
(2)  "Small business" means a business which is independently owned and which is not dominant in its field of operation or an affiliate or subsidiary of a business dominant in its field of operation. 
(b)  Assistance to small and disadvantaged businesses shall be by solicitation. The director of purchasing shall maintain a bidders list of small and disadvantaged businesses, and shall solicit those firms on such list for each procurement for which they are qualified. 
(Ord. 12-28-09) 
107.04 - APPLICABILITY TO MUNICIPAL AGENCIES. 
    This article shall, except as otherwise provided herein, govern all purchasing transactions of the city, including, but not limited to, the Big Sandy Superstore Arena, the Huntington Municipal Parking Board, the department of development and all other municipal agencies of the city including these sometimes referred to as "enterprise" organizations or as "special revenue accounts". 
(Ord. 12-28-09) 
ARTICLE 109 - OFFICIAL STANDARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Computation of time, § 101.03(c). 
State Law reference- Legal holidays, W. Va. Code, § 2-2-1; daylight savings time, W. Va. Code § 5-1-25; seal, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-1(1). 

109.01 - OFFICIAL SEAL. 
    The official seal of the city shall be in the form and design as set forth, delineated and described upon the copy annexed to the official copy of an ordinance adopted November 27, 1972, on file in the city clerk's office, and made a part hereof as fully as though incorporated herein. On such occasions that the same is reproduced other than by impression and/or in black and white, the same shall be reproduced only in the precise colors delineated on such official copy. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, imprint or reproduce such seal in any manner whatsoever without being authorized so to do by council. 
(1964 Code Sec. 1-18) 
ARTICLE 111 - INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Indemnification of officers, agents and employees, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-7. 

111.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide authority for the mayor with the concurrence of council by resolution or motion, to indemnify with city funds or provide liability insurance for any officer, agent or employee of the city. 
    It is the intent of this article to provide indemnification and liability insurance coverage as extensive as permitted by W. Va. Code, § 8-12-7, as amended, unless otherwise restricted or limited by this article. 
111.02 - INDEMNIFICATION. 
    The city shall indemnify all of its elected or appointed officers, agents or employees against any and all legal liability, including, but not limited to, expenses, costs, damages, judgments, fines, settlements, court costs, reasonable attorneys fees, and any other amounts actually and personally incurred in connection with, arising from, growing out of, by reason of or in any way connected with, any acts or omissions of the city, or its officers, agents or employees while acting within the scope of their official duties. 
    Such indemnification shall extend to any officer, agent or employee of the city who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party, to any proceeding by reason of the fact that such person is or was an officer, agent or employee of the city, without regard to the period of time in which such official duties were performed, and without regard to the fact that the performance of such official duties may have been professional in nature. 
    Such indemnification shall be provided to the officers, agents or employees of the city by the purchase of insurance as provided in section 111.03, or by the expenditure of funds from the general fund of the city as provided in section 111.04. 
111.03 - INSURANCE. 
    The mayor, with the concurrence of council, shall have plenary power and authority to contract and expend public funds for the purchase of one or more policies of public liability insurance, which may include professional liability insurance, providing the city and its officers, agents and employees, insurance coverage for any and all legal liability, including but not limited to, expenses, costs, damages, judgments, fines, settlements, court costs, reasonable attorneys fees, and any other amounts actually and personally incurred in connection with, arising from, growing out of, by reason of or in any way connected with, any acts or omissions of the city, or its officers, agents or employees while acting within the scope of their official duties. 
111.04 - EXPENDITURES FROM GENERAL FUND. 
    If the insurance coverage provided pursuant to section 111.02 is deemed to exclude an act or omission of the city or any of its officers, agents or employees, or if an insurance carrier refuses to provide coverage for the city or any of its officers, agents or employees for any reason, expenditures from the city's general fund shall be made for payment of any and all of the legal liability contemplated by section 111.02. 
111.05 - EXCLUSIONS. 
    No indemnification shall be made under this article to any officer, agent or employee of the city for: any conversion or diversion of public funds; any criminal act as defined by the laws of the United States, any state, municipality or other governmental body; any criminal act which could or does result in civil liability to any third party or the city; any act or omission committed by such officer, agent or employee while the same was insane or mentally incompetent; any amounts in settling or otherwise disposing of a threatened or pending proceeding without approval of the city; any expenses incurred in defending a threatened or pending proceeding which is settled or otherwise disposed of without approval of the city. 
    Provided however, none of the exclusions contained herein shall be interpreted to inure to the benefit of any liability or other insurance carrier of the city, unless specifically contained in the contract of insurance between the city and such carrier. 
111.06 - INDEMNIFICATION BY INDEPENDENT AGENCIES. 
    Any of the independent agencies of the city shall likewise have plenary power and authority to adopt a resolution at a regular or special meeting called for that purpose providing for the expenditure of the public funds of such agency to indemnify its elected or appointed officers, agents or employees for any acts or omissions while acting within the scope of their official duties in the manner and to the extent provided in this article. 
ARTICLE 113 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency services, W. Va. Code, Art. 15-5. 

113.01 - DEFINITION. 
    As used in this article, "emergency services" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military are primarily responsible, necessary to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, fire, flood or other natural causes. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-1) 
113.02 - POLICY AND PURPOSE. 
    In view of the possibility of local disasters resulting from enemy attack, fire, flood or other natural causes, and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety, it is hereby found desirable: 
(a)  To create an emergency services agency as authorized by law; 
(b)  To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities within the state and, if necessary and only by compact with the approval of the governor, the neighboring cities and counties of another state; 
(c)  To cooperate with the state government with respect to carrying out emergency services functions. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-2) 
113.03 - ADVISORY COUNCIL. 
    There is hereby created an emergency services advisory council, which shall consist of five residents appointed by the mayor subject to conformation by council, who shall advise the emergency services director on all matters pertaining to emergency services. The members of the advisory council shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for the reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-3) 
113.04 - DIRECTOR: APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES GENERALLY. 
    The mayor shall appoint a director of emergency services, who shall perform such duties as are imposed upon him by this article, and as are delegated to him when not contrary to the provisions of this article or other resolutions or ordinances of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-4) 
113.05 - DIRECTOR: POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The director of emergency services shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency services within the city and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with the emergency services agencies and organizations within the state and within the state government. The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the city organization for emergency services, subject to the direction and control of the mayor. 
    In performing his duties under this article, the director of emergency services is authorized to cooperate with the state government, with other cities and counties, and with private agencies in all matters pertaining to emergency services within the city and the state. 
    In performing his duties under this article, and to effect its policy and purpose, the director is further authorized and empowered: 
(a)  To make, amend and rescind the necessary orders, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article within the limits of the authority conferred upon him, with due consideration of the plans of the state government. 
(b)  To prepare a comprehensive plan and program for emergency services within the city, such plan and program to be integrated into and coordinated with the emergency services plans of the state government and of other cities and counties within the state to the fullest extent. 
(c)  In accordance with such plan and program for emergency services within the City, to procure supplies and equipment, to institute training programs and public information programs and to take all other preparatory steps including the partial or full mobilization of the emergency services organization in advance of actual disaster, to insure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces of emergency services personnel in time of need. 
(d)  To make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in the city as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the city in an emergency, and to plan for the most efficient use thereof. 
(e)  On behalf of the city, to enter into mutual aid arrangements with other cities and counties within the state, and also, with the approval of the Governor, with emergency services agencies or organizations of other states, for reciprocal emergency services aid and assistance in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. 
(f)  To delegate any administrative authority invested in him under this article, and to provide for the subdelegation of any such authority. 
(g)  To cooperate with the Governor and the state division of emergency services and with officials and agencies of other cities and counties within the state, in matters pertaining to the emergency services of the city and state. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-5) 
113.06 - APPROPRIATIONS AND GIFTS. 
    Whenever the federal or state government or any agency or officer thereof or any other person offers to the city services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of emergency services the city, acting with the consent of the Governor and through council, may accept such offer, and upon such acceptance, council may authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city, subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-6) 
113.07 - UTILIZATION OF EXISTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES. 
    In carrying out the provisions of this article, the director of emergency services is authorized to utilize such services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the city as may, in the judgment of council or the mayor, be reasonably provided under circumstances then existing. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-7) 
113.08 - APPOINTMENT AND AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC FALLOUT SHELTER MANAGERS. 
    The director of emergency services, with the approval of council, shall appoint managers for public shelters. In case of a national emergency, such public shelter managers shall open public shelters, take charge of all stocks of food, water and other supplies stored in the shelters, admit the public according to the community shelter plan and take whatever control measures are necessary for the protection and safety of the occupants. Shelter managers are authorized to use reasonable restraint against those who refuse to cooperate with the routine of shelter living under emergency conditions. No person shall refuse to carry out the orders of a public shelter manager in time of a national emergency. 
(1964 Code Sec. 9-8) 
ARTICLE 115 - PAYMENT OF MUNICIPAL FEES BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

115.01 - INTRODUCTION. 
    It is recognized that the mayor and the members of city council, as municipal civic leaders, should set an example of good citizenship. Part of being a good citizen is keeping current on payment of taxes and fees. Therefore, it is the intent of this council to hold the city's elected leaders to a higher standard and permit internal garnishments of the financial compensation of any elected municipal leader that fall significantly behind on municipal fees. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(4) ) 
115.02 - MUNICIPAL ARREARAGES. 
(a)  If the mayor or any member of council is found to be in arrears on his or her municipal service fees, refuse service fees, city service fees, franchise fees, and/or any other type of fees owed to the City of Huntington, the finance director, or his/her designee, shall cause a notice of impending garnishment to be sent to the delinquent elected official. The notice shall provide said elected official with a deadline not to exceed two weeks by which the official must respond. The notice shall also direct the official to the person and/or office responsible for receiving the response. If the arrearage is not resolved by the expiration of the deadline provided, the finance director shall withhold from said elected official's regular compensation up to 25% of the gross sum of every payout until such arrearage is brought current. 
(b)  The municipal accounts of the mayor and members of city council may be reviewed for arrearages at any time. However, at a minimum, the finance director, or his/her designee, shall cause the municipal accounts of the mayor and each city council member to be reviewed annually on or before December 31. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(4) ) 
115.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  Arrears or arrearage: A person shall be deemed to be in arrears if he or she has not paid a minimum of two payment periods. 
(b)  Payment period: A payment period is the regular time period wherein fees, taxes or a payment arrangement agreement are due, whether it be a month, a quarter, or a year. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(4) ) 
115.04 - EXCEPTIONS. 
    This section shall not apply to any elective official who is in a signed payment arrangement agreement with the legal department and is current under the terms of the agreement. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(4) ) 
CHAPTER THREE - LEGISLATIVE 
ARTICLE 121 - COUNCIL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Council generally, Art. Three; action on budget, § 10.6; action on capitol program, § 10.7; recall, Art. Twelve; oath, § 14.14. 
State Law reference- Open meeting law, W. Va. Code, Art. 6-9A; extraterritorial excise of powers, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-19. 

121.01 - SPECIAL MEETINGS OF COUNCIL; NOTICE REQUIRED; SERVICE OF PROCESS. 
    Special meetings of council may be called at any time, upon reasonable notice by the mayor or the chairperson of council, and shall be so called by the chairperson upon the request of a majority of all members of council. The requirement of reasonable notice may be satisfied by delivering to each member of council a written notice of the time, place and purpose of the special meeting in the method provided by law for the service of process in a civil action at least 12 hours prior to the time set for the meeting; or by transmission of such notice to each member of council by facsimile, provided, that, written confirmation of the receipt of the notice by facsimile by each member of council so notified is duly filed in the office of the city clerk at or before the time set for the special meeting; or by verbal communication of the time, place and purpose of the special meeting to each member of council by means of telephone, provided, that, such verbal communication shall be conveyed to each member of council by the city clerk or the assistant city clerk, and further provided, that, the city clerk or the assistant city clerk shall duly attest to such verbal communications by affidavit, in writing and under oath, and shall file such attestation affidavit in the office of the city clerk at or before the time set for the special meeting. The city clerk and the assistant city clerk shall be charged with the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. 9-24-96) 
ARTICLE 123 - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in article 123. This article has been established to provide a place for cross references and future legislation. 
Charter reference- Ordinance procedures, § 3.9; codification, § 3.15; initiative and referendum, Art. Twelve. 
State Law reference- Delegating discretion, W. Va. Code, § 8-11-2; penalty limitations, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-12-5(57), 8-11-1. 

CHAPTER FIVE - ADMINISTRATIVE 
ARTICLE 131 - MAYOR[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- General provisions, Art. Two; personnel powers and duties, § 9.12; budget duties, § 10.2 et seq.; recall, § 12.8 et seq.; oath, § 14.14. 

131.01 - SALE OR TRADE OF CITY PROPERTY BY MAYOR. 
    The mayor shall have authority from time to time, in his discretion, to sell, or trade as part payment on new purchases, any property, other than real estate, belonging to the city which is deemed by him to be surplus or not needed, and which does not exceed $500 in value, at such price as the mayor shall fix and with or without advertising, as he determines to be for the best interest of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-3) 
ARTICLE 133 - CITY ATTORNEY[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Article 133. This article has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- General provisions, Art. Four. 
State Law reference- Hiring special counsel, W. Va. Code, § 8-10-1a; notice of suit against city, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-2. 

ARTICLE 135 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- General provisions, Article Seven. 

135.01 - OFFICIAL MAP OF CITY. 
    A map entitled "Official Map of the City of Huntington, West Virginia, showing triangulation, co-ordinates and bench marks, scale 1 inch-300 feet" is hereby adopted as the official map of the city. This map shall be maintained in the office of the city engineer and shall be open at all times to inspection to anyone interested. 
(1964 Code Sec. 1-15) 
ARTICLE 137 - DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- General provisions, Art. Nine; budget and financial procedures, Art. Ten; Public accessibility of records, § 14-12. 
Cross reference- Purchasing; competitive bidding, Art. 107. 
State Law reference- Supervision of public offices, W. Va. Code, Art. 6-9; collection of moneys, W. Va. Code § 8-13-15 et seq.; financial statements, W. Va. Code § 8-13-23; accounting principles; funds, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-17 et seq.; 

137.01 - REGULATIONS FOR PAYMENT OF MONEY OUT OF CITY TREASURY. 
    No money belonging to the city shall be paid out of the city treasury except upon an order signed by the director of the division of finance and mayor and properly endorsed. 
    The signature of the director and mayor upon such orders, authorizing the payment of such orders by a depository, may be made by means of such mechanical or electrical device as council may select. Such mechanical or electrical device for the making of the signatures of the director and the mayor shall be safely kept in the office of the director so that no one shall have access thereto except the director and the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-1) 
137.02 - ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS. 
    All applications for permits or licenses shall be approved by the officer required by ordinance to issue the permit or license, but such license or permit shall be issued by such officer only upon payment of the proper fee to the director of the division of finance and presentation of the receipt of the director. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-2) 
137.03 - REVOLVING CONSTRUCTION FUND; REPAYMENT BY ASSESSMENTS. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 8-18-12, there is hereby created a revolving fund in the sum of $25,000 to be utilized by the city in financing improvements to be paid from such fund, upon council, from time to time, determining by ordinance or resolution to pay for such improvements chargeable to such fund. 
    Upon council's determining by ordinance or resolution to pay for the work completed from such unappropriated funds for the cost of which assessments are levied, council shall certify such assessments to the director of the division of finance for collection in accordance with the terms provided in the ordinance or resolution authorizing the improvements. 
    Upon receipt of installments of an assessment for such improvements by the director, he shall, on behalf of the city, credit the same to the fund herein created, all in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 8-18-12. 
    The mayor is authorized and empowered to do all acts necessary to set up such fund and allocate the amount herein provided for to the fund. 
(1964 Code Sec. 1-19) 
137.04 - REPORTING PROCEDURES. 
(a)  There shall be included in the report on revenue by source a report of all cash receipts of the Huntington Civic Arena showing the amounts and sources thereof. 
(b)  There shall be included in the budget comparison report a report of all amounts appropriated by council, from time to time, to various line items for the operation of the Huntington Civic Arena, as well as all amounts expended or encumbered of each such line item, as is done for other municipal departments, offices and agencies. 
(c)  In addition to the other reports, there shall be filed during each period described below a profit and loss statement and balance statement for the Civic Arena. 
(d)  Such reports shall be completed and distributed to council and to other appropriate department heads whose departmental budgets are reported in such monthly statements no later than the twentieth day of each calendar month in each fiscal year. 
(Ord. 1-28-91) 
137.05 - APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS. 
    The director of the division of finance shall: 
(a)  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
(b)  Approve all proposed expenditures after determining that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriated and available funds within the expenditure line item. The director shall not approve an expenditure unless there is an unencumbered balance of appropriated and available funds within the expenditure line item. 
(c)  Examine and approve all contracts and other documents by which the city incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligation becomes due and payable. The administration shall not enter into any contracts or incur any obligations unless funds have previously been appropriated to meet such obligations when they become due. 
(Ord. 1-28-91) 
ARTICLE 141 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Charter reference- Chief of Police, § 14.1. 
State Law reference- Appointment of special police, W. Va. Code § 8-10-1; powers and duties, W. Va. Code §§ 8-14-1, 8-14-3; hours of duty; holidays, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-14-2, 8-14-2a; school zone officers, W. Va. Code, § 8-14-5; parking lot or building officers, W. Va. Code, § 8-14-5a; civil service, W. Va. Code, § 8-14-6 et seq.; pension and relief fund, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-22. 

141.01 - ESTABLISHED. 
    There is hereby established a police department of the city, which department shall be composed of such officers, patrolmen and other employees as are designated in this article or may be provided for by council. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-1) 
141.02 - DUTIES GENERALLY. 
    The police department shall have the duty to preserve the public peace of the city, prevent crimes and arrest offenders, protect the rights of persons and properties and enforce all laws and ordinances which may be properly enforced by the police department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-2) 
141.03 - CONTROL BY MAYOR; PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The mayor shall have the active control of the police department and be the executive head thereof. He shall appoint, in the manner provided by law, all employees in the department and shall prescribe and promulgate general rules and regulations governing the operation of the department. All employees of the police department shall be subject to such rules and regulations. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-3) 
141.04 - APPOINTMENTS, REMOVALS, SUSPENSIONS. 
    All appointments, promotions, removals, demotions, suspensions, reinstatements and reductions in the police department shall be made by the mayor, in accordance with the provisions of state law and the Charter of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-4) 
141.05 - CHIEF OF POLICE. 
    There shall be a chief of police, who shall be charged with the duties of managing and controlling the operations of the police department, under such general rules and regulations as the mayor may prescribe. The chief shall have control of the stationing and transfer of all officers and patrolmen in the department and shall have the authority peremptorily to suspend, demote or discharge any subordinate for neglect of duty, disobedience of orders, misconduct or failure to perform his duties properly; provided that such disciplinary action shall be in accordance with state law and the City Charter. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-5) 
141.06 - CAPTAINS. 
    Council shall determine from time to time the number of captains in the police department, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-6) 
141.07 - LIEUTENANTS. 
    Council shall determine from time to time the number of lieutenants in the police department, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-7) 
141.08 - SERGEANTS. 
    Council shall determine from time to time the number of sergeants in the police department, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-8) 
141.09 - CORPORAL. 
    Council shall determine from time to time the number of corporals in the police department who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of police. Officers holding the rank of Officer First Class immediately prior to the passage of this section shall hold the rank of corporal. 
(Ord. 11-12-91) 
141.10 - POLICE OFFICERS. 
    Council shall determine from time to time the number of police officers in the police department, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 11-12-91) 
141.11 - OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT OF POLICEMEN PROHIBITED. 
    Members of the police department shall devote their whole time to the business of the department and are expressly prohibited from being employed in or giving their personal attention to any other business or employment; provided, that the chief of police is authorized to exempt from this prohibition members of the department who request permission to engage in off-duty employment which, in the opinion of the chief of police, will not be detrimental to the best interests of the department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-12) 
141.12 - SALES OF STOLEN PROPERTY RECOVERED BY POLICE; PROPERTY CONFISCATED BY POLICE. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the chief of police shall every two months, sell at public auction all property, of every kind and character, stolen and recovered by the police and to which no claim has been made by anyone entitled to the possession thereof, and all property of every kind and character confiscated by the police, except weapons. None of the property described in this section shall be sold within 30 days after the same has been recovered or confiscated, and no separate item of property having a value of more than $20 shall be sold until the sale thereof has been advertised once each week for two weeks in a newspaper published in the city, the advertisement to contain a description of the property to be sold and the place of sale. The chief of police shall make a full and complete report of all such sales and pay the proceeds thereof to the director of the division of finance and take from him a receipt therefor, and the proceeds are hereby appropriated to the general fund of the city. All weapons shall be disposed of in accordance with the order of the municipal court. 
(Ord. 3-22-82) 
141.13 - EVACUATION AND CONTROL OF CROWDS DURING DISASTERS. 
    In the event of a disaster or imminent disaster, resulting or about to result from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or from fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes or from crash of aircraft, train wreck, explosion or other like catastrophe, the police officers of the city are authorized to evacuate all or part of the residents from any stricken or threatened area within the city wherein such disaster has occurred or is about to occur, and to take such action as may be necessary to control crowds in such area. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey and carry out the lawful order of a police officer assigned to such disaster area. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-16) 
141.14 - POLICEMEN'S READJUSTMENT BENEFIT. 
(a)  Established; funds generally. There is hereby established a benefit fund to be known as the "Policemen's Readjustment Benefit." The funds becoming a part thereof shall be held by the director of the division of finances as all accrued or accruing salary of members of the police department is held, and the same shall be disbursed as and when all other salary disbursements are made. 
(b)  Composition of benefit fund. The benefit fund established by this section shall be constituted and composed of the following: 
(1)  The amounts of pay, based only on the prevailing policemen's basic rate, without any additional amount because of rank, which shall be earned by reason of one day's work or service in the police department rendered as requested or directed by the chief of police by each participating member after the death of a participating member of such department; and 
(2)  In the event the participating member for whose benefit such benefit fund is created, dies from injuries suffered while actually engaged in the performance of his duties in such department, such amount of salary for one month after such death as such member would have received had he lived and performed his duty, which amount shall be payable by the city as a part of such benefit. 
(c)  Contributions to fund by participating members. Each participating member of the benefit fund established by this section shall agree to work or serve, at the prevailing basic rate of pay for policemen, one day in the police department, for and in the place of and after the death of each participating member, as and when directed by the police chief, and to assign an order paid into such fund the amount so earned by such day's work, for disbursement to the beneficiary of the deceased member for whose beneficiary such work or service is performed, and each participating member shall execute and deliver to the director of the division of finance within 30 days after having become a member of such department such form of assignment and consent as may be desired by the city or its disbursing officer for such purpose. 
(d)  Who may participate. The benefit established by this section shall be only for those who are beneficiaries of the active members of the city police department who have agreed to this benefit plan and have executed the agreement and assignment specified in subsection (c) hereof and who have performed prior to such member's death all his duties hereunder in regard to the one day's work or service for the benefit of the beneficiary of every participating member who has predeceased such member, and no member who is drawing retirement or permanent (not temporary) disability pension shall be a participating member of such benefit plan. 
(e)  Beneficiaries; payment of funds. The beneficiary of the plan established by this section shall be only one of the following relationships to the deceased participating member: widow, son, daughter, mother, father, sister or brother. The funds to be paid shall be payable to the widow exclusively, if she is the survivor, otherwise to such other eligible beneficiary as may be approved by the Fraternal Order of Police, Local No. 65. Such payment shall be made personally to the beneficiary and shall not be assignable by any beneficiary or liable for any claim against the estate of the deceased participating member or his beneficiary. The beneficiary shall by acceptance of any payment of the benefit waive any claim for pension from the policemen's pension fund during or for the period such beneficiary, if so entitled hereunder, received the one month's salary provided for in subsection (b) hereof. 
(1964 Code Secs. 27-18 to 27-22) 
141.15 - POLICEMEN'S PENSION OR RELIEF FUND. 
    The administration of the policemen's pension or relief fund and payment made from such fund shall be as provided by council by ordinance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 27-23) 
141.16 - RESERVE POLICE UNIT. 
(a)  The mayor may, for the purposes hereinafter set forth, designate and appoint a Huntington Police Department reserve unit, hereinafter referred to as "reserve" or "reserves." 
(b)  The reserve unit in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance will remain in effect without any further action of Council. 
(c)  Police chief may appoint as members of the reserve bona fide citizens of the City of Huntington, or non-residents as the chief may deem necessary and appropriate, who are of good moral character and who have not been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. Any person so appointed shall serve at the will and pleasure of the police chief and is not subject to the provisions of article fourteen, chapter eight of the West Virginia Code providing for paid police officers. A member of the reserve may not engage in any political activity or campaign involving any municipal office or from which activity or campaign the candidates therefor appointing the member would directly benefit. 
(d)  Members of the reserves shall not serve as law-enforcement officers, nor carry firearms, but may carry other weapons, provided that the police chief certifies in writing to the mayor that the reserve has met the special training requirements for the weapon as established by the governor's committee on crime, delinquency and corrections. The reserves may be provided with radio communication equipment for the purpose of maintaining contact with the Huntington Police Department or other law-enforcement agencies. The duties of the reserves shall be limited to crowd control or traffic control and direction within the City of Huntington. In addition, the reserves may perform such other duties of a nonlaw-enforcement nature as are designated by the police chief or by a subordinate designated and appointed by the police chief for that purpose. 
(e)  Members of the reserves may be uniformed; however, if so uniformed, the uniforms shall clearly differentiate these members from sworn officers of the Huntington Police Department. 
(f)  After appointment to the reserves but prior to service each member of the reserves shall receive appropriate training and instruction in their functions and authority as well as the limitations of authority. 
(g)  Each member of the reserve shall take the same oath as prescribed by Section five, Article IV of the Constitution of the State of West Virginia, but the taking of the oath does not serve to make the member a public officer. 
(h)  The City of Huntington shall provide for liability insurance of each member of the reserve. 
(i)  A member of the reserve is not an employee of either the Huntington Police Department or City of Huntington for any purpose or purposes, including, but not limited to, the purposes of workers' compensation, civil service, unemployment compensation, public employees retirement, public employees insurance or for any other purpose. A member of the reserves may not receive any compensation or pay for any services performed as a member nor may a member use the designated uniform for any other similar work performed. 
(1964 Code Secs. 27-24 to 27-31; Ord. of 11-23-15(2) ) 
141.17 - POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS; TERMINATIONS AT POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER. 
Editor's note- Former Section 141.17 was repealed by Ordinance 10-27-97, passed October 27, 1997. 
ARTICLE 143 - FIRE DEPARTMENT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference- Fire chief, § 14.2. 
State Law reference- Fire protection contracts, W. Va. Code §§ 8-15-3, 8-12-5(56); paid fire departments, W. Va. Code § 8-15-9 et seq.; civil service, W. Va. Code § 8-15-11 et seq.; pension and relief fund, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-22; authority of local fire departments, W. Va. Code Art. 29-3A. 

143.01 - ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; PURPOSE AND DUTIES. 
    There is hereby established the fire department of the city, which department shall be composed of such officers and firemen as are designated by this article or as may be provided by council. The city fire department shall protect the lives and property of the people of the city in case of fire and shall perform all other activities and duties not inconsistent with this article as may be required by council or the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-1) 
143.02 - MAYOR TO CONTROL; RULES GENERALLY. 
    The mayor shall have active control of the fire department and shall be the executive head thereof. He shall appoint, according to law, all officers and firemen of such department and shall prescribe general rules governing the operation of such department. All officers and firemen shall be subject to such rules. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-2) 
143.03 - VIOLATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS OR GENERAL OR SPECIAL ORDERS. 
    Violation of any rules and regulations established by the mayor or of the general or special orders of the fire department shall be punished by reprimand, loss of time, suspension or dismissal. Members of the fire department shall take notice of all such violations and shall prefer, or cause to be preferred, charges against the person so violating. Such charges shall be forwarded to the chief of the fire department. The charges shall contain a brief recital of the facts and circumstances of the violation. Any member under suspension or cited for dismissal may avail himself of a hearing as provided by law. Prior charges and the disposition thereof against any person charged with a violation shall be made known to the authority charged with the disposition of the violation. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-3) 
143.04 - APPOINTMENTS, REMOVALS. 
    All appointments, promotions, removals, transfers, layoffs, suspensions, demotions and reinstatements in the city fire department shall be made by the mayor, in accordance with the provisions of state law and the Charter of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-4) 
143.05 - CHIEF. 
    There shall be a chief of the city fire department, who shall be charged with the duties of managing and controlling the operations thereof under such general rules and regulations as the mayor may prescribe. Such chief shall have control of the stationing and transfer of all officers and firemen in such department and shall have the authority to peremptorily suspend, demote or discharge any subordinate then under his direction for neglect of duty, disobedience of orders or misconduct; provided, that all procedures prescribed by state law shall be followed in any such action. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-5) 
143.06 - DEPUTY CHIEF. 
    There shall be not to exceed four deputy chiefs of the fire department who, when on duty, shall be second in command to the chief and shall have authority to act for and in place of the chief in case of absence, illness or other temporary disability of the chief, and shall perform such other duties as may be designated by the chief. 
(Ord. 10-12-93.) 
143.07 - CAPTAIN. 
    There shall be not to exceed 21 captains in the fire department, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. 8-25-86) 
143.08 - LIEUTENANT. 
    There shall be not to exceed 16 lieutenants in the fire department, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. 8-25-86) 
143.09 - FIREMEN. 
    There shall be within the fire department such number of firemen as may be required for the normal operation of the department, who shall perform such duties as may be designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-9) 
143.10 - ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT/DRILL MASTER. 
    The administrative assistant and/or drill master shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department and the rank normally shall not exceed that of captain. 
(Ord. 8-25-86) 
143.11 - CERTAIN INCUMBENTS CONTINUED IN OFFICE. 
    Any member of the fire department holding civil service status for any position in the fire department on the effective date of this section, which position is not mentioned in this chapter, shall continue to hold such status until such incumbent vacates such position. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-10) 
143.12 - PROHIBITED ACTS. 
    False fire alarms. No person shall wilfully do anything creating or tending to create a false alarm of fire. 
    Entering fire lines. No person, except with full and proper authority shall enter within any fire lines which shall be stretched around and about any affected area. 
    Unauthorized riding on fire apparatus. No person, other than with proper authority, shall ride upon any fire apparatus. 
    Tampering with fire apparatus. No person shall in any way tamper with or injure any fire apparatus. 
    Unauthorized opening, etc., of fire hydrants. No unauthorized person shall open, tamper with or injure any fire hydrant. 
(1964 Code Secs. 11-11 to 11-15) 
143.13 - FIREMEN'S READJUSTMENT BENEFIT FUND. 
(a)  Establishment; how held and disbursed. There is established a benefit fund to be known as the firemen's readjustment benefit fund, which shall be held by the director of the division of finance as all accrued or accruing salary of members of the fire department is held and shall be disbursed as and when all other salary disbursements are made. 
(b)  Composition. The firemen's readjustment benefit fund shall be composed of the following: the amounts of pay, based only on the prevailing firemen's basic rate, without any additional amount because of rank, which shall be earned by reason of one day's work or service in the department rendered as requested or directed by the chief of the fire department by each participating member after the death of a participating member of the department; and, in the event the participating member for whose benefit the benefit fund is created, dies from injuries suffered while actually engaged in the performance of his duties in the fire department, such amount of salary for one month after such death as the member would have received had he lived and performed his duty, which amount shall be payable by the city as a part of the benefit fund. 
(c)  Members to agree to contribute; form of assignment. Each participating member of the firemen's readjustment benefit fund shall agree to work or serve, at the prevailing basic rate of pay for firemen, one day in the fire department, for and in the place of, and after the death of, each participating member, as and when directed by the chief of the fire department, and to assign and order paid into such fund the amount so earned by the day's work, for disbursement to the beneficiary of the deceased member for whose benefit such work or service is performed. Each participating member shall execute and deliver to the director of the division of finance within 30 days after having become a member of the fire department such form of assignment and consent as may be desired by the city or its disbursing officer for such purpose. 
(d)  Participating members and beneficiaries generally. The firemen's readjustment benefit fund shall be only for those who are beneficiaries of the active members of the fire department who have agreed to this benefit fund plan and have executed the agreement and assignment specified in subsection (c) hereof and who have performed prior to such member's death all his duties hereunder in regard to the one day's work or service for the benefit of the beneficiary of every participating member who has predeceased such member. No member who is drawing a retirement or permanent disability pension shall be a participating member of the benefit fund plan. The beneficiary of the benefit fund shall be only one who is in the following relationship to the deceased participating member: widow, son, daughter, mother, father, sister or brother. 
(e)  Payments; waiver of pension. The firemen's readjustment benefit fund shall be payable to the widow exclusively, if she is the survivor, otherwise to such other eligible beneficiary as may be approved by the International Association of Fire Fighters Local No. 289. Such payment shall be made personally to the beneficiary and shall not be assignable by any beneficiary or liable for any claim against the estate of the deceased participating member or his beneficiary. The beneficiary shall, by acceptance of any payment of the benefit fund, waive any claim for pension from the firemen's pension or relief fund during or for the period such beneficiary, if so entitled hereunder, receives the one month's salary provided for in subsection (b) hereof. 
(1964 Code Secs. 11-16 to 11-20) 
143.14 - FIREMEN'S PENSION OR RELIEF FUND. 
    The administration of the firemen's pension or relief fund and payments made from such fund shall be as provided by council by ordinance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 11-21) 
143.15 - SECURITY KEY VAULT SYSTEM REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. 
(a)  A key vault system, or such other high security system, which, in the opinion of the fire marshal, is designed to give emergency services agencies immediate access to locked buildings, structures, elevators and other secured areas, shall be installed in a conspicuous and accessible location in all multi-family dwellings containing four or more units, commercial buildings and structures, governmental buildings and structures, and all buildings and structures or portions of buildings and structures used for gathering together 50 or more persons for purposes of deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating, drinking, amusement, awaiting transportation, or any other building or structure classified as an assembly occupancy under state and federal Fire Codes, built and constructed within the corporate boundaries of the city. The owner of each dwelling, building and structure described herein shall provide, install and replace the high security system required by this section. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $500. The fire marshal, or his designee, shall have plenary power and authority to enforce this section in the municipal court or such other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 10-24-94) 
ARTICLE 147 - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Human Rights Art., W. Va. Code, Art. 5-11; authority to prohibit housing discrimination, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-9. 

147.01 - DECLARATION OF POLICY. 
    Equal opportunity in the areas of employment, public accommodations, and the sale, lease, rental and financing of housing accommodations is hereby declared to be a human right or civil right of all persons without regard to race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability or familial status. The denial of these rights of properly qualified persons by reason of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, veteran status, or familial status is contrary to the principles of freedom and equality of opportunity and is destructive to a free and democratic society. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    When used in this article: 
(a)  "Person" means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, labor organizations, cooperatives, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and other organized groups of persons. 
(b)  "Commission" means the Huntington Human Relations Commission. 
(c)  "Employer" means any person employing 12 or more persons within the city and includes an agent of such person, the State of West Virginia and its agencies. Provided, that such terms shall not be taken, understood or construed to include a private club, which, in fact, is not open to the public. 
(d)  "Employee" shall not include any individual employed by his parents, spouse or child, or in the domestic service of any person. 
(e)  "Labor organization" includes any organization, which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, for collective bargaining or for dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or for other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment. 
(f)  "Employment agency" includes any person regularly undertaking with or without compensation to procure, recruit, refer or place employees. A newspaper engaged in the activity of advertising in the normal course of its business shall not be deemed to be an employment agency. 
(g)  "Discriminate" or "discrimination" means to exclude from, or fail or refuse to extend to, a person equal opportunities because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, veteran status, or familial status and includes "to separate" or "segregate". 
(h)  "Unlawful discriminatory practices" includes only those practices specified in section 147.08. 
(i)  "Place of public accommodations" means any establishment or person, as defined herein, excluding the city and any of its affiliated boards and commissions, or any political or civil subdivision thereof, which offers its services, goods, facilities or accommodations to the general public, but does not include any accommodations which are in their nature private. 
(j)  "Housing accommodations" means any building or portion thereof which is used or intended for use as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. Nothing contained in this definition or this article shall apply to the rental of a room or rooms in a rooming house occupied by the owner as a place of residence and containing no more than four rented rooms, or rooms to be rented. 
(k)  "Real property" includes real estate, lands, leaseholds, commercial or industrial buildings and any vacant land offered for sale or rent on which the construction of a housing accommodation, commercial or industrial building is intended, and any land operated as a trailer camp or rented or leased for the use, parking or storage of mobile homes or house trailers. 
(l)  "Real estate broker" includes any person, firm or corporation who, for a fee, commission or other valuable consideration, or by reason of a promise or reasonable expectation thereof, lists for sale, sells, exchanges, buys or rents, or offers or attempts to negotiate a sale, exchange, purchase or rental of real estate or an interest therein, or collects or offers or attempts to collect rent for the use of real estate or solicits for a prospective purchaser, or assists or desists in the procuring of prospects or the negotiation or closing of any transaction which does or is contemplated to result in the sale, exchange, leasing, renting or auctioning of any real estate, or negotiates, offers or attempts or agrees to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by mortgage or other encumbrance upon transfer of any real estate for others, or any person who, for pecuniary gain or expectation of pecuniary gain, conducts a public or private competitive sale of lands or any interest in lands. In the sale of lots, the term "real estate broker" also includes any person, partnership, association or corporation employed by or on behalf of the owner or owners of lots or other parcels of real estate at a stated salary, or upon a commission, or upon a salary and commission, or otherwise, to sell such real estate, or any parts thereof, in lots or other parcels, and who shall sell or exchange, or offer or attempt or agree to negotiate the sale or exchange of any such lot or parcel of real estate. A newspaper engaged in the activity of advertising in the normal course of its business shall not be deemed to be a real estate broker. 
(m)  "Real estate salesman" includes any person who, for compensation, valuable consideration or commission, or other thing of value, or by reason of a promise or reasonable expectation thereof, is employed by and operates under the supervision of a real estate broker to sell, buy or offer to buy or negotiate the purchase, sale or exchange of real estate, offers or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance upon or transfer of real estate for others, or to collect rents for the use of real estate, or to solicit for prospective purchasers or lessees of real estate, or who is employed by a licensed real estate broker to sell or offer to sell lots or other parcels of real estate, at a stated salary, or upon a commission, or upon a salary and commission, or otherwise, to sell real estate, or any parts thereof, in lots or other parcels. 
(n)  "Purchaser" includes any occupant, prospective occupant, lessee, prospective lessee, renter, prospective renter, buyer or prospective buyer. 
(o)  "Owner" shall include the owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager, agents or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation or real property within the city or any agent of any of these. 
(p)  "Age" means 40 or above. 
(q)  "Sexual orientation" means actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, bisexuality, or gender-related identity, appearance, or behavior of an individual, with or without regard to the individual's assigned sex at birth. 
(r)  "Rooming house" means a house or building where there are one or more bedrooms which the proprietor can spare for the purpose of giving lodgings to such persons as he chooses to receive. 
(s)  For the purpose of this article, a person shall be considered to be blind only if his central visual acuity does not exceed 20/200 in the better eye with correcting lenses, or if his visual acuity is greater than 20/200 but is occasioned by a limitation in the field of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees. 
(t)  "Disability" means a person who: 
(1)  Has a mental or physical impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; "major life activities" includes functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working; 
(2)  Has a record of such impairment; or 
(3)  Is regarded as having such an impairment. 
For the purposes of this article "disability" does not include persons whose current use of or addiction to alcohol or drugs prevents such individual from performing the duties of the job in question or whose employment, by reasons of such current alcohol or drug abuse, would constitute a direct threat to property or the safely of others. 
(u)  "Veteran status" means a person who has served in the active military, naval or air service, and was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable. 
(v)  "Familial status" means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. Nothing in this definition restricts advertisements of dwellings which are intended and operated for occupancy by older persons and which constitute housing for older persons. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.03 - CONTINUANCE; STATUS, POWERS AND OBJECTS. 
    The commission shall encourage and endeavor to bring about mutual understanding and respect among all racial, religious and ethnic groups within the city; and shall strive to eliminate all discrimination in employment and places of public accommodations by virtue of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability or veteran status, and shall strive to eliminate all discrimination in the sale, purchase, lease, rental or financing of housing and other real property by virtue of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or familial status. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.04 - COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS; EXPENSES. 
    The commission shall be composed of 11 members, all residents of the city and broadly representative of the groups protected by this article to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of council, provided that in the event that any vacancy on the commission is not filled by the mayor within 90 days of the occurrence thereof, the council shall, within 60 days, take such action as is necessary to fill such vacancy. No member shall hold office in any political party. 
    The appointment of the present commission members under the term of the former ordinance shall continue until the expiration of their terms or until they resign. All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of three years each, except members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
    No member of the commission shall receive any salary or compensation for his services as such; but each member shall be reimbursed for any reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of commission services, not to exceed allowances as outlined in city policies or the amount allocated for commission expenses in the city budget. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.05 - ORGANIZATION; PERSONNEL. 
    As soon as practical after establishment of the commission, the mayor shall call a meeting of the commission to be convened at the city building. The commission shall at such a meeting organize by electing one of its members as chair of the commission and one as vice-chair thereof for a term of one year or until their successors are elected and qualified. At such meeting the commission shall also elect from its membership such other officers as may be found necessary and proper for its effective organization. Annually thereafter, as soon as practical after the anniversary date of the establishment of the commission, the commission shall elect a chair and a vice-chair from its membership and other officers as may be necessary and proper to its organization. The commission shall meet not less often than quarterly. 
    The commission may appoint such staff and personnel as may be necessary to fulfill the purposes of the commission, and provide for payment of such staff and personnel within the allowances allocated in the city budget. The commission shall comply with all personnel rules, regulations and ordinances imposed by the city. 
    Special meetings may be called by the chair upon written notice thereof mailed to each member not less than seven calendar days prior to the called meeting. Any four members of the commission or a majority of the actively serving commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Minutes of the commission's meetings shall be kept. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.06 - ASSISTANCE TO COMMISSION; LEGAL SERVICES. 
    The commission, through the mayor, may call upon other officers, departments and agencies of the city government to assist in its hearings, programs and projects. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.07 - POWERS; FUNCTIONS; SERVICES. 
    The commission is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(a)  To cooperate and work with federal, state and local government officers, units, activities and agencies in the promotion and attainment of more harmonious understanding and greater equality of rights between and among all racial, religious and ethnic groups in the city. 
(b)  To enlist the cooperation of racial, religious and ethnic units, community and civic organizations, industrial and labor organizations and other identifiable groups of the city in programs and campaigns devoted to the advancement of tolerance, understanding and the equal protection of the laws of all groups and peoples. 
(c)  To receive, investigate and pass upon complaints alleging discrimination in employment or places of public accommodations, because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability or veteran status, and complaints alleging discrimination in the sale, purchase, lease, rental and financing of housing accommodations or real property because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, veteran status, or familial status and to initiate its own consideration of any situations, circumstances or problems, including therein any racial, religious or ethnic group tensions, prejudice, disorder or discrimination reported or existing within the city relating to employment, places of public accommodations, housing accommodations and real property. 
(d)  To hold and conduct public or private hearings on complaints, matters and questions before the commission and, in connection therewith, relating to discrimination in employment, or places of public accommodations, housing accommodations or real property and during the investigation of any formal complaint before the commission relating to employment, places of public accommodations, housing accommodations or real property to: 
(1)  Issue cease and desist orders against any person found, after a public or private hearing, to have violated the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations of the commission; 
(2)  Apply to the Circuit Court of Cabell County to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum upon the concurrence of at least five members of the commission; administer oaths and take the testimony of any person under oath; and make reimbursement for travel and other reasonable and necessary expenses in connection with such attendance; 
(3)  Furnish copies of hearing records to parties involved therein upon their payment of the reasonable costs thereof to the commission; 
(4)  To enter into conciliation agreements on behalf of the city; 
(5)  To apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for enforcement of any conciliation agreement or consent order by seeking specific performance of such agreement or consent order, on behalf of the city; 
(6)  To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction, or any federal, state or local agency, for injunctive or other relief, on behalf of the city, in any matters falling within the scope of the commission's functions, upon the concurrence of four members of the commission. 
(e)  To recommend to the mayor and council policies, procedures, practices and legislation in matters and questions affecting human relations. 
(f)  To prepare a written report on its work, functions and services for each year ending on June 30 and to deliver copies thereof to the mayor on or before December 1 next thereafter. 
(g)  To do all other acts and deeds necessary and proper to carry out and accomplish effectively the objects, functions and services contemplated by the provisions of this article, including the promulgation of rules and regulations implementing the powers and authority hereby vested in the commission. 
(h)  To create such advisory agencies and conciliation councils within the city as in its judgment will aid in effectuating the purposes of this article; to study the problem of discrimination in all or specific fields or instances of discrimination because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, veteran status, or familial status; to foster, through community effort or otherwise, goodwill, cooperation and conciliation among the groups and elements of the population of the city and to make the recommendations to the commission for the development of policies and procedures, and for programs of formal and informal education, which the commission may recommend to the appropriate city agency. Such advisory agency and conciliation councils shall be composed of representative residents serving without pay. The commission may itself make the studies and perform the acts authorized by this subsection. It may, by voluntary conferences with parties in interest, endeavor by conciliation and persuasion to eliminate discrimination in all stated fields and to foster goodwill and cooperation among all elements of the population of the city. 
(i)  To "accept contributions from any person" to assist in the effectuation of the purposes of this section and to seek and enlist the cooperation of private, charitable, religious, labor and civic and benevolent organizations for the purposes of this section. 
(j)  To issue such publications and such results of investigation and research as in its judgment will tend to promote goodwill and minimize or eliminate discrimination; however, the identity of the parties involved shall not be disclosed. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.08 - UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES. 
    It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice, unless based upon a bona-fide occupational qualification: 
(a)  For any employer to discriminate against an individual with respect to compensation, hire, tenure, terms, conditions or privileges of employment on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status. Provided, that it shall not be unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer to observe the provisions of any bona-fide pension, retirement, group or employee insurance, or welfare benefit plan or system not adopted as a subterfuge to evade the provisions of this subsection (a). 
(b)  For any employer, employment agency or labor organization, prior to the employment or admission to membership, to: 
(1)  Elicit any information or make or keep a record of or use any form of application or application blank containing questions or entries concerning the race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status of any applicant for employment or membership, except for such forms which shall be kept separate from the application blanks for the administration of any bona-fide affirmative action plan that is in accordance with state and federal laws and regulations; 
(2)  Print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment or membership indicating any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based upon race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status; or 
(3)  Deny or limit, through a quota system, employment or membership because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status. 
(c)  For any labor organization because of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status of any individual to deny full and equal membership rights to any individual or otherwise to discriminate against such individuals with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions or privileges of employment or any other matter, directly or indirectly, related to employment. 
(d)  For an employer, labor organization, employment agency or any joint labor-management committee controlling apprentice training programs to: 
(1)  Select individuals for an apprentice training program on any basis other than their qualifications as determined by objective criteria which permit review; 
(2)  Discriminate against any individual with respect to his right to be admitted to or participate in a guidance program, an apprenticeship training program, on-the-job training program, or other occupational training or retraining program; 
(3)  Discriminate against any individual in his pursuit of such programs or to discriminate against such a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of such programs; 
(4)  Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication; or to use any form of application for such programs; or to make any inquiry in connection with such program which expresses, directly or indirectly, discrimination or any intent to discriminate, unless based upon a bona-fide occupational qualification. 
(e)  For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly, refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual because of his race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status. 
(f)  For any person, being the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of any place of public accommodations, to: 
(1)  Refuse, withhold from or deny to any individual because of his race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status either directly or indirectly, any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges or services of such place of public accommodations; 
(2)  Publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, either directly or indirectly, any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement to the effect that any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges or services of such place shall be refused, withheld from or denied to any individual on account of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, age, blindness, disability, or veteran status or that the patronage or custom thereat of any individual, belonging to or purporting to be of any particular race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, veteran status, or age or who is blind or disabled is unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable, undesired or not solicited. 
(g)  For any person, employer, employment agency, labor organization, owner, real estate broker, real estate salesman or financial institution to: 
(1)  Engage in any form of threats or reprisal, or to engage in, or hire, or conspire with others to commit acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to harass, degrade, embarrass or cause physical harm or economic loss, or to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the unlawful discriminatory practices defined in this section. 
(2)  Willfully obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article, or to resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the commission or any of its members or representatives in the performance of duty under this article. 
(3)  Engage in any form of reprisal or otherwise discriminate against any person who has opposed any practices or acts forbidden under this article or because he has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.09 - DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES; INVESTIGATIONS, HEARINGS, PROCEDURES AND ORDERS. 
    Any individual claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful discriminatory practice shall make, sign and file with the commission a verified complaint, which shall state the name and address of the person, employer, labor organization, employment agency, owner, real estate broker, real estate salesman or financial institution alleged to have committed the unlawful discriminatory practice complained of, and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be required by the commissioner's rules and regulations. The commission upon its own initiative shall, in like manner, make, sign and file such complaint. Any employer, whose employees, or some of them, hinder or threaten to hinder compliance with the provisions of this article, shall file with the commission a verified complaint, asking for assistance by conciliation or other remedial action, no hearings, orders or other actions shall be held, made or taken by the commission against such employer. Any complaint filed pursuant to this article must be filed within 180 days after the alleged act of discrimination. 
    After the filing of any complaint, or whenever there is reason to believe that an unlawful discriminatory practice has been committed, the commission shall make a prompt investigation in connection therewith. In connection with such investigation the director or his/her designated representative or the commission's legal staff shall have authority to request the commission, or the chair acting in the name of the commission, to apply to the Circuit Court of Cabell County, West Virginia to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum upon the concurrence of at least five members of the commission. 
    If it is determined after such investigation that no probable cause exists for substantiating the allegations of the complaint, the commission shall, within ten days from such determination, cause to be issued and served upon the complainant written notice of such determination; and the complainant or his attorney may, within ten days after such service, file with the commission a written request for a meeting with the commission to show probable cause for substantiating the allegations of the complaint. If it is determined after such investigation or meeting that probable cause exists for substantiating the allegations of the complaint, the commission shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful discriminatory practices complained of by conference, conciliation and persuasion. The members of the commission and its staff shall not disclose what has transpired in the course of such endeavors. Provided, that the commission may publish or release the terms of settlement or conciliation when the complaint has been conciliated or settled. 
    In case of failure so to eliminate such practice or in advance thereof, if in the judgment of the commission circumstances so warrant, the commission shall cause to be issued and served a written notice, together with a copy of such complaint as the same may have been amended, in the manner provided by law for the service of summons in civil actions, requiring the person, employer, labor organization, employment agency, owner, real estate broker, real estate salesman or financial institution named in such complaint, hereinafter referred to as respondent, to answer the charges of such complaint at a public or private hearing before the commission in the county where the respondent resides or transacts business at a time and place so specified in such notice; provided, however, that such written notice shall be served at least 30 days prior to the time set for the hearing. The commission or its chair shall delegate the power and authority to conduct the hearing to a hearing examiner(s) who may be an individual commissioner; a panel of commissioners; a hearing examiner, who shall be an attorney duly licensed to practice law in West Virginia; a panel of hearing examiners; or a panel composed of any combination of commissioners and hearing examiners. 
    The case in support of the complaint shall be presented before the commission by one of its attorneys or agents, but no one presenting the case in support of the complaint shall counsel or advise the commission, commissioner or hearing examiner who hears the case. The respondent may file a written, verified answer to the complaint and appear at such hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, and submit testimony and evidence. Except as provided in this article, all of the pertinent provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 29A-5 shall apply to and govern the hearing and the administrative procedures in connection with and following such hearing, with like effect as if the provisions of such W. Va. Code, Art. 29A-5 were set forth in extenso in this section. 
    If, after such hearing and consideration of all of the testimony, evidence and record in the case, the commission finds that a respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful discriminatory practice as defined in this article, the commission shall issue and cause to be served on such respondent an order to cease and desist from such unlawful discriminatory practice and to take such affirmative action, including but not limited to, hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of employees, with or without back pay, admission or restoration to membership in any respondent labor organization, or the admission to full and equal enjoyment of the services, goods, facilities, or accommodations offered by any respondent place of public accommodation, and the sale, purchase, lease, rental or financial assistance to any complainant otherwise qualified for the housing accommodation or real property denied in violation of this article, as in the judgment of the commission, will effectuate the purposes of this article, and including a requirement for report of the manner of compliance, payment of expenses and lost wages of any witness called by the complainant or commission, payment to the complainant of reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and legal costs, and payment to the commission of its costs in conducting the hearing; and any other legal or equitable relief as the commission deems appropriate. Such order shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law as specified in W. Va. Code, § 29A-5-3. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.10 - ENFORCEMENT OF CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS. 
    In the event any person fails to obey a lawful cease and desist order of the commission, the commission may seek an order of a court of competent jurisdiction for its enforcement in a proceeding as provided in this section. Such proceeding shall be initiated by the filing of a petition in such court, together with a written transcript of the entire record of the hearing before the commission. Notice of the filing of such petition, together with a copy thereof, shall be served upon the respondent in the manner provided by law for the service of summons in civil actions. No hearing shall be held on such petition within 20 days of the date of service thereof on the respondent. The court may grant such temporary relief or restraining order as it deems just and proper and shall make and enter upon the pleadings, testimony and proceedings set forth in such transcript an order enforcing, modifying and enforcing as so modified, or setting aside in whole or in part the order of the commission. All such proceedings shall be heard and determined by the court. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.11 - JUDICIAL REVIEW. 
    Judicial review of a final decision of the commission shall be by a certiorari as set forth in W. Va. Code, §§ 53-3-1-53-3-6, or in such other manner as may be allowed under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.12 - ADOPTION OF WEST VIRGINIA FAIR HOUSING ACT. 
    The city adopts, by reference, the provisions of West Virginia Senate Bill 162, passed March 5, 1992, a copy of which is available for review in the city clerk's office, with the following modifications: 
Article II, Human Rights Commission. Section 5-11-3 Definitions, subsection (b) is amended by substituting the term "Huntington" for the term "West Virginia"; in subsection (c) thereof by inserting the phrase "Huntington Human Relations Commission" before the term "Commission"; in subsection (d) thereof by substituting the term "City" for the term "State"; in subsection (j) thereof by substituting the term "City" for the term "State"; and further modifying said Senate Bill No. 162, in Article IIA of the West Virginia Fair Housing Act, Section 5-11A-1 by substituting the term "City of Huntington" for the term "West Virginia"; in Section 5-11A-2, Declaration of policy, by substituting the term "City of Huntington" for the term "State of West Virginia"; and in Section 5-11A-3(a) thereof by substituting the term "Huntington" for the term "West Virginia" in line 2. 
And further modifying said Senate Bill No. 162 by substituting the term "City of Huntington" for the term "State" wherever any such reference therein is made to the term "State". 
And by substituting the term "Commission's Attorney" for the term "Attorney General" wherever said term appears in said Act. 
And by substituting the term "Hearing Examiner" for "Administrative Law Judge" wherever said term appears in said Act. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this article or code to the contrary, the city hereby adopts the provisions of the West Virginia Human Rights Act, W. Va. Code, Ch. 5, Art. 11 and the West Virginia Fair Housing Act, W. Va. Code, Ch. 5, Art. 11-A, in total. Such provisions shall supersede any contrary language or definitions contained in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
147.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person who willfully resists, prevents, impedes or interferes with the commission, its members, agents or agencies in the performance of duties pursuant to this article or willfully violates a final order of the commission, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500, or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, or both; but seeking judicial review of an order shall not be deemed to be such willful conduct. 
(Ord. of 12-23-13(1)) 
ARTICLE 149 - TRI-STATE TRANSIT AUTHORITY[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference- Urban mass transportation systems, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-27. 

149.01 - CREATED IN CONJUNCTION WITH CABELL COUNTY. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 8-27, the city, in conjunction with the County Court of Cabell County, as joint participating government, does hereby create and establish an urban mass transportation authority to be known as "The Tri-State Transit Authority." 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-27) 
149.02 - POWERS, DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS. 
    The Tri-State Transit Authority shall be a public corporation, expressly invested with all of the powers and charged with all of the duties and responsibilities, and subject to all of the rights of the participating governments, as authorized and provided by W. Va. Code, Art. 8-27. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-28) 
149.03 - BOARD; MEMBERS. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 8-27-5, the management and control of the Tri-State Transit Authority, its operations, business and affairs shall be lodged in a board consisting of five members, to be known as members of the board of the Tri-State Transit Authority, and who shall be appointed for three-year terms by governing bodies of the participating governments; provided, however, the initial terms of the members shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two members for terms of one year each, expiring April 3, 1973; 
(2)  One member for a term of two years, expiring April 3, 1974; 
(3)  Two members for terms of three years, expiring April 3, 1975. 
(b)  The members shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  By the County Court of Cabell County: 
A.  One member for an initial one-year term, and for the three-year term thereafter upon the expiration of such initial one-year term. 
B.  One member for an initial three-year term, and for the three-year term thereafter upon the expiration of such initial three-year term. 
(2)  By the mayor subject to approval by council: 
A.  One member for an initial one-year term, and for the three-year term thereafter upon the expiration of such initial one-year term. 
B.  One member for an initial three-year term, and for the three-year term thereafter upon the expiration of such initial three-year term. 
(3)  Jointly by the County Court of Cabell County and the mayor subject to approval by council: One member for an initial two-year term, and for the three-year term thereafter upon the expiration of such initial two-year term. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-29) 
149.04 - VOTING POWER UPON BOARD DETERMINED. 
    The city and the County Court of Cabell County, and any such other local governments admitted to participation under the provisions of the statutes hereinbefore set forth and described, shall each have such voting power upon such board as provided by W. Va. Code, § 8-27-5. The number of votes to which each participating government shall be entitled for the balance of the fiscal year 1971-72 is hereby determined to be one vote for each $500 contributed by such participating government at the time of the organization of the Tri-State Transit Authority, to be voted in the same manner and in the same percentages as set out in section 149.05. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-30) 
149.05 - PERCENTAGE OF VOTING POWER ALLOTTED TO MEMBERS. 
    The city and the County Court of Cabell County, each being represented by more than one member on such board, and under the provisions of the statutes aforesaid, each participating government being entitled to one vote for each $500 contributed to the Tri-State Transit Authority, as such contributions are determined at the end of the preceding fiscal year, the two members appointed by the city shall each have 40% of the voting power of the city; the two members appointed by the County Court of Cabell County shall each have 40% of the voting power of the county; and the one member appointed jointly by the city and the County Court of Cabell County shall have 20% of the voting power of the city and 20% of the voting power of Cabell County. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-31) 
149.06 - FISCAL YEAR. 
    The fiscal year of such authority shall be from July 1 to June 30. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-32) 
149.07 - REFERENCES TO STATUTES. 
    All references to the statutes of the state, as herein set forth and described, shall include such statutes as presently existing, and as they may from time to time hereafter be amended. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-33) 
ARTICLE 151 - FEDERAL-STATE ADVISORY COMMISSION[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Charter reference- Appointments to Commission, § 2.1; attendance requirement, § 14.17. 

151.01 - CREATION. 
    There is hereby created a federal-state advisory commission, which shall consist of not more than ten members to be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by council, and who shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-39) 
151.02 - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
    The federal-state advisory commission shall research and explore all federal and state programs in the area of federal and state relations, and shall advise council in all areas relating to the availability and the securing of funds for the development of municipal projects and other municipal needs and requirements from such sources, which shall include, but not be limited to, federal agencies, state agencies, foundations and other public or private sources. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-40) 
151.03 - MAYOR OR DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE TO BE EX-OFFICIO MEMBER OF COMMISSION. 
    In addition to the members hereinbefore provided for, the mayor, or his designated representative, shall be a member ex-officio of the federal-state advisory commission, with all of the powers and privileges, including the right to vote, of the other members of such commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-41) 
ARTICLE 153 - ARTS AND CULTURAL ADVISORY COMMISSION[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Charter reference- Appointments to Commission, § 2.1; attendance requirement, § 14.17. 

153.01 - CREATION. 
    There is hereby created an arts and cultural advisory commission which shall consist of not more than ten members, to be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by council and who shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-42) 
153.02 - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
    The arts and cultural advisory commission shall make studies of maps, plans and reports relative to the region in the fields of arts and culture and shall recommend procedures and policies to council, based on physical, social, economic and governmental conditions and trends, to promote the coordinated development of the region in these areas. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-43) 
153.03 - CIVIC ARENA DIRECTOR TO BE EX-OFFICIO MEMBER OF COMMISSION. 
    In addition to the members hereinbefore provided for, the civic arena director shall be a member ex-officio of the arts and cultural advisory commission, with all the powers and privileges, including the right to vote, of any other member of such commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-44) 
ARTICLE 155 - BEAUTIFICATION ADVISORY COMMISSION[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Charter reference- Appointments to Commission, § 2.1; attendance requirement, § 14.17. 

155.01 - CREATION. 
    There is hereby created a beautification advisory commission, which shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by council, and who shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-45) 
155.02 - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
    The beautification advisory commission shall design and develop programs and projects to beautify the city. A community-wide cleanup and fix-up campaign shall be held at least annually under the sponsorship of this commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-46) 
155.03 - MAYOR OR DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE TO BE EX-OFFICIO MEMBER OF COMMISSION. 
    In addition to the seven members hereinbefore provided for, the mayor, or his designated representative, shall be a member ex-officio of the beautification advisory commission, with all of the powers and privileges, including the right to vote, of the other members of such commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-47) 
ARTICLE 157 - RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Charter reference- Appointments to commission, § 2.1; attendance requirement, § 14.17. 

157.01 - CREATION. 
    There is hereby created a recreation advisory commission, which shall consist of six members to be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by council, and who shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-48) 
157.02 - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
    The recreation advisory commission shall explore and ascertain what land and sites within the corporate limits of the city may be potentially available for the purpose of acquisition or utilization for recreational purposes by the city, and shall formulate and make recommendations to council relative thereto. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-49) 
157.03 - MAYOR OR DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE TO BE EX-OFFICIO MEMBER OF COMMISSION. 
    In addition to the six members hereinbefore provided for, the mayor, or his designated representative, shall be a member ex-officio of the recreation advisory commission, with all of the powers and privileges, including the right to vote, of the other members of such commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 2-50) 
ARTICLE 159 - BOARD OF STATIONARY ENGINEERS (REPEALED)[22] 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note- Former Article 159 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 2-12-01. 

ARTICLE 161 - CIVIC ARENA DEPARTMENT[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Cross reference- Director ex-officio member of Arts and Cultural Advisory Commission, § 153.03. 

161.01 - CREATION. 
    There is hereby created a department to be designated and known as the Huntington Civic Arena Department, which shall be constituted as a department unit of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8.1-1; Ord. 2-27-95) 
161.02 - PURPOSE. 
    The civic arena department is hereby created for the purpose of operating the civic arena and such other projects or public facilities as council may, from time to time, designate by ordinance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8.1-2; Ord. 2-27-95) 
161.03 - DIRECTOR. 
    There shall be a civic arena director who shall be the head of the civic arena department, and who shall be appointed by the mayor. The director shall be in charge of all facilities operated by the civic arena department, and shall perform all duties and exercise all powers which shall be conferred upon him by ordinance or resolution of council, and except as may be otherwise provided, shall: 
(a)  Schedule and book events in conjunction with the operation and maintenance of the civic arena; 
(b)  When authorized by the mayor, appoint and remove subordinates in such Department; 
(c)  Assume all responsibility for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department; 
(d)  Enter into rental contracts, subject to the rental and box office schedule as council may authorize by ordinance or resolution; 
(e)  Negotiate and enter into, subject to the approval of council, straight percentage rental contracts which may not require rental or box office guarantees when, in his opinion, it would be in the best interest of the city so to do; 
(f)  Reject the utilization, rental or use of the civic arena by any individual, group, organization or event that, in his professional judgment, is not in the best interest of the city; 
(g)  Promulgate rules and regulations for the maintenance, use and operation of the facility. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of council and may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  No individual organization or group of any kind whatever shall be granted free usage of any facility operated by the civic arena. 
(2)  No literature of any kind shall be distributed or placed in such facility or on the grounds thereof without the written consent of the director. 
(3)  No contributions or donations shall be made or solicited or announcements regarding same in such facilities or the grounds thereof without the prior written permission of the director. 
    The mayor, with the approval of council by ordinance, may employ and designate a private firm, corporation or other entity specializing in entertainment management and promotions, and with such other qualifications as the mayor may require, to serve as the director of the civic arena. 
(Ord. 2-27-95) 
161.04 - CREATION OF CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU. 
    There is hereby created a convention and visitors bureau under the control of the civic arena department to be partially funded by the city. This bureau shall fully cooperate with the Huntington Chamber of Commerce and other civic organizations, and shall actively promote tourism and perform all duties and exercise all powers necessary to attract, schedule and book conventions in the city. Such bureau shall consist of 15 members to be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by council. 
(Ord. 7-26-82; Ord. 2-27-95) 
161.05 - CIVIC ARENA ADVISORY BOARD. 
    There is hereby created a board which shall be known as the Civic Arena Advisory Board of the City of Huntington, consisting of five members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by council. In addition to the five members so appointed, the mayor of the city shall be an ex-officio member of the board. One member shall be appointed for a term of one year; one member for a term of two years; one member for a term of three years; one member for a term of four years, and one member for a term of five years. 
    The board is hereby vested with the authority to advise the civic arena director and the mayor in operating, maintaining and controlling the civic arena. 
(Ord. 7-26-82; Ord. 2-27-95) 
ARTICLE 163 - HUNTINGTON COMMUNICATIONS BOARD 

163.01 - GUIDELINES. 
(a)  To provide the citizens of the City of Huntington information through public access channel(s) and the Huntington Communications Board shall: 
(1)  Provide televised coverage of all city council meetings; 
(2)  Provide opportunity for local schools and governmental agencies to air informational news, sporting, award, social and art events via the public access channel(s) and, if available, provide equipment for the production of such programs; 
(3)  Enhance public awareness and solicit sponsorships for such programs; 
(4)  Advance social awareness and education within the City of Huntington; 
(5)  Insure that programming on the public access channel(s) reflects the conscience of the citizens of the City of Huntington; 
(6)  Provide equal opportunity to organizations seeking to air programs on the public access channel(s); 
(7)  Maintain records and/or copies of programming that has aired on the public access channel(s); 
(8)  Seek opportunities to provide information regarding the community to the public; and 
(9)  Maintain an account and list of sponsors. 
(b)  The Huntington Communications Board shall begin with an initial group of no less than five individuals chosen by the mayor with the advice and consent of council. The board shall have the right to add more members who shall be approved by council. At no time shall the board exceed 11 members. 
(1)  Members shall serve terms for a period of two years and may be reappointed. 
(2)  Members shall attend at least 60% of all meetings or forfeit their appointment. 
(3)  Members shall elect a chairperson and secretary annually. 
(4)  The secretary shall submit a record of all meetings to include attendance and voting records to the mayor and city clerk. 
(5)  The city attorney or the assistant city attorney shall be a permanent member of the board. 
(c)  The board shall have the right to cause sponsor's names to be published before, after and during breaks at council meetings when televised on public access channel(s). 
(d)  The board shall accept no less than $20 publishing fee per individual sponsor and a $50 publishing fee for business sponsorships. The board shall not guarantee when such recognition for sponsorship will be aired. The board may seek by resolution of council any adjustment to the sponsorship fee. The board may accept fees for an annual basis, based upon 24 schedule council meetings. 
(e)  The board shall not allow any advertisements to be aired on public access channel(s) and shall comply with all federal, state and local laws. 
(f)  The board shall seek out methods to improve the communication information systems within the City of Huntington and may negotiate on behalf of the City of Huntington. 
(g)  The director of administrator and finance shall establish accounts and maintain monies for the board. The mayor shall oversee the disbursement of funds by the board without the approval of council for any amount not exceeding $4,999. Any amount over $4,999, the board, with the mayor's approval, must seek authorization from council. 
(h)  The board must comply with all government regulations when seeking to enter into contracts. Further, the mayor shall act as contracting authority for the board with the advice and consent of council. 
(i)  The board shall establish a schedule where they have at least one meeting each month and shall publish a list of meeting dates in the city clerk's office. All meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the Open Meetings Law. 
(j)  The board shall conduct its meetings pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order and shall encourage the public to speak towards issues it addresses. 
(k)  The board shall adopt its own administrative rules and shall provide a copy of said rules to each member and to the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. 8-27-01) 
ARTICLE 165 - MUNICIPAL PARKING BOARD[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish off-street parking, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-12; public works projects, W. Va. Code, § 8-16; vehicle parking facilities, W. Va. Code, § 8-16-4a et seq. 

165.01 - CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; TERM; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL OF MEMBERS. 
    There is hereby created a board which shall be known as the municipal parking board of the city consisting of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by council. Members of the board shall be residents of the city, at least four of whom have been such residents for at least five years prior to their appointment to the board. At least four members of the board shall be freeholders of real property within the city. The persons now serving on such board by appointment under prior ordinance shall continue to serve under their original appointment; the person to be appointed to fill the term expiring on June 27, 1970 under the prior ordinance and the two new appointments to be made under this amendment shall be appointed for terms expiring June 27, 1970. Following the expiration of the term of each of the original appointees, his successor shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years. All appointees shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. All appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any member shall be for the period of such members' term. Any member of the board shall be eligible for reappointment and any member may be removed from the board for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-206) 
165.02 - OFFICERS; PERSONNEL. 
    The members of the municipal parking board shall elect one of their number as chairman and the director of the division of finance shall be ex-officio treasurer of the board. Necessary secretarial and other personnel shall be obtained by the board through the regular personnel procedures of the city upon request made to the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-207) 
165.03 - COMPENSATION. 
    The members of the municipal parking board and the director of the division of finance acting as ex-officio treasurer shall serve without compensation; provided, however, that the members and such director shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred for the benefit of the board if such expenditures have been authorized by the board prior to being incurred and if duly verified vouchers for such expenditures are presented to the board for reimbursement. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-208) 
165.04 - EXPENDITURES. 
    At least 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the municipal parking board shall prepare and submit to council for approval a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The board shall not expend any money or incur any liability or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money, for any purpose, in excess of the amount appropriated for the general budget classification of such expenditure in the budget approved by council without first obtaining a formal resolution of council authorizing such expenditure, liability or contract. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-209) 
165.05 - SALE OF REVENUE BONDS. 
    All necessary preliminary expenses actually incurred by the municipal parking board in the making of surveys or estimates of cost and of revenues, employment of engineers or other employees, the giving of notices, the taking of options and all other expenses of whatsoever nature necessary to be paid prior to the issue, sale and delivery of the revenue bonds herein provided for, shall be paid by the city upon proper application therefor and by resolution or resolutions adopted by council from time to time, all to be reimbursed and repaid out of the proceeds of the sale of such revenue bonds, as provided by W. Va. Code § 8-16-6. All expenses of the board, including compensation paid to employees, reimbursement of expenses and other necessary expenditures herein provided for, shall be paid solely from funds received by the board from revenues collected or from the proceeds received from the sale of revenue bonds under the terms and provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 8-16; and nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or permit the city or the board to make any contract or to incur any obligation of any kind or nature, except such as shall be paid solely from the proceeds from the sale of such revenue bonds and from the revenues collected by the board, and such bonds shall not in any respect be corporate indebtedness of the city, but shall be paid solely from funds authorized for their payment by the aforesaid provisions of the West Virginia Code. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-210) 
165.06 - POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY. 
(a)  The authority, power and jurisdiction of the municipal parking board shall be limited to the acquisition, construction, equipment, providing for, administration, operation, maintenance and leasing of off-street parking within the city except as provided below. The authority to lease shall include the right of the board to act as lessor, in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-16-4, and as lessee, in accordance with W. Va. Code, Art. 8-16. 
    Subject to limitations imposed upon it by this article and general law, the board shall have power to take all steps and proceedings and to make and enter into all contracts and agreements necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties in the execution of its powers under this article and as provided by general law; provided, however, that no contract involving an expenditure or receipt of more than $2,500 shall be entered into or executed prior to approval by council. 
    The board shall be bound by and subject to all of the covenants, agreements and provisions of this article authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds to finance off-street parking and the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 8-16, and such covenants, agreements and provisions shall be enforceable by the holders of such revenue bonds. 
(b)  In addition to any other powers which it has, the municipal parking board shall: 
(1)  Have the power to regulate and control on-street parking meters; 
(2)  Have control of the parking meter attendants; and 
(3)  Have the power to regulate and control all parking on public streets, alleys and right-of-ways. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-211; Ord. 2-26-07) 
165.07 - MUNICIPAL PARKING BOARD DIRECTOR. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint and the Huntington Municipal Parking Board shall approve a director of the municipal parking board. The director may be removed from the position by the mayor. The director shall serve under the supervision of the mayor and/or his or her designee and shall be responsible for the overall operation of the huntington municipal parking board. 
(b)  Said director shall be responsible for the financial operation of the Huntington Municipal Parking Board and shall submit an operating budget to the city council for approval consistent with all other city departmental budget submissions each calendar year. It will be the director's responsibility to operate the Huntington Municipal Parking Board within the said budget. Further, the director shall be responsible for submitting to the mayor, the director of finance, council and the Huntington Municipal Parking Board a financial report each month outlining all income and expenditures for the Huntington Municipal Parking Board. 
(Ord. 2-27-06) 
ARTICLE 167 - REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Charter reference- City Planning Commission, Art. Eight. 
State Law reference- Municipal-county planning commissions, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-13; regional planning and development, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-25. 

167.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
    The city and the county courts of Cabell and Wayne Counties hereby agree to participate in the establishment of the Cabell-Wayne-Huntington Regional Planning Commission, to be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-18) 
167.02 - MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION. 
    The Cabell-Wayne-Huntington Regional Planning Commission shall consist of 12 members, four from each participating jurisdiction. The planning commission of each county and the city planning commission shall recommend and the county court and council shall appoint from the membership of the respective planning commissions three members, and a member of the county court to be appointed by each county court and a member of council to be appointed by council. The terms of the representatives shall be coextensive with their terms of office to which they were elected or to which they were appointed. 
    The commission shall not appoint the two members from each participating jurisdiction from the general public as provided by the statute unless approved by each of the county and city planning commissions. 
    Any vacancy in membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments. 
    All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-19) 
167.03 - ORGANIZATION; RULES OF PROCEDURE; STAFF; FINANCES. 
    The regional planning commission shall elect its president and vice-president from among its members. The term of the president and vice-president shall be one year. The vice-president shall have the authority to act as president of the commission during the absence or disability of the president. The regional planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting, but it shall meet at least once in the months of January, April, July and October. All meetings of the regional planning commission, during which any official action is taken, shall be open to the public and all records of the commission shall be public records. 
    The regional planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract, through its individual political jurisdictions, with the state department of commerce, city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be in accordance with the purpose for which such funds are appropriated. 
    The regional planning commission shall adopt an annual budget, to be submitted for approval or modification by each participating government. Each shall contribute to the financing of the commission on a prorata basis. 
    Each of the participating jurisdictions shall have the right to determine what portion of the recommendation of the regional planning commission they desire to accept or reject for their particular jurisdiction. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-20) 
167.04 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    From and after the time when the regional planning commission has organized and selected its officers and has adopted its rules of procedure, then such commission shall have powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in W. Va. Code, Art. 8-25. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-21) 
ARTICLE 169 - SANITARY BOARD[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
State Law reference- Composition of Board, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-18; publication of financial statement, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-18a; powers and duties, W. Va. Code, § 16-13-3 et seq. 

169.01 - CREATION; MEMBERS. 
    There is hereby created a sanitary board to consist of three members. The mayor is hereby designated as a member of the board and the mayor shall be the chairman of said board. Council, as governing body as defined by W. Va. Code, § 16-13-1 et seq., shall appoint the two other members of the board. The persons so selected and the terms of their respective offices and all other matters relating thereto shall be in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. 12-22-97) 
169.02 - SEWERAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM SUPERVISION; EXPENDITURES; REVENUE. 
    The construction, acquisition, improvement, custody, operation and maintenance of the municipal sewerage treatment or collection system or other works that may be constructed or required under the provisions of law and of this article shall be under the supervision and control of the sanitary board. All necessary preliminary expense actually incurred by the board in the making of surveys, estimates of costs and revenues, employment of engineers, attorneys or other employees, the giving of notices, taking of options, and all other expense of whatsoever nature necessary to be paid prior to the issue and delivery of the revenue bonds, may be paid out of the general fund of the city not otherwise appropriated, in the manner provided in W. Va. Code, § 16-13-4; provided, however, that the funds of the city from which such payments are made shall be fully reimbursed and repaid by the board out of the first proceeds of the sale of revenue bonds. 
(Ord. 3-12-01) 
169.03 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The further regulation and control of the sanitary board, except in so far as the board is given authority by law to organize itself and establish its own by-laws, rules and regulations, is hereby reserved and may be set forth from time to time by council by proper ordinance, within the terms of state law. 
(Ord. 3-11-35) 
169.04 - COMPENSATION; SECRETARY AND TREASURER. 
    Until the further order of council the members of the sanitary board shall receive compensation in the amounts and under the circumstances as may from time to time be determined by council. The board is hereby directed to select a secretary and treasurer pursuant to W. Va. Code § 16-13-18. The bond of the treasurer is hereby fixed at $5,000. Such bond shall be given by a recognized surety company, and the cost of the premium thereof shall be paid by the board as part of its expenses. 
(Ord. 3-12-01) 
169.05 - CERTAIN CONTRACTS SUBJECT TO APPROVAL BY COUNCIL. 
    The custody, administration, operation and maintenance of the sewage disposal system of the city are hereby placed under the supervision and control of the Huntington Sanitary Board, to be exercised in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 16, as amended, and the ordinances of the city enacted thereto. 
    The Huntington Sanitary Board shall have the power to take all necessary steps and procedures to make and enter into all contracts or agreements necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties and the execution of its powers under this article; provided, that any purchase or purchases relating to the financing, construction, acquisition, maintenance, enlargement, improvement, or renovation of any such works in excess of $25,000 shall be approved by council; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to require the approval of the payment of ongoing expenses including, but not limited to, wages and utility bills. 
(Ord. 3-12-01) 
169.06 - CONSTRUCTION, ACQUISITION, IMPROVEMENT AND EQUIPMENT SUPERVISION. 
    The construction, acquisition, improvement and equipment of the sewage disposal system of the city, and all matters pertaining thereto, are likewise hereby placed under the supervision and control of the Huntington Sanitary Board in compliance with W. Va. Code § 16-13-2, as amended. 
(Ord. 1-13-97) 
169.07 - REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF APPOINTED MEMBERS; POWERS OF COUNCIL. 
(a)  Council shall, by a majority vote after proper notice and hearing, remove any appointed member of the sanitary board, except for the mayor, upon a finding that such member has violated any of the provisions of this article, or for reasonable and just cause, as determined by a majority vote of council. 
    For the purpose of this subsection, "reasonable and just cause" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The continued failure to attend meetings of the board; or 
(2)  The failure to diligently pursue the purposes and objectives for which the sanitary board was created; or 
(3)  The failure to perform any directive or duty prescribed by law, order of council, order of the public service commission of the state, or the order of any court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(4)  The commission of any other malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance while sitting as a member of the board. 
(b)  Council shall, by a majority vote after proper hearing, appoint a member to replace any member removed pursuant to subsection (a) hereof immediately after such removal is final, or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Ord. 1-13-97) 
ARTICLE 183 - MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal development authorities, W. Va. Code, Art. 7-12. 

183.01 - ESTABLISHED; AUTHORITY. 
(a)  There is hereby created, pursuant to the authority of W. Va. Code, § 7-12-1 a municipal development authority, which shall be named the "Huntington Municipal Development Authority", for the purposes stated in the preamble to Ordinance 8-11-86 as well as the purposes stated in W. Va. Code, § 7-12-2. 
(b)  The Huntington Municipal Development Authority shall have all of the rights, powers, and authority granted by the aforesaid statutes, either expressly or by implication, in carrying out its duties and responsibilities or in exercising its rights, powers and authority. 
(Ord. 8-11-86) 
183.02 - MEMBERSHIP. 
(a)  The management and control of the Huntington Municipal Economic Development Authority, its property, operations, business and affairs shall be lodged in a board consisting of 15 persons appointed by council, who shall be known as members of the authority. At least one member of the authority shall also be a member of council appointed to represent council on the board of the authority. In addition, council shall appoint three members of the authority to represent business, three members to represent industry and three members to represent labor. In addition to the ten members thus selected and appointed, the then serving mayor of the city, shall, if he so requests, and if the by-laws of the authority so provide, be entitled to be appointed to membership on the authority, and the authority may, in its by-laws, provide for the appointment of not more than four additional members to the board of the authority to represent such other persons, firms, unincorporated associations and corporations residing in, maintaining offices in, or having economic interests in the city, as the case may be; provided, however, that in no event shall the number of members of the authority exceed 15 unless hereafter authorized by duly adopted and appropriate resolution of the governing body of the municipality. 
(b)  All members of the board of the authority shall be citizens and bona fide residents of the city. 
(Ord. 8-11-86) 
183.03 - POWERS AND RIGHTS. 
(a)  As contemplated by W. Va. Code, § 7-12-8, the Huntington Municipal Development Authority shall be a body corporate, with all of the powers and rights invested in or granted to the authority, either expressly or by necessary implication, including the power to take and hold title to property of every kind, character and description, and to pledge, obligate and otherwise deal in and with such property as the authority may own or acquire, from time to time; provided, however, that the indebtedness of the authority, if any, shall not, under any circumstances, constitute an indebtedness of the governing body of the municipality or of the city, a municipal corporation; and provided, further, that the rights of creditors of the authority shall be solely against the authority as a corporate body and shall be satisfied only out of property held by the authority in its corporate capacity. 
(b)  In the event the board of the authority shall so determine, the authority may lease or sell all of its property and equipment on such terms and conditions as the authority may fix and determine. Such sale or lease shall be approved by council. Upon the dissolution of the authority, all of its assets and property shall revert to and become the property of the city. 
(Ord. 8-11-86) 
183.04 - EMPLOYEES UNDER WORKERS' COMPENSATION ACT. 
    All employees of the authority eligible thereto shall be deemed to be within the Workers' Compensation Act of West Virginia, and premiums on their compensation shall be paid by the authority as required by law. 
(Ord. 8-11-86) 
183.05 - PURPOSE. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide for the promotion, development and advancement of the business, prosperity and economic welfare of the city, its residents and its industrial complex, and this article shall be liberally construed as giving to the authority full and complete power reasonably required to give effect to the purposes hereof. 
(Ord. 8-11-86) 
ARTICLE 187 - CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY BOARD[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, Art. 190. 
State Law reference- Cable television systems, W. Va. Code, Art. 5-18 et seq. 

187.01 - CREATION; MEMBERS; TERMS; DUTIES. 
    There is hereby created a board which shall be known as the cable television advisory board of the city consisting of five members, two of which shall be appointed by the mayor, two of which shall be appointed by the council and one of which shall be jointly appointed by the mayor and the council. All members shall be appointed to the board for a term of three years and shall hold their respective positions on the board until their successors have been appointed and have qualified. 
    The board is hereby vested with the authority to advise the mayor and the council as to all matters involving all cable television franchises granted to cable television operators who are operating or seek to operate a cable television system within the corporate boundaries of the city. The board shall further serve as the liaison and duly authorized representative of the city in matters requiring communication and interaction with the West Virginia Cable Television Advisory Board and the Federal Communications Commission including, but not limited to, consumer complaints regarding cable television service and rates within the city. The board shall perform such other duties as requested by the mayor and the council, and shall report to the mayor and the council at least once every 30 days regarding any and all matters before it. 
(Ord. 10-24-94) 
ARTICLE 190 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Charter reference- Appointments, § 2.1. 

190.01 - MEMBERS APPOINTED; TERM. 
(a)  In accordance with Section 2.1 of the City Charter, the mayor shall appoint all members of boards and commissions, subject to council approval, unless otherwise provided by general law. 
(b)  When the term of a member of a board or commission expires, the position shall be vacant until a successor is appointed. 
(c)  Beginning with the year 1992, each board or commission shall conduct a review of its mission every five years. If, in the opinion of a majority of the members, the board or commission has fulfilled its mission and useful purpose, it shall make a recommendation to the mayor and council that the board or commission should be dissolved. 
(d)  For every board or commission created after October 1, 1991, the ordinance creating such board or commission shall contain a provision dissolving the body five years after its creation unless prior action is taken by council. 
(Ord. 8-26-91) 
190.02 - ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT. 
(a)  If any member of any board or commission of the city which has been appointed or reappointed in conformance with the Charter and/or this section and regardless of whether such member was appointed by the mayor or council, absence himself or herself from 40% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings by the board or commission in any 12-month period, his or her office, position or appointment shall become vacant and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  Beginning January 1, 2000, all boards and commissions shall be required to conduct a review of the attendance of its members and submit to the mayor and council annually a report indicating those members whose attendance has failed to meet the requirement as set forth in subparagraph (a) above. Said annual report shall be due no later than the second regularly scheduled meeting of council each February for the preceding calendar year. All persons who are identified as being in violation of subparagraph (a) above shall be removed from the board or commission to which they were appointed so that said vacancy may be filled. 
(Ord. 10-26-98) 
190.03 - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT AND QUARTERLY REPORTING. 
(a)  All boards, authorities and agencies of the City of Huntington are to comply with the residency requirement as specified in the Official Charter of the City of Huntington. 
(b)  All boards, authorities and agencies of the City of Huntington are to report quarterly to the city council with the attendance records and status of residency of each member. 
(c)  The chairman/president of each board, agency or authority shall certify to the city clerk of any individual that fails to meet the 40% attendance requirement. 
(d)  The city clerk shall inform the appointing authority (mayor or chairman of council) of said individual who has not met the 40% attendance requirement and the appointing authority shall inform the individual by letter of their removal. 
(e)  For the purposes of section 190.03, each board, agency or authority shall inform the city clerk, on an annual basis, of their regularly scheduled meetings. Only these meetings shall be used to compute the 40% attendance requirement. 
(Ord. 8-9-04) 
CHAPTER SEVEN - JUDICIAL 
ARTICLE 191 - MUNICIPAL COURT[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Charter reference- General provisions, Art. Five. 
State Law reference- General rights of appeal, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-1; costs for crime victims reparation fund, W. Va. Code, § 14-2A-4; costs for funding training academies, W. Va. Code, § 30-29-4. 

191.01 - AMOUNT OF COSTS TO BE IMPOSED; DISPOSITION. 
    In every case where a fine or jail sentence is imposed and not suspended by the municipal judge, for a violation of the laws or ordinances of the city, the judge shall also require the person so fined or sentenced to pay costs in the sum of $65 with the exception of the charge of overtime parking, in which cases the costs imposed shall be in the sum of $8. 
(Ord. of 8-10-81; Ord. of 4-9-12(1); Ord. of 6-12-17(1) ) 
191.02 - WORKING OUT FINES, ETC. 
    Any person who may be committed for fines, penalties or costs, and who may not be able to discharge the same, shall be required to perform public work to the amount of such fines, costs or penalties, at the rate of $10 per day. In the event any such person has partially so discharged a fine, penalty or cost, and thereafter desires to discharge the remainder in cash, he shall be permitted to do so, and shall be given credit upon the whole amount of the fines, costs or penalties for the number of days of such work. 
191.03 - APPOINTMENT OF COUNSEL FOR INDIGENTS. 
(a)  The municipal court at any time upon request, and upon the filing of an affidavit of indigency as hereinafter provided, shall appoint counsel who shall be reasonably competent in the practice of criminal law to represent an accused of a violation of a municipal criminal ordinance if: 
(1)  There is a present intention on the part of the prosecuting authorities to seek confinement of the accused on that charge; or 
(2)  The judge of the municipal court feels there is a reasonable possibility that he will impose incarceration if the accused is found guilty. 
    In the event an indigent accused is not awarded an attorney, the judge of the municipal court shall inform him at his arraignment that he cannot be incarcerated as a result of the proceedings. 
(b)  This section prohibits the incarceration of indigents after the initial arraignment, unless appointed an attorney; however, incarceration of indigents will be permitted for not longer than 24 hours, or 48 hours on the weekend, if the accused indigent presents an immediate threat of harm to himself or others. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-56; Ord. 2-14-83) 
191.04 - DETERMINATION OF INDIGENCY ELIGIBILITY; FALSE STATEMENT PROHIBITED; PENALTIES. 
(a)  In determining whether a person is a needy person, the municipal court shall consider such factors as his net worth and the liquidity of his assets, his disposable income, and the number and ages of his dependents, and may consider such other factors as it may deem pertinent and material; but the fact that the accused has been released on bond shall not be determinitive of the question of eligibility. The court shall advise such person of the penalties for giving false information and of the possibility of a civil suit for recovery of moneys advanced under sections 191.03 to 191.06 for his defense. 
(b)  If any attorney willfully gives false information to the court with respect to his services or expenses, he shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500 or may be incarcerated for a period not to exceed 30 days or both. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-57) 
191.05 - RECOVERY OF AMOUNTS ADVANCED; OFFENSE OF MAKING FALSE STATEMENTS; PENALTIES. 
(a)  Any person charged with violating a municipal ordinance, who appears in municipal court as an indigent, shall be required to furnish information of his financial status and sign an affidavit stating that he is in fact unable to afford an attorney. 
(b)  To the extent that such person is financially able to pay for counsel furnished him under sections 191.03 to 191.06, without undue hardship, the municipal court may order that he make such payment. If such person willfully gives false information to the court with respect to his income or sources, or obligations, he shall be fined not more than $500 or incarcerated not more than 30 days, or both. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-58) 
191.06 - COMPENSATION FOR ATTORNEYS FOR SERVICE. 
(a)  In each case in which an attorney is assigned under the provisions of sections 191.03 to 191.06 to perform legal services for a needy person, he or she shall be compensated for actual and necessary services rendered at the rate of $20 per hour for work performed out of court and at the rate of $25 per hour for work performed in court; but the compensation for services shall not exceed $300. 
(b)  The attorney shall present to the municipal court a voucher for such services and expenses certifying the same to have been actually performed or incurred, which shall be forwarded to the director of the division of finance with an order of the municipal court approving payment of the amount of the voucher or of such lesser sum to which the municipal court believes the attorney to be entitled. Vouchers submitted more than six months after the last date of service shall be rejected. 
(Ord. 3-9-98) 
191.07 - MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK. 
    Effective July 1, 2004, the Municipal Court Clerk for the City of Huntington will be authorized to perform arraignments. 
(Ord. 7-12-04) 
CHAPTER NINE - EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 200 - WORKING CONDITIONS FOR NON-CONTRACTUAL EMPLOYEES[31] 

Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted December 22, 2014, amended article 200 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 200, §§ 200.01-200.14, pertained to similar subject matter. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
Charter reference- Residency requirement, § 14.3; bonds, § 14.5; loss of qualification, § 14.9; conflict of interest, § 14.10; salary limitation, § 14.13; oath, § 14.14. 

200.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Years of service. The term "years of service" as set forth and contained in all pertinent sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs and provisions of article 200 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington shall hereafter read "continuous and uninterrupted years of service to the City of Huntington." No benefit of any kind, type or nature shall hereafter be conferred upon any employee of the City of Huntington for service rendered to another employer, whether public or private, and regardless of whether such service was rendered prior or subsequent to the employee's employment with the City of Huntington. 
(b)  Work week. The work week shall consist of five consecutive eight-hour working days and shall begin on Monday. Any work performed in excess of 40 hours per week shall be subject to the current compensatory time and overtime policy. 
(c)  Non-contractual employees. Non-contractual employees shall include all professional and administrative positions not covered under a collective bargaining agreement. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.02 - CLASSIFICATION OF NON-CONTRACTUAL EMPLOYEES. 
    The mayor, or his/her designee, shall cause to be created and maintained a classification plan assigning each non-contractual position to a class. Each class specification shall be identified by a letter and number which will correlate to a pay grade range within the compensation plan. The mayor, or his/her designee, shall cause to be created and maintained job descriptions which outline the duties, authority, responsibilities, qualifications for each position in each class. The most current classification plan and correlating job descriptions shall be maintained in the human resources office and shall be available for inspection during normal office hours. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.03 - COMPENSATION PLAN. 
(a)  There shall be a pay grade designated by city council for each class within the classification plan, as well as a designated pay range for each position recognized within that class. Within each such pay range, there shall be four pay steps labeled A, B, C, and D. The most current compensation plan shall be maintained in the human resources office and shall be available for inspection during normal office hours. 
(b)  Non-contractual employees shall be paid at the A rate for the first six calendar months of continuous employment; at the B rate for the next 12 calendar months of continuous employment; at the C rate for the next 12 calendar months of continuous employment; and thereafter at the D rate. All in-grade positions shall be subject to the approval of the mayor who may, for outstanding previous experience or education, initially start an employee at a rate higher than A. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.04 - PROBATIONARY PERIOD. 
    New employees shall be considered probationary for a period of six months from their date of hire. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.05 - LONGEVITY. 
    All non-contractual employees shall receive longevity payments commencing on the employee's fourth anniversary. Employees who have previously terminated their employment for any reason and return as an administrative employee or employees who have retired from positions covered by collective bargaining agreements and return as administrative employees shall not transfer longevity time to an administrative position. 
    Longevity shall be based upon the following rates per month, per years of service: 
(a)  $5 per month after four years of service. 
(b)  $6 per month after ten years of service. 
(c)  $7 per month after 20 years of service. 
    Computation of longevity increments in all cases shall be computed as to time of service on the employment anniversary date. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.06 - INSURANCE. 
    The city shall provide an employer-sponsored health care plan. The most current version of the plan shall be maintained in the human resources office and shall be available for inspection during normal office hours. The city shall have the flexibility to modify insurance benefits. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.07 - PAID HOLIDAYS. 
    Recognizing the close and mutually-dependent working relationship between non-contractual employees and those employees within the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) trade union, the official paid holidays for non-contractual employees shall be the same as those listed in the most current AFSCME collective bargaining agreement. A copy of the most current AFSCME collective bargaining agreement shall be maintained in the human resources office and shall be available for inspection during normal office hours. 
    In addition to the holidays granted in this section, employees shall receive two personal leave days with pay each calendar year, which days may be taken at any time during said year with the permission and approval of the department head. Carryover of personal leave and days shall not be permitted under any circumstances. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.08 - VACATION. 
    All non-contractual employees of the City of Huntington shall be entitled to ten working days vacation leave with pay each year accrued on an anniversary year basis. 
    Employees shall be eligible for five working days after six months of service, which is included in the ten days earned during the first year of service. Vacation leave shall not be advanced to employees except with the approval of the mayor. 
    Each employee who has completed five years of continuous employment with the city shall thereafter receive five days annual vacation leave in addition to the leave provided for above, for a total of 15 days. 
    Each employee who has completed 15 years of continuous employment with the city shall receive 20 working days annually as vacation leave. 
    Vacation leave shall be used at the rate of not less than one-half day at a time and shall be used in the anniversary year following that in which it has been accrued. Vacation leave shall be scheduled only by approval of the respective department heads and shall be scheduled on an anniversary year basis so as to avoid any backlog of leave in the month of December. Carry-over will not be permitted without the permission of the mayor and must be taken within the following anniversary year. 
    An employee who is laid off, discharged, retired or separated from the service of the employer for any reason prior to taking his vacation, shall be compensated in cash for the unused vacation he has accumulated at the time of separation, which compensation shall be prorated on a monthly basis, based on the employee's employment anniversary date. 
    Employees who have previously terminated their employment for any reason and return as an administrative employee or employees who have retired from positions covered by collective bargaining agreements and return as administrative employees shall not transfer vacation rights to an administrative position. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.09 - SICK LEAVE. 
    Any employee contracting or incurring any sickness or disability which renders such employee unable to perform the duties of his /her employment shall receive sick leave with pay. Each employee shall be eligible for paid sick leave after 60 days of probationary service with the employer. 
    All full-time non-contractual employees shall be entitled to sick leave with pay for absence due to illness or injury of the employee. Sick leave may be used in the event of illness or death of the employee's mother or stepmother, father or stepfather, spouse, son or stepson, daughter or stepdaughter, upon approval of the department head and authorization by the mayor. 
    After the initial 60 days of probationary employment, an employee shall be granted one day paid sick leave for each month of employment. After completing the probationary period, the employee shall be credited with the appropriate sick leave from the date of employment. An additional four hours sick leave for each month of employment (not to exceed 48 hours per year) shall be credited to the employee and used only in cases of prolonged illness or non-work-related injury confirmed by a physician and extending at least 80 hours or longer, and for retirement. Under certain extenuating circumstances, the 80-hour requirement may be relaxed upon the approval of the mayor. Such credited accumulation may not be used until all regularly accrued sick leave provided for in the first sentence of this section has been used. After completing the probationary service with the employer, the employee shall be credited with the appropriate sick leave from the date of employment. 
    An employee may not utilize paid sick leave in excess of 40 hours per year to care for an ill or injured family member (parent, spouse, or child, including step relations) when it does not qualify as a Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) event. In the event of catastrophic illness that does qualify as an FMLA event, use of additional sick leave may be granted with the approval of the mayor. 
    Upon retirement at the age of 60 years or older, or the employee completing 20 or more years of service, or upon disability retirement, an employee shall be granted additional working days. This proviso shall not be interpreted to mean that an employee is entitled to payment of vacation leave for his/her net accumulated sick leave upon separation of employment with the city, other than those individuals who retire at the age of 60 years or older, or who have completed 20 years of service, or upon disability retirement. 
    Employees may elect to apply up to 75 of the maximum 140 days toward hospitalization coverage. Eligible employees shall receive one month of family hospitalization coverage for each 40 hours of accumulated sick time. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.10 - FUNERAL LEAVE. 
    The city shall pay employees for time lost up to three consecutive working days while arranging for or attending the funeral of a member of the immediate family. "Immediate family" shall include a father, stepfather, mother, stepmother, sister, stepsister, sister-in-law, brother, brother-in-law, stepbrother, grandparents, grandchildren, wife, husband, child, stepchild, mother-in-law and father-in-law. In the case of the death of an employee's relative such as a niece, nephew, aunt or uncle, the employee shall be given one day paid leave of absence to attend funeral services. This section is to be interpreted so that when the event arises the employee receives the time off at the time of bereavement, and shall not be interpreted to give an employee the right to any additional days off, i.e., if a person is regularly scheduled for a vacation or other time off, he/she shall not be entitled to added days off. Said leave in all cases shall be the working days immediately following the death. The mayor, on a case-by-case basis and in his/her discretion, may grant up to a total of three additional days of leave without pay, of which, said three days may include non-working days, as circumstances so warrant. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.11 - INJURY LEAVE. 
(a)  Option 1. An employee who is injured while on the job may elect to receive a percentage of his/her regular pay in an amount equal to the current Workers' Compensation rate for all time lost resulting from such injury for a period of 45 working days following the date of the injury, provided, that, the employee signs a written agreement to reimburse the city all monies received in excess of his/her base wage resulting from the combination of injury pay from the city and Temporary Total Disability (TTD) benefits from Workers' Compensation. Except for the initial three days of the injury leave, the employee shall receive 100% of his/her regular pay. In no event shall an injured employee receive, from a combination of injury pay and Workers' Compensation payments, an amount which would exceed 100% of his/her regular pay for any day while on injury leave. Any employee receiving greater than 100% of his/her base wage as a result of injury pay shall be indebted to the city in the amount in excess of 100%. Such excess shall be repaid immediately upon notification to the employee of said excessive payment by the city or by payroll deduction. 
(b)  Option 2. Alternatively, the employee may elect to receive 100% of his/her regular pay for the first three days of injury leave, and thereafter, the city shall pay the employee 30% of his/her base wage for the period that he/she is considered to be temporarily or totally disabled under the Workers' Compensation statute up until such time as he/she receives his/her first benefit from the Workers' Compensation Commission. 
(c)  No election. If the employee does not make an election of Option 1 or Option 2, then Option 2 shall automatically be in force. 
    The injured employee shall remain on "Pay Status" until his/her return to employment. "Pay status" includes all pay and benefit entitlements. 
    The city shall have the right to require the employee to submit to a medical examination by a doctor designated by the city and qualified to diagnose and evaluate the injury in question. If such examination establishes the ability of the employee to return to work and said employee fails and refuses to do so, then the city may terminate all pay requirements hereunder. In the event such examination shall conclusively establish no injury, it is understood and agreed that all pay received by the employee hereunder shall be repaid to the city. 
    Employees on injury leave or receiving Workers' Compensation benefits shall be considered to be on "Pay Status" not exceeding 12 months without a review by the mayor. 
    Employees shall not be involved in any gainful employment while on injury leave. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.12 - MILITARY SERVICE. 
    Employees who are connected with one or more branches of the Armed Forces, Reserve or National Guard, shall be entitled to a leave of absence as set forth by state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.13 - JURY DUTY AND SUBPOENAS. 
    Any employee selected for jury duty or subpoenaed to appear in any court or other public body shall be granted leave with pay for such time as is required to fulfill such duty. The employee shall reimburse the city the total of all compensation received from the court in which he/she was selected for jury duty. In the event an employee is subpoenaed to appear as a witness in a criminal case or as a party to or subpoenaed to appear as a witness on a civil case, he/she may be granted leave with pay. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.14 - PARENTING LEAVE. 
    In the case of either natural birth or adoption, parenting leave, without pay, not to exceed a period of six months shall be granted at the request of an employee; said leave at the discretion of the mayor may upon request of the employees be extended for an additional period not to exceed six months. An employee who has been granted parenting leave shall be entitled to use accrued sick leave for the period she is unable to work for medical reasons as certified by a licensed physician. An employee shall not earn sick leave while she is on parenting leave. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
200.15 - LEAVE WITHOUT PAY. 
    Leave of absence without pay may be granted by the mayor, but such leave shall be limited to a maximum of 30 calendar days in any calendar year; provided that employees who have received or anticipate receiving, military leave in the same calendar year shall not be granted leave without pay. 
(Ord. of 12-22-14(1)) 
ARTICLE 202 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[33] 

Footnotes: 
--- (33) --- 
Charter reference- Residency requirement, § 14.3; bonds, § 14.5; loss of qualification, § 14.9; conflict of interest, § 14.10; salary limitation, § 14.13; oath, § 14.14. 

202.01 - WORKERS' COMPENSATION; SELF-INSURED STATUS. 
    As long as the city has elected to pay compensation and expenses directly under the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 23-2-9, council shall appropriate each year sufficient funds in an amount to pay into the West Virginia Workers' Compensation Fund the city's proper proportion of the expenses of the Workers' Compensation Commissioner in administering the fund, the required amounts into the surplus fund for the coverage of catastrophe and second injury liability, and to pay all workers' compensation benefits anticipated to be payable that year. In addition to the appropriation of such moneys, council shall authorize all other necessary procedures to insure that all workers' compensation payments shall be paid promptly to its employees or fatally injured employees' dependents and shall direct the purchase of excess insurance for the purpose of indemnifying the city against losses per accident in excess of a specific retention level to be determined by council, and, for the purpose of indemnifying the city against annual losses in the aggregate, in excess of a retention level to be determined by council. 
    If at any time the city determines that it is no longer in the best interest of the city, its employees, or the residents to continue to pay compensation and expenses directly under the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 23-2-9, the city shall immediately advise the West Virginia Workers' Compensation Commissioner that it has elected to discontinue paying such compensation and expenses directly as to future claims and shall immediately begin paying into the Workers' Compensation Fund the premiums required to comply with the provisions of W. Va. Code, §§ 23-2-1 and 23-2-5. In the event the city elects to discontinue paying such compensation and expenses directly, it shall, nevertheless, remain liable to and shall pay such compensation and expenses directly in claims arising prior to the election to resume payment of such premiums into the Workers' Compensation Fund. 
(Ord. 10-25-82) 
202.02 - DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. 
    Council hereby adopts a deferred compensation program and its attendant investment options and hereby establishes the city deferred compensation plan for the voluntary participation of all eligible city employees, elected officials and independent contractors. The mayor is hereby authorized to execute for the city, individual participation agreements with each employee requesting same, and to act as the administrator of the plan representing the city, and to execute such agreements and contracts as are necessary to implement the program. It is implicitly understood that other than the incidental expenses of collecting and disbursing the employee's deferrals and other minor administrative matters, there is to be no cost or contribution by the city to the program. 
(Ord. 10-15-91) 
202.10 - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR CITY EMPLOYEES. 
(a)  All personnel employed or appointed to the City of Huntington by the council or the mayor after July 1, 2002, whether hourly or salaried, whether full-time or part-time, and whether appointed in the classified civil service or the unclassified positions of the city, must be bona-fide residents of the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia, except at the time of appointment or employment when they need not be residents of the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia, but shall establish residence in the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia, within 90 days of being appointed or employed by the city. 
(b)  All officers and employees of the City of Huntington employed after July 1, 2002 by the city are hereby required as a condition of their continued employment to have their place of abode in the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, and to be bona-fide residents therein, except as otherwise provided by this section. A "bona-fide resident," for the purpose of this section, means a person having a permanent domicile within the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, and one which has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, limits. The use of a post office box or nonpersonal residence for mailing purposes shall not be considered a bona-fide resident. 
(c)  Provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as to prevent persons who were originally employed or appointed prior to July 1, 2002 and have not left the service of the City of Huntington for more than 30 consecutive days from being employed in another position with the City of Huntington, promoted or reappointed due to their residency outside the City of Huntington. 
(d)  Failure of any officer, employee or appointee in the classified civil service or the unclassified positions of the City of Huntington to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in immediate discharge from the city service. 
(e)  Upon request of application for employment the mayor or his designee shall provide a copy of the following letter to each applicant that they must complete prior to receiving consideration for employment. 
"I ____________ understand that if I am employed/appointed to any position by the City of Huntington that I must be a permanent resident of the City of Huntington within ninety (90) days of such appointment and must maintain permanent residence within the Municipality of the City of Huntington as a condition of my continued employment. I understand that failure to establish or maintain such residency within the City of Huntington will result in my immediate dismissal for cause and such residency is a condition of my continued employment. 
Signature _____ " 
(f)  (1)  The mayor or mayor designee shall insure by the 89th day of employment by the City of Huntington that the employee shall have a permanent residence within the municipality of the City of Huntington or shall be dismissed at the end of his 90th day. 
(2)  Failure to dismiss an employee who has failed to establish residency within the City of Huntington by the mayor shall result in forfeiture of his compensation (wages/salary) until such time as appropriate action is taken. 
(g)  Upon the effectiveness of this ordinance (July 1, 2002) the City of Huntington shall be in compliance with section 14.3 of the Charter of the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. 2-11-02) 
202.20 - EMPLOYEE TRAINING. 
(a)  Statement of policy. It is the policy of the City of Huntington that every employee be entitled to a working environment free from any kind of unlawful harassment or discrimination regardless of its form or manner. Harassment is unlawful and hurts other employees. Harassment and discrimination can be destructive to employee morale as well as to the city's reputation and can be extremely costly in terms of lost productivity, lost employees, and out-of-pocket expense. Any incident of harassment or discrimination contributes to a general atmosphere in which all persons who share the victim's protected status suffer the consequences and have no legitimate purpose related to the business of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    "Discriminate" shall mean to unlawfully segregate, separate or treat individuals differently based on race, color, sex, gender identity or expression, transgender status, religion or religious beliefs, age, disability, handicap, ethnic, national, or Appalachian regional origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, sexual preference, marital status, parental status, familial status, military discharge status, lawful source of income, housing status, or political affiliation. 
    "Diversity training" shall include, but is not limited to, race, color, sex, gender identity or expression, transgender status, religion or religious beliefs, age, disability, handicap, ethnic, national, or Appalachian regional origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, sexual preference, marital status, parental status, familial status, military discharge status, lawful source of income, housing status, or political affiliation. 
    "Harassment" consists of knowingly pursuing a pattern of conduct that is intended to annoy, seriously alarm or terrorize another person and that serves no lawful purpose. The conduct must be such that it would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress. Harassment includes, but is not limited to, sexual harassment. 
(c)  Training mandated. 
(1)  The division of human resources shall develop and/or cause to be provided relevant training to increase employees' knowledge of awareness of laws and regulations, as well as the city's policies relating to diversity, discrimination, and harassment in the workplace. 
(2)  The training shall include instruction on what harassment, bullying, and discrimination are, how to prevent them, what the repercussions are, and the complaint process. The training shall also include sensitivity training. 
(3)  Each employee shall receive training in diversity and harassment every two years. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(2) ; Ord. of 1-25-16(3) ) 
ARTICLE 203 - APPOINTMENTS 

203.01 - DUTIES OF CITY CLERK. 
(a)  The city clerk shall maintain a list of all members of boards, agencies, associations, authorities or other entities to include both permanent and temporary groups as to their names, numbers and the dates of their terms of appointment and such list shall be made available to the public during normal working hours. 
(b)  The city clerk shall inform council members 30 days prior to the expiration of any appointment. 
(c)  Upon any appointment by council or the mayor and approval by council the clerk shall prepare a certificate of appointment for that individual which shall state the board, agency or authority and the term of office and shall be presented to the individual when the oath of office is taken in front of either the city clerk or chairman of said board or other authority that may legally administer the oath of office. 
(Ord. 4-23-01) 
203.02 - PERSONNEL COMMITTEE. 
(a)  There shall be a standing committee of council titled "Personnel Committee". 
(b)  They shall solicit nominations from all council members on any appointment. 
(c)  They may also seek and receive applications and recommendations from the general public, the mayor or other government agency or institution. 
(1)  Solicitations and/or recommendations shall at a minimum contain the name of the individual, address, phone number, occupation and past community experience. 
(2)  It may include recommendations on other pertinent facts that the committee and/or council may consider in its deliberations. 
(d)  The committee shall review all applicants and may, at is discretion, conduct personal interviews or request other information from applicants at its sole discretion. 
(e)  The personnel committee shall not consider any individual for appointment who is not resident of the municipality of the City of Huntington. 
(f)  The personnel committee shall recommend a nominee to council at least five working days prior to the meeting of council at which the nominee is to be considered for appointment. 
(Ord. 4-23-01) 
203.03 - APPOINTMENTS BY COUNCIL. 
(a)  Council shall appoint by a majority vote. 
(b)  If a nominee's appointment fails, council shall instruct the committee to provide another nominee five working days prior to the next council meeting. 
(c)  Council may by a two-thirds vote of the members present, remove any appointee of the governing body prior to the expiration of their term for any reason, such appointment shall be considered at will. 
(Ord. 4-23-01) 
203.11 - APPOINTMENTS BY THE MAYOR. 
(a)  The mayor shall present appointments to council for confirmation when required and shall state by letter that the individual is qualified, a resident of the City of Huntington and that all appropriate rules, regulations and ordinances have been followed with the appointment. 
(b)  The mayor may recommend to the personnel committee individuals for appointment to any organization, where the appointing authority is vested in council and the committee shall give such consideration to his recommendation as it deems appropriate and may call upon the mayor to state his recommendations to council in an executive session or upon the floor of council. 
(c)  The mayor shall forward the name of the individual to be confirmed to the personnel committee at least 15 working days prior to the council meeting to which the nomination is to be confirmed so council may do its due diligence. 
(d)  The mayor shall furnish any information that he feels shall be pertinent to the confirmation to the personnel committee and upon his discretion may provide the same to all council members. 
(Ord. 4-23-01) 
203.20 - VETO PROCEDURES. 
(a)  At the request of three members of council, an order shall be drafted by the city attorney that shall be presented to council vetoing any appointment not subject to confirmation by council and shall be presented to the floor of council within 30 days of said appointment by the mayor in accordance with the Official Charter of the City of Huntington. 
(b)  The personnel committee shall interview the appointed individual after said order has been prepared. They may interview any council member, the mayor or other individual that might provide information to be considered upon a vote. Such interviews shall be held in executive session. 
(c)  (1)  The personnel committee shall not consider any of the following in its deliberations or recommendations: 
A.  Racial or ethnic origin. 
B.  Sexual orientation. 
C.  Marital status. 
D.  Religious affiliation. 
E.  Political affiliation. 
F.  Pending or past civil litigation. 
G.  Hearsay testimony. 
(2)  The personnel committee shall consider the following: 
A.  Past bad acts either admitted to by the individual or convictions. 
B.  Alleged bad acts that they have received direct testimony. 
C.  Education. 
D.  Attitude. 
E.  Residency. 
F.  Other qualifications relating to the duties of the job. 
(d)  The personnel committee shall provide to the mayor, at least three days prior to the council meeting that a veto order is to be considered, an explanation of the committee's concerns. 
(e)  The personnel committee shall make a written recommendation to council supporting or rejecting the proposed veto. The committee may at is discretion provide reasons for its recommendation. 
(f)  Veto shall be stated to have passed upon a roll call vote where two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority of council members present, provided that a quorum is present, shall vote yea on the order. 
(Ord. 4-23-01) 
203.30 - MULTIPLE BOARD APPOINTMENTS. 
(a)  No individual shall be appointed to more than two boards, commissions, authorities, agencies or other entities with the exception of the mayor or council members. 
(b)  Any appointed member of a board, commission, authority, agency or other entity who is currently serving on multiple entities by appointment shall be allowed to finish their appointed terms, but shall not be reappointed to multiple entities unless they be the mayor or council members. 
(Ord. 4-23-01) 
ARTICLE 204 - REINSTATEMENT AND REHIRING OF CITY EMPLOYEES 

204.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide parameters where collective bargaining agreements and state code are silent concerning layoffs and reinstatement to City of Huntington employees. 
(Ord. 5-12-03) 
204.10 - REHIRING. 
(a)  An individual may be rehired to any department within one year of lay-off. The individual may not be rehired and/or reinstated if the employee was terminated for cause. 
(b)  An individual who is laid off from employment with the City of Huntington shall be afforded equal status, time in grade and service with the city if they are rehired and/or reinstated within the one-year period. 
(c)  If an individual was laid off from employment with the City of Huntington desires to return to work for the city and there has been a break of one year or greater, then the individual must submit an application for employment as a new hire and must meet all prerequisites for employment upon the new hire date. 
(Ord. 5-12-03) 
PART THREE - TRAFFIC CODE 
CHAPTER ONE - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE 301 - DEFINITIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Speed race defined, § 335.04. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law. 

301.01 - MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this Traffic Code shall, for the purpose of this Traffic Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-1. 
301.02 - AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. 
    "Authorized emergency vehicle" means vehicles of the fire department, duly chartered rescue squad, police department, ambulance service, state, county or municipal agency and such privately owned ambulances, tow trucks, wreckers, flag car services, vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles, service vehicles of a public service corporation, postal service vehicles, snow removal equipment, Class A vehicles of firefighters, Class A vehicles of members of ambulance services, and Class A vehicles of members of duly chartered rescue squads, and all other emergency vehicles as are designated by the agency responsible for the operation and control of these persons or organizations. Class A vehicles are as defined by W. Va. Code, § 17A-10-1. Agency authorization and emergency equipment are defined in W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-26. Agencies responsible for issuing authorization for emergency vehicle permits may promulgate such regulations that are necessary for the issuance of permits for emergency vehicles. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-6. 
301.03 - BICYCLE. 
    "Bicycle" means every device which does not have a motor attached and which is propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-8. 
301.04 - BUS. 
    "Bus" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than seven passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-13. 
301.05 - BUSINESS DISTRICT. 
(a)  "Business district" means the territory contiguous to and including a street or highway when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-45. 
(b)  "Central business district" means all streets and portions of streets within the area bounded on the west by Sixth Street, on the south by the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad main line right-of-way, on the east by Thirteenth Street and on the north by the Ohio River. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-1) 
301.06 - CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. 
    "Controlled-access highway" means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-41. 
301.07 - CROSSWALK. 
    "Crosswalk" includes: 
(a)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street or highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; and 
(b)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-43. 
301.08 - DRIVER. 
    "Driver" or "operator" means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-31. 
301.081 - ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. 
    "Electric personal assistive mobility device" or "EPAMD" means a self-balancing, two nontandem-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, with an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horse power), whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a propulsion system while ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 miles per hour. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-66. 
301.09 - EXPLOSIVES. 
    "Explosives" means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosive and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-24. 
301.10 - FLAMMABLE LIQUID. 
    "Flammable liquid" means any liquid which has a flash point of 70 degrees Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-25. 
301.11 - GROSS WEIGHT. 
    "Gross weight" means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-26. 
301.12 - INTERSECTION. 
    "Intersection" includes: 
(a)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets or highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets or highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; and 
(b)  Where a street or highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street or highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street or highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such streets or highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-42. 
301.13 - LANED ROADWAY. 
    "Laned roadway" means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-39. 
301.14 - MOPED. 
    "Moped" means every motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless otherwise specified in this Traffic Code, which is equipped with two or three wheels, foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be 50 cubic centimeters regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour on a level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-5a. 
301.15 - MOTORCYCLE. 
    "Motorcycle" means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-4. 
301.16 - MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. 
    "Motor-driven cycle" means every motorcycle having a piston displacement of more than 50 cubic centimeters but not more than 150 cubic centimeters, or with not more than five brake horsepower. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-5. 
301.17 - MOTOR VEHICLE. 
    "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except motorized wheelchairs. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-3. 
301.18 - OWNER. 
    "Owner" means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-32. 
301.19 - PARK. 
    "Park" when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-54. 
301.20 - PARKING AREA. 
    "Parking area" means lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or without charge. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-60. 
301.201 - PASSENGER VAN. 
    "Passenger van" means any van or other motor vehicle owned by any agency, business or other legal entity and operated for the purpose of transportation of children under the age of 18 years, other than a van utilized for private use, taxicab, bus or school bus. Passenger vans include, but are not limited to, vehicles used by daycare centers, after-school centers and nursery schools; provided, that the term "passenger van" does not include any van or other motor vehicle which is utilized for the specific purpose of transporting children to medical facilities for the purpose of medical or dental treatment and which loads and unloads the children on private property, making no stops for loading or unloading along public roads or highways. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-64. 
301.21 - PEDESTRIAN. 
    "Pedestrian" means any person afoot or any person using a wheelchair. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-30. 
301.22 - PERSON. 
    "Person" means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-29. 
301.23 - POLE TRAILER. 
    "Pole trailer" means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, trusses or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-17. 
301.24 - POLICE OFFICER. 
    "Police officer" means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-33. 
301.25 - PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY; PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(a)  "Private road" or "driveway" means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
(b)  "Private property" means real estate in private ownership without regard to the manner in which it is used. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-36. 
301.26 - RAILROAD. 
    "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property, upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-21. 
301.27 - RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. 
    "Railroad sign" or "signal" means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-49. 
301.28 - RAILROAD TRAIN. 
    "Railroad train" means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-22. 
301.29 - RESIDENCE DISTRICT. 
    "Residence district" means the territory contiguous to and including a street or highway not comprising a business district when the property on such street or highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-46. 
301.30 - RESIDENTIAL STREET. 
    "Residential street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way, whether publicly or privately maintained, located within any subdivision, development or other similar area used primarily for residential purposes when any part thereof is open to the common use of those living in such area for the purpose of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-62. 
301.31 - RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
    "Right-of-way" means the privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-51. 
301.32 - ROADWAY. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a street or highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-37. 
301.33 - SAFETY ZONE. 
    "Safety zone" means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-44. 
301.34 - SCHOOL BUS. 
    "School bus" means every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-7. 
301.35 - SCHOOL GROUNDS. 
    "School grounds" includes the land on which a school is built together with such other land used by students for play, recreation or athletic events while attending school. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-55. 
301.36 - SEMITRAILER. 
    "Semitrailer" means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so contructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-16. 
301.37 - SIDEWALK. 
    "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street or highway between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-38. 
301.38 - STOP. 
    "Stop" when required, means complete cessation from movement. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-52. 
301.39 - STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING. 
    "Stop", "stopping," or "standing," when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-53. 
301.40 - STREET OR HIGHWAY; ALLEY. 
(a)  "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel (W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-35), and shall also include, but not be limited to, all public streets and highways within the city, the municipal parking garage and any and all other city parking lots and facilities. 
(b)  "Alley" means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 9-27-93) 
301.41 - THROUGH STREET OR THROUGH HIGHWAY. 
    "Through street" or "through highway" means every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-40. 
301.42 - TRAFFIC. 
    "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street or highway for purposes of travel. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-50. 
301.43 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
    "Traffic control device" means any sign, signal, marking and device not inconsistent with this Traffic Code placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-47. 
301.44 - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. 
    "Traffic control signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-48. 
301.45 - TRAILER. 
    "Trailer" means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-15. 
301.46 - TRUCK. 
    "Truck" means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-12. 
301.47 - VEHICLE. 
    "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or wheelchairs. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-2. 
301.48 - LOADING ZONE. 
(a)  "Commercial loading zone" means a space adjacent to the curb for the exclusive use of commercial vehicles during the loading or unloading of merchandise. 
(b)  "Passenger loading zone" means a space adjacent to the curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-1) 
301.49 - WHEELCHAIR. 
    "Wheelchair" means a motorized or nonmotorized wheeled device designed for, and used by, a person with disabilities that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight miles per hour. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-1-65. 
ARTICLE 303 - ENFORCEMENT, IMPOUNDING AND PENALTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; disposition of abandoned vehicles, W. Va. Code, § 17-24-5 et seq.; uniform application of West Virginia traffic law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-7; power of local authorities, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8. 

303.01 - AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to enforce all street traffic laws of this municipality and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this municipality. 
(b)  Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
303.02 - APPLICATION TO VEHICLES UPON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; EXCEPTIONS. 
    The provisions of this Traffic Code relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and highways except: 
(a)  Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(b)  The provisions of this Traffic Code except article 347 shall apply upon streets and highways as defined in section 351.06. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-1. 
303.03 - OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS. 
(a)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with a lawful order or direction of any police officer or designated special officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-3(c). 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle so as to willfully elude or flee a police officer or designated special officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from such an officer to bring his vehicle to a stop. 
303.04 - APPLICATION TO GOVERNMENT VEHICLES; EXCEPTION. 
(a)  The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets or highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, municipality, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this section and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this Traffic Code with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this Traffic Code shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street or highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-4. 
303.05 - AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Traffic Code; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement of turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted flashing lamp as authorized by section 345.18 which is visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a warning light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-5. 
303.06 - APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES. 
    Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this Traffic Code, except those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their very nature can have no application. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-6. 
303.07 - IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION; IMMOBILIZATION. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to move a vehicle from a street or highway, any parking lot or parking facility owned and/or operated by the municipal parking board or the city to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by this city without prior notice under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(3)  When any vehicle is involved in a wreck and is not removed by the owner or any authorized person within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(4)  When any vehicle is driven by a person charged with being under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance or other drug. 
(5)  When any vehicle is in the possession of a person who has been arrested. 
(6)  When any vehicle is parked on any street, highway or avenue within the city during hours designated for the cleaning of any such street, highway or avenue. Such designation shall be made by the chief of police, traffic engineer or head of the traffic department of the city; and such street, highway or avenue shall be posted by appropriate signs at least 24 hours prior to such cleaning. These signs shall clearly set forth that parking is prohibited and that automobiles that remain in the designated areas during the prohibited times will be towed. 
(7)  Where an automobile is an immediate danger to public safety. 
(8)  When an automobile is illegally parked and impedes the flow of traffic. 
(9)  When there are more than two unpaid parking citations outstanding, and the citations contained notices that the vehicle may be towed for nonpayment of the fine. 
(10)  When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of the owner. 
(11)  When any vehicle has been abandoned or junked on public or private property as provided in W. Va. Code, Art. 17-24. 
(b)  A vehicle may be impounded after prior notice when the vehicle is parked and/or used in violation of any law, ordinance or regulation not hereinbefore provided for. Prior notice shall consist of conspicuously posting a notification of intent to tow on the vehicle at least 48 hours prior to the removal of the vehicle or personally handing to the owner a notification of the intent to tow. 
(c)  Any notice given under this section shall contain the particulars of the removal, the redemption procedure to be followed, the opportunity and procedure for obtaining a hearing contesting the right to redeem, the correctness of the towing and storage charges, or the right of removal. Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem the vehicle. Provided, that if the vehicle is redeemed prior to the giving of the notice, notice may be handed to the one seeking to redeem and notice need not be mailed. 
(d)  If no inquiry from the owner or his representative is made to the police department within 72 hours after the towing, then the police department shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such towing by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register vehicles and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which it was removed, the reasons for such removal and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(e)  Vehicles removed by the city shall be redeemed only under the following procedures: 
(1)  Only the person who can show that he is entitled to possession may redeem the vehicle. Proof may be in the form of the automobile registration, a notarized statement from the registered owner or other good and sufficient proof. 
(2)  A person seeking to redeem an impounded vehicle has a right to a hearing to contest the validity of the removal or the amount accrued for removal and storage at a hearing. If a hearing cannot be held within the next day, a release for the vehicle shall immediately be given upon the posting of a bond to cover the potential fine for the criminal charge which caused the towing and the execution of a promissory note in the amount of $25. Such note would become due and owing as a civil penalty when the person requesting the hearing either fails to appear for the hearing or fails to pay the charges after the hearing. Such note would be cancelled when the person withdraws his request for a hearing and pays the charges, or if he pays the removal and storage fees after being found liable at the hearing, or if the removal and storage is found to be in violation of this section. In the event the municipal court determines the towing was improper, the city shall bear the expenses of the towing and storage. 
(f)  Any unattended motor vehicle, found parked at any time upon any public thoroughfare of the city against which there are two or more unpaid summonses or other processes issued within a 12-month period charging that such vehicle was parked, stopped or standing in violation of any law, ordinance or local authority of the city, may be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its operation by a member of the city police department, an employee of the municipal parking board or any other agent assigned to traffic duty. No such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or other mechanism which causes no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. 
(g)  In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this article, the member of the city police department, employee of the municipal parking board or the agent assigned to traffic duty immobilizing the vehicle shall cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual to the effect that such vehicle has been immobilized for failure to pay the two or more summonses or other processes, that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to such vehicle and that any unauthorized person who removes, damages or tampers with the immobilization device may be subject to a fine and costs of repair or replacement of the immobilization device. 
(h)  Vehicles immobilized pursuant to this article will be released to the lawful owner or the person entitled to possession, upon showing adequate evidence of a right to its possession and paying the amount of all accrued fines and costs for each outstanding unpaid summons, or upon depositing of the collateral required for his appearance in the municipal court of the city to answer for each violation for which there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation notice or warrant. This release shall be signed by an authorized officer. 
(i)  Whenever a vehicle is booted by employees of the municipal parking board for unpaid traffic violations owed to the city or the municipal parking board, in accordance with existing traffic ordinances, a fee of $30 may be levied against the owner or driver of such vehicle. Such boot fee shall be due and payable at the time the boot is released from the vehicle. One-half of all boot fees collected shall be deposited in the general revenue fund account of the municipal parking board. The remaining one-half of all boot fees collected shall be earmarked for maintenance and improvements of equipment and facilities owned and operated by the municipal parking board. This subsection shall become effective immediately upon its passage by the council. 
(j)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no vehicle shall be released except upon payment of all outstanding citations in addition to towing and storage charges. (A.O.) 
(k)  Any person not authorized herein to place an immobilization device upon a vehicle pursuant to this article, who removes, damages or tampers with the same shall be fined not more than $500. 
(l)  Any person not authorized herein to place an immobilization device upon a vehicle pursuant to this article, in addition to the fine imposed herein, who removes, damages or tampers with the immobilization device shall pay to the city or the municipal parking board the actual costs to repair or replace the immobilization device. If the person fails to remit the amount due after 30 day's written notice from the city or the municipal parking board, the city or the municipal parking board may recover that amount plus its related costs by filing a civil action for the collection of the same. 
(m)  In any hearing on a charge of removing, damaging or tampering with an immobilization device, testimony that an unattended vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found parked upon any public thoroughfare with two or more unpaid summonses or other process issued within a 12-month period as prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that the records of the department of motor vehicles shows that the license plate was issued to the defendant, shall be prima-facie evidence that the owner did remove, damage or tamper with the immobilization device. A certified copy of registration from the department of motor vehicles shall be proof of such ownership. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-30; Ord. 6-14-93; Ord. 12-23-96) 
303.08 - TRAFFIC CITATION PROCEDURE. 
(a)  Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person before a magistrate for violation of any traffic law, a police officer who halts a person for such violation shall issue to such person in writing a traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him in the municipal court. The person receiving the citation shall give his written promise to appear in seven days to answer to the charge against him in municipal court or shall be immediately taken to answer to such charges. The police officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation, shall release such person from custody. 
(b)  No person shall violate his written promise to appear given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation was originally issued. 
(c)  No person shall cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than as may be lawfully authorized. 
(1964 Code Secs. 22-20, 22-22, 22-25) 
303.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code or any rule or regulation lawfully made pursuant thereto, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. (A.O.) 
(b)  Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle against whom there are four or more unpaid summonses or other processes issued charging that such owner or operated violated any provision of this Traffic Code, who shall fail to pay the fines and costs imposed pursuant to said summonses or other processes within 14 calendar days of the date of written demand therefor made upon such owner or operator by the city, shall be fined an additional amount not to exceed $100. The municipal judge shall have plenary power and authority to waive such additional fine, provided that such owner or operator shall pay all such unpaid summonses or processes over to the division of finance within seven calendar days of the date of imposition of such additional fine. This subsection shall apply to all summonses and other processes issued pursuant to this Traffic Code within 12 months next preceding the date of passage and all such summonses and processes issued thereafter. This subsection shall become effective on July 31, 1993. 
(Ord. 6-14-93) 
ARTICLE 305 - TRAFFIC CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Uniformity with State law required, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-7; powers of Municipality, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8. 

305.01 - AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
    The traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this Traffic Code to make effective the provisions of this Traffic Code and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this Traffic Code or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-36) 
305.02 - MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
    All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration or to resolutions adopted by council. All signs and signals required under this Traffic Code for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Traffic Code shall be official traffic control devices. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-37) 
305.03 - PLAY STREETS. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected designating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers having business or residing within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-45) 
305.04 - CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(a)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, including marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections, where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(b)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-46) 
305.05 - TRAFFIC LANES. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, no operator of any vehicle shall fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-47) 
305.06 - REGULATION OF SPEED BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Whenever the traffic engineer determines, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that slow speed on any part of the highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, he may determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(1964 Code Secs. 22-51, 22-53) 
305.07 - AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersection. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-57) 
305.08 - AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT DIRECTION OF MOVEMENT IN STREETS DURING CERTAIN PERIODS. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-61) 
305.09 - THROUGH STREETS AND OTHER INTERSECTIONS; SIGNS REQUIRED. 
(a)  Whenever this Traffic Code or any other ordinance of this city designates and describes a through street, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain a stop sign, or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, on each street intersecting such through street, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not designated as a through street, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the traffic engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than through streets and to determine: 
(1)  Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event the traffic engineer shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required; or 
(2)  Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection as prescribed in section 343.09, in which event the traffic engineer shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(c)  Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway. 
(1964 Code Secs. 22-63, 22-64; Ord. 6-24-85) 
305.10 - NO-PASSING ZONE. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those portions of any street where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-107) 
305.11 - PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public; and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-163) 
305.12 - CURB LOADING ZONES. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and commercial loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-161) 
305.13 - WHEN PARKING SIGNS ARE REQUIRED. 
    Whenever by this Traffic Code or any other ordinance of this city, any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on specific streets, the traffic engineer shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-170) 
305.14 - TRAFFIC CONTROL FILE. 
(a)  There is hereby established a traffic control file which shall list the following traffic control designations and such others as authorized by the traffic engineer: 
(1)  Traffic control signals. 
(2)  Through streets, state routes and truck routes. 
(3)  Stop intersections. 
(4)  Yield right-of-way intersections. 
(5)  Commercial and passenger loading areas. 
(6)  Prohibited and limited parking areas; parking meter zones. 
(7)  One-way streets and alleys. 
(8)  Prohibited and restricted turns. 
(9)  Special speed limits. 
(b)  The traffic control file shall include: 
(1)  Adequate description of the street or area affected. 
(2)  Effective date of traffic engineer's regulations or authorizing ordinance's effective date and number. 
(3)  Date when official signs, signals or markings were erected or placed in proper position. 
(c)  The file shall be prepared and maintained to date by the traffic engineer. 
(d)  Council or the traffic engineer may amend the traffic control file, but no such ordinance or regulation shall be enforceable until after the effective date of the ordinance or regulation and the official signs, signals or markings are erected or placed in proper position. 
    The traffic engineer upon receipt of a copy of the amending ordinance or regulations shall record the information in the file to conform with the ordinance or regulation provisions. 
ARTICLE 307 - PREJUDGMENT ALTERNATIVE DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN TRAFFIC OFFENSES 

307.01 - RULES OF PROCEDURE. 
    The municipal court shall adopt such rules of procedure as may be necessary or advantageous for the efficient administration of justice. 
(Ord. 2-10-03) 
307.02 - TRAFFIC SCHOOL. 
    With the consent of the judge of the municipal court a person alleged to have committed a minor traffic offense pursuant to the Traffic Code of the City of Huntington may elect to attend traffic school. 
    Traffic school shall be operated under the supervision of the municipal court judge who shall establish written procedures covering applications to attend traffic school, and the duration and curriculum of traffic school. In addition to any and all court costs and imposed fines any persons wishing to attend traffic school shall, with their application to attend, pay to the director of finance a fee for such school in the amount of $65. In the event that an individual is charged with two or more offenses arising out of the same incident, the fee shall be $20 for each additional offense in addition to the court costs and fines imposed. 
    Pending the successful completion of traffic school, the charges against a person enrolled in traffic school shall not be tried nor shall any plea of a defendant be required. Upon successful completion of traffic school said charges shall be dismissed with prejudice. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no person who is alleged to have violated section 333.01 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington shall be eligible to attend traffic school; nor shall any person be permitted to attend traffic school more than one time during any 24 consecutive month period. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
CHAPTER THREE - STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
ARTICLE 311 - STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Authority to establish play streets, § 305.03; dropping, leaking loads, § 347.04. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to prohibit littering in streets, W. Va. Code § 8-12-5(3); authority to regulate processions or assemblages, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(a)(3). 

311.01 - PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL IN STREET. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle. (W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-11) 
(d)  No person shall throw, place or deposit upon any street or highway any material, article or substance which injures or damages, or is likely to injure or damage, the street or highway. 
311.02 - PLAY STREETS. 
(a)  No person shall use the public streets, highways, alleys, thoroughfares, roads or avenues of the Municipality for the purpose of engaging in or playing any games or athletic activities, except public ways specifically set aside for such purposes. 
(b)  When authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or highway or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residence is within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or highway or portion thereof. 
311.03 - TOY VEHICLES ON STREETS. (Repealed) 
Editor's note- Former section 311.03 was repealed by an ordinance passed April 26, 1999. 
311.04 - PARADES. 
    No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or participate in any parade, assemblage or procession other than a funeral procession upon any street or highway, or block off any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit from the police chief. 
    Applications for such permit shall be made on such forms as may be prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. Applications shall be filed not less than five days before the time intended for such parade, procession or assemblage. 
    The permit may be refused or canceled if: 
(a)  The time, place, size or conduct of the parade including the assembly areas and route of march would unreasonably interfere with the public convenience and safe use of the streets and highways. 
(b)  The parade would require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement, assembly area and areas contiguous thereto so as to deny normal police protection to the municipality. 
(c)  The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably interfere with the movement of police vehicles, fire-fighting equipment or ambulance service to other areas of the municipality. 
(d)  The parade would unreasonably interfere with another parade for which a permit has been issued. 
(e)  The information contained in the application is found to be false, misleading or incomplete in any material detail. 
(f)  An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper conduct of the parade. 
    The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe reasonable conditions, including the hours, the places of assembly and of dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions thereof which may be used or occupied. 
311.05 - RESERVED PARKING TO FORM ASSEMBLY OR PROCESSION. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate certain streets or portions thereof for the temporary assembly of persons, vehicles or processions and to cause signs to be placed as notice that such area is reserved. When official signs are so placed, no person shall stop, stand, park or drive a vehicle within such reserved area unless he is one of those taking part in or forming the assembly or procession. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-152.1) 
311.06 - ASSEMBLAGES. 
(a)  No person may hold a public assembly or assemble in a crowd on any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, landings, squares, rights-of-way or on any other public property in such a manner as to block ingress to and egress from such property or to unreasonably hinder the free flow of and efficient movement of persons and vehicles upon such property. 
(b)  The traffic engineer may grant permission for an otherwise unlawful assemblage under subsection (a) and shall consider the following factors in determining whether such permission may be granted: 
(1)  Nature and purpose of assemblage. 
(2)  Location and route of assemblage. 
(3)  Duration of assemblage. 
(4)  Degree of hindrance by assemblage to free and efficient flow of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(5)  Time of day of assemblage. 
(6)  Number of persons in assemblage. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-33) 
311.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 313 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic control devices defined, § 301.43; traffic control signal defined, § 301.44 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; authority to place traffic control devices, W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-2-8(a)(2), 17C-3-3; placing traffic control devices on State highways, W. Va. Code §§ 17C-2-8(b), 17C-3-2; local regulations requiring traffic control devices, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(c). 

313.01 - OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this Traffic Code. 
(b)  No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-4. 
313.02 - OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL INSTRUCTIONS AT STREET CONSTRUCTION. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the traffic-control instructions of any law enforcement officer or persons authorized by the commissioner of highways or by proper local authorities to operate traffic control devices, act as flagmen or operate authorized vehicles engaged in work at or near the site of street or highway construction maintenance work, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-4a. 
313.03 - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "go," "caution" or "stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(a)  Green alone or "go": 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under section 343.02, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(b)  Yellow alone or "caution" when showing following the green or "go" signal: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "stop" signal is exhibited. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(c)  Red alone or "stop": 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone except as provided in subsection (c)(2) and (3) hereof. 
(2)  A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or "stop" signal as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection, may cautiously make a right turn but such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at such intersection, except that council may by ordinance prohibit any such right turn against a red or "stop" signal at any intersection which ordinance shall be effective when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof. 
(3)  A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or "stop" signal as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection on a one-way street which intersects another one-way street on which traffic moves to the left, may cautiously make a left turn into the one-way street but such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at such intersection, except that council may by ordinance prohibit any such left turn against a red or "stop" signal at any intersection, which ordinance shall be effective when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof. 
(4)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Red with green arrow: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(e)  In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-5. 
313.04 - PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "wait" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(a)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(b)  Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the wait signal is showing. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-6. 
313.05 - FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS. 
    Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(a)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(b)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-7. 
313.06 - UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING. 
(a)  No local authority or person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized traffic control device or traffic control signal, or any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street or highway any traffic control device bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to a street or highway of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(b)  Every such prohibited device, signal, sign or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the commissioner of highways or other authority having jurisdiction over the street or highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-8. 
313.07 - ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
    No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-9. 
313.08 - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS IN CONSTRUCTION ZONES. 
(a)  At each and every location where street or highway construction work is to be conducted a sign shall be posted at least 1,000 feet from the construction site, or as close to 1,000 feet from the construction site as is practicable given the location of the site when workers are present, notifying all motorists as to the speed limit and displaying the words "construction work". 
(b)  No person shall violate any posted speed restriction or traffic restriction at such construction site referred to in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude prosecution of any operator of a motor vehicle who commits a violation of any other provision of this Traffic Code for such violation. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-3-4b. 
313.99 - PENALTY. 
State Law reference- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
CHAPTER FIVE - VEHICULAR OPERATION 
ARTICLE 331 - ACCIDENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Impounding wrecked vehicles, § 303.07; removal of glass, etc. from highway, § 311.01. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to require local accident report, W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-15. 

331.01 - ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she has complied with the requirements of section 331.03; provided, that the driver may leave the scene of the accident as may reasonably be necessary for the purpose of rendering assistance to an injured person as required by section 331.03. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-2. 
331.02 - ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 331.03. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with such requirements under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-2. 
331.03 - DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his or her name, address and the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his or her driver's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-3. 
331.04 - COLLISION WITH UNATTENDED VEHICLE. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-4. 
331.05 - COLLISION WITH FIXTURES UPON A STREET OR HIGHWAY. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his or her name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his or her driver's license and shall make report of such accident when and as required. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-5. 
331.06 - IMMEDIATE REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication, whether oral or written, give notice of such accident to the police department. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-6. 
331.07 - WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an immediate report of an accident as required in section 331.06 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be made such report not made by the driver. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-8. 
331.08 - GARAGES TO REPORT BULLET DAMAGE. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been struck by any bullet, shall report to the police department within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number, and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-12. 
331.09 - WRITTEN REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS. 
    The driver, attorney or agent of such driver, of a vehicle involved in an accident occurring on the public highway, streets and alleys of this city resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of such amount as provided in W. Va. Code, § 17C-4-7(a) shall, within five days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police department, providing such accident was not investigated at the scene by a member of the police department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-34.1) 
331.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 333 - DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE, RECKLESS DRIVING, USE OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES WHILE DRIVING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to prohibit driving under the influence, W. Va. Code § 8-12-5(21); compliance with state law, W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-11a; implied consent, W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A. 

333.01 - DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE. 
(a)  Any person who: 
(1)  Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she: 
A.  Is under the influence of alcohol; or 
B.  Is under the influence of any controlled substance; or 
C.  Is under the influence of any other drug; or 
D.  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug; or 
E.  Having an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent (0.08%) or more, by weight; and 
(2)  While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure proximately causes the death of any person within one year next following the act or failure. 
(3)  Commits the act or failure in reckless disregard of the safety of others and when the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or drugs is shown to be a contributing cause to the death, is guilty of a felony and, upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in a state correctional facility for not less than two years nor more than ten years and shall be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $3,000. 
(b)  Any person who: 
(1)  Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she: 
A.  Is under the influence of alcohol; or 
B.  Is under the influence of any controlled substance; or 
C.  Is under the influence of any other drug; or 
D.  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug; or 
E.  Having an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent (0.08%) or more, by weight; and 
(2)  While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure proximately causes the death of any person within one year next following the act or failure, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not less than one day nor more than one year and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000. 
(c)  Any person who: 
(1)  Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she: 
A.  Is under the influence of alcohol; or 
B.  Is under the influence of any controlled substance; or 
C.  Is under the influence of any other drug; or 
D.  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug; or 
E.  Having an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent (0.08%) or more, by weight. 
(2)  While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure proximately causes bodily injury to any person other than himself or herself, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not less than one day nor more than one year, which jail term is to include actual confinement of not less than twenty-four hours, and shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000. 
(d)  Any person who: 
(1)  Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she: 
A.  Is under the influence of alcohol; or 
B.  Is under the influence of any controlled substance; or 
C.  Is under the influence of any other drug; or 
D.  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug; or 
E.  Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent or more, by weight, but less than fifteen hundredths of one percent, by weight. 
(2)  Is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, except as provided in section 333.01a (deferral of proceedings) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-2b, shall be confined in jail for up to six months and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. A person sentenced pursuant to this subdivision shall receive credit for any period of actual confinement he or she served upon arrest for the subject offense. 
(e)  Any person who drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of fifteen hundredths of one percent or more, by weight, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not less than two days nor more than six months, which jail term is to include actual confinement of not less than twenty-four hours, and shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000. A person sentenced pursuant to this subdivision shall receive credit for any period of actual confinement he or she served upon arrest for the subject offense. 
(f)  Any person who, being a habitual user of narcotic drugs or amphetamine or any derivative thereof, drives a vehicle in this municipality is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not less than one day nor more than six months, which jail term shall include actual confinement of not less than twenty-four hours, and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. 
(g)  Any person who: 
(1)  Knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this municipality by any other person who: 
A.  Is under the influence of alcohol; or 
B.  Is under the influence of any controlled substance; or 
C.  Is under the influence of any other drug; or 
D.  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug; or 
E.  Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent (0.08%) or more, by weight; 
(2)  Is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not more than six months and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. 
(h)  Any person who knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this municipality by any other person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or amphetamine or any derivative thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not more than six months and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. 
(i)  Any person under the age of twenty-one years who drives a vehicle in this Municipality while he or she has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of two hundredths of one percent (0.02%) or more, by weight, but less than eight hundredths of one percent (0.08%), by weight, for a first offense under this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100. For a second or subsequent offense under this subsection, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for 24 hours and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. A person who is charged with a first offense under the provisions of this subsection may move for a continuance of the proceedings, from time to time, to allow the person to participate in the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program as provided for in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-3a. Upon successful completion of the program, the court shall dismiss the charge against the person and expunge the person's record as it relates to the alleged offense. In the event the person fails to successfully complete the program, the court shall proceed to an adjudication of the alleged offense. A motion for a continuance under this subsection may not be construed as an admission or be used as evidence. 
A person arrested and charged with an offense under the provisions of this subsection or subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of this section may not also be charged with an offense under this subsection arising out of the same transaction or occurrence. 
(j)  Any person who: 
(1)  Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she: 
A.  Is under the influence of alcohol; or 
B.  Is under the influence of any controlled substance; or 
C.  Is under the influence of any other drug; or 
D.  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled substance or any other drug; or 
E.  Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent (0.08%) or more, by weight; and 
(2)  The person while driving has on or within the motor vehicle one or more other persons who are unemancipated minors who have not reached their sixteenth birthday is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not less than two days nor more than 12 months, which jail term is to include actual confinement of not less than 48 hours and shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000. 
(k)  A person violating any provision of subsection (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (i) of this section, for the second offense under this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not less than six months nor more than one year and the court may, in its discretion, impose a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $3,000. 
(l)  A person violating any provision of subsection (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (i) of this section, for the third or any subsequent offense under this section, is guilty of a felony and, upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in a state correctional facility for not less than one nor more than three years and the court may, in its discretion, impose a fine of not less than $3,000 nor more than $5,000. 
(m)  For purposes of subsections (k) and (l) of this section of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and/or the West Virginia Code relating to second, third and subsequent offenses, the following types of convictions are to be regarded as convictions under this section: 
(1)  Any conviction under the provisions of subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of this section or under a prior enactment of this section for an offense which occurred within the ten-year period immediately preceding the date of arrest in the current proceeding; 
(2)  Any conviction under a municipal ordinance of this state or any other state or a statute of the United States or of any other state of an offense which has the same elements as an offense described in subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of this section, which offense occurred within the ten-year period immediately preceding the date of arrest in the current proceeding; and, 
(3)  Any period of conditional probation imposed pursuant to section 333.01a (deferral of proceedings) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and/or W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-2b for violation of subsection (d) hereof, which violation occurred within the ten-year period immediately preceding the date of arrest in the current proceeding. 
(n)  A person may be charged in a warrant or indictment or information for a second or subsequent offense under this section if the person has been previously arrested for or charged with a violation of this section which is alleged to have occurred within the applicable time period for prior offenses, notwithstanding the fact that there has not been a final adjudication of the charges for the alleged previous offense. In that case, the warrant or indictment or information must set forth the date, location and particulars of the previous offense or offenses. No person may be convicted of a second or subsequent offense under this section unless the conviction for the previous offense has become final, or the person has previously had a period of conditional probation imposed pursuant to section 333.01a (deferral of proceedings) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and/or W. Va. Code § 17C-5-2b. 
(o)  The fact that any person charged with a violation of subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) of this section, or any person permitted to drive as described under subsection (g) or (h) of this section, is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, a controlled substance or a drug does not constitute a defense against any charge of violating subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of this section. 
(p)  For purposes of this section, the term "controlled substance" has the meaning ascribed to it in W. Va. Code, ch. 60A. 
(q)  The sentences provided in this section upon conviction for a violation of this article are mandatory and are not subject to suspension or probation; provided, that the court may apply the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 62-11A-1 et seq. to a person sentenced or committed to a term of one year or less for a first offense under this section; provided further, that the court may impose a term of conditional probation pursuant to section 333.01a (deferral of proceedings) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and/or W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-2b to persons adjudicated thereunder. An order for home detention by the court pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 62-11B-1 et seq. may be used as an alternative sentence to any period of incarceration required by this section for a first or subsequent offense; provided, however, that for any period of home incarceration ordered for a person convicted of second offense under this section, electronic monitoring shall be required for no fewer than five days of the total period of home confinement ordered and the offender may not leave home for those five days notwithstanding the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 62-11B-5; provided further, that for any period of home incarceration ordered for a person convicted of a third or subsequent violation of this section, electronic monitoring shall be included for no fewer than ten days of the total period of home confinement ordered and the offender may not leave home for those ten days notwithstanding W. Va. Code, § 62-11B-5. 
(r)  For purposes of this section, the phrase "in this municipality" means anywhere within the physical boundaries of this municipality, including, but not limited to, publicly maintained streets and highways, and subdivision streets or other areas not publicly maintained but nonetheless open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(s)  When used in this section, the term or phrases "driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor," "driving or operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated," "for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor to drive any vehicle," or any similar term or phrase shall be construed to mean and be synonymous with the term or phrase "while under the influence of alcohol...drives a vehicle" as the latter term or phrase is used in this section. 
(t)  A warrant or indictment which charges or alleges an offense, prohibited by the provisions of this section, and which warrant or indictment uses any of the terms or phrases set forth in subsection (s) hereof, shall not thereby be fatally defective if such warrant or indictment otherwise informs the person so accused of the charges against him or her. 
(Ord. of 6-25-12(1)) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-2. 
333.01a - DEFERRAL OF FURTHER PROCEEDINGS FOR CERTAIN FIRST OFFENSES UPON CONDITION OF PARTICIPATION IN MOTOR VEHICLE ALCOHOL TEST AND LOCK PROGRAM; PROCEDURE ON CHARGE OF VIOLATION OF CONDITIONS. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (g) of this section, whenever any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense under this article or under any statute of the United States or of any state relating to driving under the influence of alcohol, any controlled substance, or any other drug: 
(1)  Notifies the court within 30 days of his or her arrest of his or her intention to participate in a deferral pursuant to this section; and 
(2)  Pleads guilty to or is found guilty of driving under the influence of alcohol under section 333.01(d), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused, shall defer further proceedings and, notwithstanding any provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington or the West Virginia Code to the contrary, place him or her on probation, which conditions shall include, that he or she successfully completes the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program as provided for in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-3a. Participation therein shall be for a period of at least one hundred and sixty-five days after he or she has served the fifteen days of license suspension imposed pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-2. 
(b)  A defendant's election to participate in deferral under this section shall constitute a waiver of his or her right to an administrative hearing as provided in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-2. 
(c)  (1)  If the prosecuting attorney files a motion alleging that the defendant during the period of the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program has been removed therefrom by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or has failed to successfully complete the program before making a motion for dismissal pursuant to subsection (d) hereof, the court may issue such process as is necessary to bring the defendant before the court. 
(2)  A motion alleging such violation filed pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) hereof must be filed during the period of the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program or, if filed thereafter, must be filed within a reasonable time after the alleged violation was committed. 
(3)  When the defendant is brought before the court, the court shall afford the defendant an opportunity to be heard. If the court finds that the defendant has been rightfully removed from the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program by the Division of Motor Vehicles, the court may order, when appropriate, that the deferral be terminated, and thereupon enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided. 
(4)  Should the defendant fail to complete or be removed from the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program, the defendant waives the appropriate statute of limitations and the defendant's right to a speedy trial under any applicable Federal or State constitutional provisions, statutes, or rules of court during the period of enrollment in the program. 
(d)  When the defendant shall have completed satisfactorily the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program and complied with its conditions, the defendant may move the court for an order dismissing the charges. This motion shall be supported by affidavit of the defendant and by certification of the Division of Motor Vehicles that the defendant has successfully completed the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program. A copy of the motion shall be served on the prosecuting attorney who shall within 30 days after service advise the judge of any objections to the motion, serving a copy of such objections on the defendant or the defendant's attorney. If there are no objections filed within the 30-day period, the court shall thereafter dismiss the charges against the defendant. If there are objections filed with regard to the dismissal of charges, the court shall proceed as set forth in subsection (c) hereof. 
(e)  Except as provided herein, unless a defendant adjudicated pursuant to this subsection be convicted of a subsequent violation of this article, discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime except for those provided in section 333.01(a) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-2. Except as provided in subsection (k), (l), and (m), section 333.01 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-2 regarding subsequent offenses, the effect of the dismissal and discharge shall be to restore the person in contemplation of law to the status he or she occupied prior to arrest and trial. No person as to whom a dismissal and discharge have been effected shall be thereafter held to be guilty of perjury, false swearing, or otherwise giving a false statement by reason of his or her failure to disclose or acknowledge his or her arrest or trial in response to any inquiry made of him or her for any purpose other than any inquiry made in connection with any subsequent offense as that term is defined in section 333.01(m). 
(f)  There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any person. 
(g)  No person shall be eligible for dismissal and discharge under this section: 
(1)  In any prosecution in which any violation of any other provision of this article has been charged, 
(2)  If the person holds a commercial driver's license or operates commercial motor vehicle(s), or 
(3)  The person has previously had his or her driver's license revoked under section 333.01(a) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-2a, or under any statute of the United States or of any state relating to driving under the influence of alcohol, of any controlled substance, or of any other drug. 
(h)  (1)  After a period of not less than one year which shall begin to run immediately upon the expiration of a term of probation imposed upon any person under this section, the person may apply to the court for an order to expunge from all official records all recordations of his or her arrest, trial, and conviction, pursuant to this section except for those maintained by the Division of Motor Vehicles; provided, that any person who has previously been convicted of a felony may not make a motion for expungement pursuant to this section. 
(2)  If the prosecuting attorney objects to the expungement, the objections shall be filed with the court within 30 days after service of a motion for expungement and copies of the objections shall be served on the defendant or the defendant's attorney. 
(3)  If the objections are filed, the court shall hold a hearing on the objections, affording all parties an opportunity to be heard. If the court determines after a hearing that the person during the period of his or her probation and during the period of time prior to his or her application to the court under this subsection has not been guilty of any serious or repeated violation of the conditions of his or her probation, it shall order the expungement. 
(I)  Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, any person prosecuted for a violation of section 333.01(d) the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington whose case is disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be liable for any court costs assessable against a person convicted of a violation of section 333.01(j). Payment of such costs may be made a condition of probation. The costs assessed pursuant to this subsection, whether as a term of probation or not, shall be distributed as other court costs in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 50-3-2, § 14-2A-4, § 30-29-4, § 62-5-2, § 62-5-7, and § 62-5-10. 
(Ord. of 6-25-12(1)) 
333.01b - REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO TESTS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PRIVILEGE; CONSENT NOT WITHDRAWN IF PERSON ARRESTED IS INCAPABLE OF REFUSAL; HEARING. 
(a)  If any person under arrest as specified in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-4 refuses to submit to any secondary chemical test, the tests shall not be given; provided, that prior to the refusal, the person is given an oral warning and a written statement advising him or her that his or her refusal to submit to the secondary test finally designated will result in the revocation of his or her license to operate a motor vehicle in this state for a period of at least 45 days and up to life; and that after fifteen minutes following the warnings the refusal is considered final. The arresting officer after that period of time expires has no further duty to provide the person with an opportunity to take the secondary test. The officer shall, within 48 hours of the refusal, sign and submit to the commissioner of motor vehicles a written statement of the officer that: 
(1)  He or she had reasonable grounds to believe the person had been driving a motor vehicle in this state while under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or drugs; 
(2)  The person was lawfully placed under arrest for an offense relating to driving a motor vehicle in this state while under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or drugs; 
(3)  The person refused to submit to the secondary chemical test finally designated in the matter provided in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-4; and 
(4)  The person was given a written statement advising him or her that his or her license to operate a motor vehicle in this state would be revoked for a period of at least forty-five days and up to life if he or she refused to submit to the secondary test finally designated in the matter provided in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-4. 
    The signing of the statement required to be signed by this section constitutes an oath or affirmation by the person signing the statement that the statements contained in the statement are true and that any copy filed is a true copy. The statement shall contain upon its face a warning to the officer signing that to willfully sign a statement containing false information concerning any matter or thing, material or not material, is false swearing and is a misdemeanor. Upon receiving the statement the commissioner shall make and enter an order revoking the person's license to operate a motor vehicle in this state for the period prescribed by this section. 
    For the first refusal to submit to the designated secondary chemical test, the commissioner shall make and enter an order revoking the person's license to operate a motor vehicle in this state for a period of one year or 45 days, with an additional one year of participation in the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-3a; provided, that a person revoked for driving while under the influence of drugs is not eligible to participate in the Motor Vehicle Test and Lock Program. The application for participation in the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program shall be considered to be a waiver of the hearing provided in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-2. If the person's license has previously been revoked under the provisions of this section, the commissioner shall, for the refusal to submit to the designated secondary chemical test, make and enter an order revoking the person's license to operate a motor vehicle in this state for a period of ten years; provided, however, that the license may be reissued in five years in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-3. If the person's license has previously been revoked more than once under the provisions of this section, the commissioner shall, for the refusal to submit to the designated secondary chemical test, make and enter an order revoking the person's license to operate a motor vehicle in this state for a period of life. A copy of each order shall be forwarded to the person by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall contain the reasons for the revocation and shall specify the revocation period imposed pursuant to this section. A revocation shall not become effective until ten days after receipt of the copy of the order. Any person who is unconscious or who is otherwise in a condition rendering him or her incapable of refusal shall be considered not to have withdrawn his or her consent for a test of his or her blood, breath or urine as provided in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-4 and the test may be administered although the person is not informed that his or her failure to submit to the test will result in the revocation of his or her license to operate a motor vehicle in this state for the period provided for in this section. A revocation under this section shall run concurrently with the period of any suspension or revocation imposed in accordance with other provisions of this code and growing out of the same incident which gave rise to the arrest for driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or drugs and the subsequent refusal to undergo the test finally designated in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-4. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, where reference is made to previous suspensions or revocations under this section, the following types of suspensions or revocations shall also be regarded as suspensions or revocations under this section: 
(1)  Any suspension or revocation on the basis of a conviction under a municipal ordinance of another state or a statute of the United States or of any other state of an offense which has the same elements as an offense described in W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-4 for conduct which occurred on or after June 10, 1983; and 
(2)  Any revocation under the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-1 or § 17C-5A-2 for conduct which occurred on or after June 10, 1983. 
(c)  A person whose license to operate a motor vehicle in this state has been revoked shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 17C-5A-2. 
(Ord. of 6-25-12(1)) 
333.02 - RECKLESS DRIVING. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle upon any street or highway, or upon any residential street, or in any parking area, or upon the ways of any institution of higher education, whether public or private or upon the property of the Board of Education, or upon any property within the municipal park and public recreation system, in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) hereof shall not apply to those areas which have been temporarily closed for racing sport events or which may be set aside by the municipality within the park and recreation system for exclusive use by motorcycles or other recreational vehicles. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-5-3. 
333.03 - HAZARDOUS DRIVING. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving his full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle. 
333.04 - USE OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES WHILE DRIVING. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a person may not drive or operate a motor vehicle on a public street or highway while: 
(1)  Texting unless the texting is accomplished by hands-free equipment; or 
(2)  Using a cell phone or other electronic communications device, unless the use is accomplished by hands-free equipment. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  "Cell telephone" shall mean a cellular, analog, wireless or digital telephone. 
(2)  "Driving" or "operating a motor vehicle" means operating a motor vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays, but does not include operating a motor vehicle when the driver moved the vehicle to the side of, or off, a highway and halted in a location where the vehicle can safely remain stationary. 
(3)  "Electronic communication device" shall mean a cell telephone, personal digital assistant, electronic device with mobile data access, laptop computer, pager, broadband personal communication device, 2-way messaging device, electronic game, or portable computing device. For the purposes of this section, an "electronic communication device" does not include: 
A.  Voice radios, mobile radios, land mobile radios, commercial mobile radios or two way radios with the capability to transmit and receive voice transmissions utilizing a push-to-talk or press-to-transmit function; or 
B.  Other voice radios used by a law-enforcement officer, an emergency services provider, an employee or agent of public safety organizations, first responders, Amateur Radio Operators (HAM) licensed by the Federal Communications Commission and school bus operators. 
(4)  "Engaging in a call" shall mean when a person talks into or listens on an electronic communication device, but shall not include when a person dials or enters a phone number on a pushpad or screen to initiate the call. 
(5)  "Hands-free electronic communication device" shall mean an electronic communication device that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such electronic communication device, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand or both hands. 
(6)  "Hands-free equipment" shall mean the internal feature or function of a hands-free electronic communication device or the attachment or addition to a hands-free electronic communication device by which a user may engage in a call or text without the use of either hand or both hands. 
(7)  "Texting" means manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an electronic communication device, and includes, but is not limited to, short message service, e-mailing, instant messaging, a command or request to access a World Wide Web page or engaging in any other form of electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication. For purposes of this section, "texting" does not include the following actions: 
A.  Reading, selecting or entering a telephone number, an extension number, or voicemail retrieval codes and commands into an electronic device by pressing the device in order to initiate or receive a phone call or using voice commands to initiate or receive a telephone call; 
B.  Inputting, selecting or reading information on a global positioning system or navigation system; or 
C.  Using a device capable of performing multiple functions, including fleet management systems, dispatching devices, smart phones, citizens band radios or music players, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited in this section. 
(8)  "Using a cell phone or other electronic communication device" shall mean holding in a person's hand or hands an electronic communication device while: 
A.  Viewing or transmitting images or data; 
B.  Playing games; 
C.  Composing, sending, reading, viewing, accessing, browsing, transmitting, saving or retrieving e-mail, text messages or other electronic data; or 
D.  Engaging in a call. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A law-enforcement officer, a firefighter, an emergency medical technician, a paramedic or the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle in the performance of their official duties; 
(2)  A person using an electronic communication device to report to appropriate authorities a fire, a traffic accident, a serious road hazard, or a medical or hazardous materials emergencies. 
(3)  The activation or deactivation of hands-free equipment or a function of hands-free equipment. 
(d)  This section does not supersede the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 17B-2-3A, or any more restrictive provisions for drivers of commercial motor vehicles prescribed by the provisions of chapter seventeen-e of this code or federal law rule. 
(e)  Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a traffic offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall for a first offense be fined $100; for a second offense be fined $250; and for a third or subsequent offense be fined $500. No court costs or other fees shall be assessed for a violation of subsection (a). 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington to the contrary, points may not be entered on any driver's record maintained by the Division of Motor Vehicles as a result of a violation of this section, except for the third and subsequent convictions of the offense, for which three points shall be entered on any driver's record maintained by the Division of Motor Vehicles. 
(g)  Driving or operating a motor vehicle on a public street or highway while texting shall be enforced as a primary offense as of July 1, 2012. Driving or operating a motor vehicle on a public street or highway while using a cell phone or other electronic communication device without hands-free shall be enforced as a secondary offense as of July 1, 2012, and as a primary offense as of July 1, 2013 for purposes of citation. 
(h)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize seizure of a cell phone or electronic device by any law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 6-25-12(2)) 
333.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 335 - SPEED RESTRICTIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Regulation by traffic signals, § 305.06. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to regulate speed, W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-2-8, 17C-6-3; minimum speed regulations, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-3(a); special speed limitations, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-4 et seq.; use of radar, W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-7. 

335.01 - MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards, then existing. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street or highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(b)  Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) hereof the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be lawful but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be unlawful. 
(1)  Fifteen miles per hour when passing a school building or school grounds abutting on a road, street or highway during school recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours. Such speed restriction shall not apply to vehicles traveling on a controlled-access highway which is separated from the school or school grounds by a fence or barrier approved by the commissioner of highways; 
(2)  Fifty-five miles per hour on open country streets and highways, except as otherwise provided by this article. 
(3)    
State and 
Federal 
Highways (mph) Business 
District 
(mph) Other Streets (mph) Vehicles designed for carrying passengers 35 25 25 Other vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires 35 25 25  
(4)  Sixty-five miles per hour on interstate highways. 
    The speed set forth in this section may be altered as authorized in W. Va. Code, Art. 17C-6. 
(c)  Whenever the speed limitations have been so altered, either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as required, operators of vehicles shall be governed by the speed limitations set forth on such signs. No person shall exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs. 
(d)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (a) hereof drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(e)  The speed limit on controlled-access highways and interstate highways, where no special hazard exists that requires a lower speed, shall in no event be lower than 55 miles per hour and the speed limits specified in subsection (b) hereof shall not apply. (W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-1) 
(f)  Pursuant to sections 305.14(a)(9) and 305.14(d) the traffic engineer shall designate certain streets located in residential or other areas that are subject to special maximum speed limits. Adequate descriptions of streets having special speed limits and the speed limits of those streets shall be maintained in the traffic file by the traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 9-28-87) 
335.02 - SLOW SPEED. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(b)  The driver of a slow-moving vehicle shall keep as near to the right-hand curb as practicable. Slow-moving vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets and highways abreast; one must follow the other. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-98) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-3a(a). 
335.03 - SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle upon a street, avenue, alley or other public way in the city at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour when passing a municipal swimming pool or the grounds thereof during the hours when such facilities are open. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with other than pneumatic tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten miles per hour. 
(c)  No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a street or highway at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure, when such structure is so signposted. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-50) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-5. 
335.04 - RACING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall engage in, or aid or abet by serving as lookout or timer or in any other capacity whatever, any speed race, as defined herein, on any public street or highway in this Municipality. For the purposes of this section, "speed race" means: 
(a)  The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration competition with another motor vehicle or motor vehicles; or 
(b)  The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration competition against time; or 
(c)  The operation of a motor vehicle in speed competition with another motor vehicle or motor vehicles where the speed exceeds the lawful speed limit. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-6-8(a). 
335.99 - PENALTY. 
State Law reference- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 337 - DRIVING ON RIGHT; PASSING[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic lanes, § 305.05; no passing zones, § 305.10. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar State law; authority to establish one-way streets, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(4). 

337.01 - DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-1. 
337.02 - PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-2. 
337.03 - OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER'S DUTIES. 
    The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to these limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall give an audible signal and pass to the left of the overtaken vehicle at a safe distance and may not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking a bicycle traveling in the same direction shall pass to the left of the bicycle at a distance of not less than three feet at a careful and reduced speed, and may not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken bicycle. 
(c)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and may not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
( Ord. of 1-26-15(2) ) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-3. 
337.04 - OVERTAKING AND PASSING UPON RIGHT. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-4. 
337.05 - OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTER. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-5. 
337.06 - ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY. 
(a)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street or highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction; 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing; 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-6. 
337.07 - HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES. 
    When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person indicating that overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-7. 
337.08 - ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS. 
(a)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(b)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-8(b), (c). 
337.09 - DRIVING IN MARKED LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply: 
(a)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(b)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane which is clearly marked as a left turn lane except in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(c)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-9. 
337.10 - FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or highway. 
(b)  No operator of any motor truck, registered for a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds, bus, special mobile equipment or any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle operating upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district, shall follow within 200 feet of another motor truck, bus, special mobile equipment or any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle; provided that this provision shall not be construed to: 
(1)  Prevent overtaking and passing; 
(2)  Apply upon any lane specially designated for the use of motor trucks or combinations of vehicles, or within any section of a roadway posted or marked as a "no-passing zone"; 
(3)  Apply to any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the United States or of this state; and 
(4)  Apply to funeral processions. 
(c)  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; or 
(2)  Any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the United States or of this state. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-10. 
337.11 - DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS. 
    Whenever any street or highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection established by public authority. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-11. 
337.12 - ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-7-12. 
337.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 339 - TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Restricted turn signals, § 305.07. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to regulate the turning of vehicles, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(a)(9); authority to specify different courses for turns, W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-5. 

339.01 - CONFORMITY WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as provided in this article. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-1. 
339.02 - RIGHT TURNS. 
    Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-2. 
339.03 - LEFT TURNS ON TWO-WAY ROADWAYS. 
    At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-3. 
339.04 - LEFT TURNS ON OTHER THAN TWO-WAY ROADWAYS. 
    At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-4. 
339.05 - SPECIFIED TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS. 
    Council or other designated traffic authority may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this article be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-5. 
339.06 - "U" TURNS RESTRICTED. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 500 feet. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or upon any street in a business district, or upon a controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit such movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety to other users of the street and without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-6. 
339.07 - STARTING VEHICLE. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-7. 
339.08 - SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in sections 339.02 to 339.05, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-8. 
339.09 - SIGNALS TO BE GIVEN BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE. 
    Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then such signals must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-9. 
339.10 - HAND AND ARM SIGNALS. 
    All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(a)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(b)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward. 
(c)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-8-10. 
339.99 - PENALTY. 
State Law reference- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 341 - RIGHT-OF-WAY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to designate through streets and stop intersections, W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-2-8(a)(6), 17C-12-5. 

341.01 - RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different street or highway. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter an intersection from a different street or highway at approximately the same time the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) hereof are modified at through streets or highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in this article. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-1. 
341.02 - RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT. 
    The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this Traffic Code may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicles making the left turn. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-2. 
341.03 - RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY OR STOP INTERSECTIONS. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by section 343.05 at the entrance to a through street or highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from such through streets or highways or which are approaching so closely on such through street or highway as to constitute an immediate hazard but the driver having so yielded may proceed. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through street or highway and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-3. 
341.04 - DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY; DUTY TO YIELD. 
    The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-4. 
341.05 - RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one flashing lighted lamp of a color authorized by section 345.18, which is visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle other than a police vehicle when operated as an authorized emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-9-5. 
341.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 343 - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Stop and yield signs, § 305.09. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to establish through streets and stop intersections, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(a)(6). 

343.01 - DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSING. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the street or highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  Any approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-1. 
343.02 - STOPS AT DANGEROUS GRADE CROSSINGS. 
    Council or other designated traffic authority with the approval of the state commissioner of highways is hereby authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop signs are erected the driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-2. 
343.03 - STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSING. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, the driver of a commercial motor vehicle specified in subsection (b) of this section shall not cross a railroad track or tracks at grade unless he or she first: 
(1)  Stops the commercial motor vehicle within 50 feet of, and not closer than 15 feet to, the tracks; 
(2)  Thereafter, listens and looks in each direction along the tracks for an approaching train; and 
(3)  Ascertains that no train is approaching. 
    When it is safe to do so, the driver may drive the commercial motor vehicle across the tracks in a gear that permits the commercial motor vehicle to complete the crossing without change of gears. The driver shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(b)  The following commercial vehicles are required to stop at railroad tracks or tracks at grade: 
(1)  Every bus transporting passengers; 
(2)  Every commercial motor vehicle transporting any quantity of a United States Department of Transportation defined division 2.3 chlorine; 
(3)  Every commercial motor vehicle which, in accordance with United States Department of Transportation regulations, is marked or placarded and is required to stop in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 392.10(a)(3)(2001); 
(4)  Every cargo tank motor vehicle, loaded or empty, used for the transportation of any hazardous material, as defined in Federal Department of Transportation hazardous materials rules, 49 C.F.R. parts 107 through 180 (2001); 
(5)  Every cargo tank motor vehicle transporting a commodity which, at the time of loading, has a temperature above its flashpoint as determined by 49 C.F.R. § 173.120 (2001); and 
(6)  Every cargo tank motor vehicle, whether loaded or empty, transporting any commodity exemption in accordance with 49 C.F.R. part 107 subpart B (2001). 
(c)  Any vehicle owned by an employer which, in carrying on the employer's business or in carrying employees to and from work, carries more than six employees of the employer is required to stop at all railroad tracks or tracks at grade, in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  All drivers of commercial motor vehicles not required to stop at railroad tracks or tracks at grade as provided in subsection (a) of this section may not cross a railroad track or tracks at grade unless he or she first slows the commercial motor vehicle to a speed which will permit the commercial motor vehicle to be stopped before reaching the nearest rail of the railroad crossing and permit exercise of due caution to ascertain that the tracks are clear of an approaching train. 
(e)  All drivers of commercial motor vehicles may not proceed to cross a railroad crossing unless there is sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing without stopping and the vehicle has sufficient undercarriage clearance to drive completely through the crossing without stopping. 
(f)  No stop need be made at: 
(1)  Any crossing where a police officer, crossing flagger or a traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed; 
(2)  A streetcar crossing, or railroad tracks used exclusively for industrial switching purposes within a business district, as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5 (2000); 
(3)  A railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning highway traffic signal transmitting a green indication which, under local law permits the commercial motor vehicle to proceed across the track without slowing or stopping; or 
(4)  A railroad grade crossing which is marked with a sign indicating that the rail line is out of service. 
(g)  Any person driving a vehicle specified in this section or a vehicle that requires a commercial driver's license who fails to comply with the requirements of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. Provided, that if the electric or mechanical signal device is malfunctioning, this subsection shall not apply. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-3. 
343.04 - MOVING HEAVY EQUIPMENT ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS. 
(a)  No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating speed of ten or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of less than one-half inch per foot of the distance between any two adjacent axles or in any event, of less than nine inches, measured above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section. 
(b)  Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide proper protection at such crossing. 
(c)  Before making any such crossing the person operating or moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than 15 feet nor more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely. 
(d)  No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal or crossing gates or a flagman or otherwise of the immediate approach of a railroad train or car. If a flagman is provided by the railroad, movement over the crossing shall be under his direction. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-4. 
343.05 - THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS. 
(a)  Council or other designated traffic authority may designate through streets or highways and erect stop signs at specified entrances thereto or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection and erect like signs at one or more entrances to such intersection. 
(b)  Every such sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than six inches in height and such sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. 
(c)  Every stop sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the roadway. 
(d)  Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in the event there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting street or highway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting street or highway before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-5. 
343.06 - DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; STOPPING AT SIDEWALK. 
    The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from any alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or private driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-6. 
343.07 - STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; SIGNS AND WARNING LIGHTS; SALE OF SCHOOL BUS. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on such school bus flashing warning signal lights, as referred to in W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-8 and such driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. This section applies wherever the school bus is receiving or discharging children, including, but not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, private road or driveway; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a controlled access highway need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. If the identity of the driver cannot be ascertained, then any such owner or lessee of the vehicle in violation of this subsection shall be subject to the penalty provided for a violation of this subsection provided, however, that such conviction shall not subject such owner or lessee to further administrative or other penalties for such offense, notwithstanding other provisions of the West Virginia Code or this Traffic Code to the contrary. 
(b)  Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight inches in height. When a contract school bus is being operated upon a street or highway for purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from school, all markings thereon indicating "school bus" shall be covered or concealed. Any school bus sold or transferred to another owner by a county board of education, agency or individual, shall have all flashing warning lights disconnected and all lettering removed or permanently obscured, except when sold or transferred for the transportation of school children. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-7. 
343.071 - STOPPING FOR PASSENGER VAN; SIGNS AND WARNING LIGHTS. 
(a)  Every passenger van used for the transportation of children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the warning "Caution: Loading and Unloading Passengers" in letters not less than six inches in height. Every such passenger van shall be equipped with either flashing warning signal lights as are contemplated and referred to in W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-8, or a red caution flag which the driver or some other adult must use by exiting the passenger van and displaying while assisting in the loading or unloading of passengers. Such vehicles may also be equipped with a white flashing strobotron warning light that meets the requirements set forth in W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-26(e). 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from any direction any passenger van which has stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers shall stop his or her vehicle before reaching the passenger van when there is in operation on the passenger van flashing warning signal lights or when an adult is outside the passenger van with a red caution flag and assisting with the loading or unloading of passengers. The driver of a vehicle may not proceed until he or she is signaled by the passenger van driver to proceed, the passenger van flashing signal lights are no longer actuated, or the passenger resumes motion. This section applies whenever the passenger van is loading or unloading children on any street, highway, parking lot, private road or driveway; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a controlled access highway need not stop upon meeting or passing a passenger van which is on a different roadway or adjacent to the highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-12-17a. 
343.08 - OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
343.09 - VEHICLE ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding; provided, that a driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required herein. The foregoing shall not relieve the drivers of other vehicles approaching the intersection at such distance as not to constitute an immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event that there is no crosswalk but a stop line is marked, the vehicle shall be stopped on the near side of such stop line. If neither a crosswalk nor stop line is marked, then the vehicle shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-67) 
343.99 - PENALTY. 
State Law reference- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 345 - SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Bicycle equipment, Art. 373. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; obscured light on vehicles in combination, W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-13; warning devices for commercial vehicles, W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-39. 

345.01 - DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION; FARM AND ROAD EQUIPMENT EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move and no owner shall cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any street or highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this article, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of this article, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required under this article. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this article with respect to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or farm tractors except as herein made applicable. Every farm tractor equipped with an electric lighting system shall at all times mentioned in section 345.02 display a red tail lamp and either multiple-beam or single-beam head lamps meeting the requirements of section 345.02. 
345.02 - WHEN LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED. 
    Every vehicle other than a school bus, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped operated upon a street or highway within this municipality at any time from sunset to sunrise or during fog, smoke, rain or other unfavorable atmospheric conditions, or at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the street or highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead shall display lighted head lamps and illuminating devices as hereinafter respectively required for different classes of vehicles, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as provided for in section 345.07(c). Every school bus, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall display lighted head lamps at all times when upon the street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-2. 
345.03 - MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS. 
(a)  Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible such provisions shall apply during the times stated in section 345.02 in respect to a vehicle without load when upon a straight, level, unlighted street or highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or condition is expressly stated. 
(b)  Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted height of lamps or devices it shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a load. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-3. 
345.04 - HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped shall be equipped with at least two head lamps with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which head lamps shall comply with the requirements and limitations set forth in this article. 
(b)  Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two head lamps which shall comply with the requirements and limitations of this article. 
(c)  Every head lamp upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped, shall be located at a height measured from the center of the head lamp of not more than 54 inches nor less than 24 inches to be measured as set forth in section 345.03. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-4. 
345.05 - TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, and any other vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as hereinbefore required, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail lamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified. 
(b)  Every tail lamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not more than 60 inches nor less than 20 inches to be measured as set forth in section 345.03(b). 
(c)  Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the head lamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-5. 
345.06 - RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS. 
    Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in section 345.02, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-14. 
345.07 - LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between sunset and sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between sunset and sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: At least one lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of such lamp or lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped. 
(c)  Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-15. 
345.08 - LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES. 
    All vehicles including animal-drawn vehicles and including those referred to in section 345.01(c) not hereinbefore specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall at the times specified in section 345.02 be equipped with at least one lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-16. 
345.09 - SPOTLIGHTS AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS. 
(a)  Spot lamps. Any motor vehicle except a public utility company maintenance vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spot lamp and every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle. A public utility company maintenance vehicle may be equipped with more than one spot lamp but all lighted spot lamps shall be aimed and used in conformity to the requirements of this subsection. 
(b)  Fog lamps. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two fog lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than 12 inches nor more than 30 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands and so aimed that when the vehicle is not loaded none of the high-intensity portion of the light to the left of the center of the vehicle shall at a distance of 25 feet ahead project higher than a level of four inches below the level of the center of the lamp from which it comes. 
(c)  Auxiliary passing lamp. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one auxiliary passing lamp mounted on the front at a height not less than 24 inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands and every auxiliary passing lamp shall meet the requirements and limitations set forth in this article. 
(d)  Auxiliary driving lamp. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one auxiliary driving lamp mounted on the front at a height not less than 16 inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands and every such auxiliary driving lamp shall meet the requirements and limitations set forth in this article. 
(e)  Roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device comprised of multiple lamps; provided, that whenever the vehicle is operated or driven upon any road or highway, the roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device shall be turned off and covered with an opaque covering that prohibits light from being emitted while the vehicle is being operated on any road or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-17. 
345.10 - SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required under this Traffic Code shall be equipped with the following signal lamps or devices: 
(1)  A stop lamp on the rear which shall emit a red or yellow light and which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake and which may but need not be incorporated with a tail lamp. 
(2)  A lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating any intention to turn either to the right or to the left and which shall be visible both from the front and rear. 
(b)  A stop lamp shall be plainly visible and understandable from a distance of 100 feet to the rear both during normal sunlight and at nighttime and signal lamp or lamps indicating intention to turn shall be visible and understandable during daytime and nighttime from a distance of 100 feet both to the front and rear. When a vehicle is equipped with a stop lamp or other signal lamps, such lamp or lamps shall at all times be maintained in good working condition. No stop lamp or signal lamp shall project a glaring or dazzling light. 
(c)  All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use at the times mentioned in section 345.02. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-18. 
345.11 - COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS; FLASHING HAZARD LIGHTS. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two side cowl or fender lamps which shall emit an amber or white light without glare. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one running-board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare. 
(c)  Except for school buses as provided in this subsection, any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two back-up lamps either separately or in combination with other lamps, but any such back-up lamp shall not be lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. School buses used for the transportation of school children in this municipality, whether owned and operated by a county board of education or privately owned and operated under contract with a county board of education, shall be equipped with two back-up lamps, one on each side of the rear door, with white lens or reflectors, capable of lighting the roadway and objects to the rear of the bus for safe backing during darkness, and which, at the option of the county board of education, may each provide 50 candlepower in illumination intensity instead of 32 candlepower. 
(d)  Any vehicle may be equipped with lamps which may be used for the purpose of warning the operators of other vehicles of the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing, and when so equipped may display such warning in addition to any other warning signals required by this article. The lamps used to display such warning to the front shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously flashing white or amber lights, or any shade of color between white and amber. The lamps used to display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, and shall show simultaneously flashing amber or red lights or any shade of color between amber and red. 
(e)  Vehicles used by "rural mail carriers" in carrying or delivering mail in rural areas may be equipped with amber flashing lights. Such lights shall be on the front and rear of the vehicle and may be activated when the vehicle is stopped or decreasing speed in order to stop in the course of carrying, delivering or picking up mail along the route. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one electroluminescent solid state ceramic front identification plate without glare, mounted in conformance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
(g)  Vehicles used as the lead car in a funeral procession are hereby authorized to be equipped with, but are not required to use, purple lamps or purple flashing lights. Such lamps may be used for the purpose of warning the operators of other vehicles of the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing a funeral procession, and when so equipped may display such warning in addition to any other warning signals required by this article. The lamps or flashing lights used to display such warning to the front shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously either illuminating or flashing purple lights. The lamps used to display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, and shall show simultaneously flashing or illuminated purple lights. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-19. 
345.12 - MULTIPLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, the head lamps or the auxiliary driving lamp or the auxiliary passing lamp or combinations thereof on motor vehicles other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped shall be so arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition, be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 350 feet ahead for all conditions of loading. 
(b)  There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead; and on a straight level road under any condition of loading none of the high-intensity portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of an approaching driver. 
(c)  Every new motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped, registered in the state after January 1, 1952, which has multiple-beam road-lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the head lamps is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. Such indicator shall be so designed and located that when lighted it will be readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle so equipped. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-20. 
345.13 - USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS. 
    Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in section 345.02, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and limitations: 
(a)  Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within 500 feet, such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver. The lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam specified in section 345.12(b) shall be deemed to avoid glare at all times regardless of road contour and loading. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within 200 feet to the rear, except when engaged in the act of overtaking and passing, such driver shall use a distribution of light permissible under this Traffic Code other than the uppermost distribution of light specified in section 345.12(a). 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-21. 
345.14 - SINGLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT. 
    Head lamps arranged to provide a single distribution of light shall be permitted on motor vehicles manufactured and sold prior to July 1, 1952 in lieu of multiple-beam road-lighting equipment herein specified if the single distribution of light complies with the following requirements and limitations: 
(a)  The head lamps shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is not loaded none of the high-intensity portion of the light shall at a distance of 25 feet ahead project higher than a level of five inches below the level of the center of the lamp from which it comes, and in no case higher than 42 inches above the level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet ahead. 
(b)  The intensity shall be sufficient to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 200 feet. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-22. 
345.15 - LIGHTS ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND MOPEDS. 
    The head lamp or head lamps upon every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped may be of the single-beam or multiple-beam type but in either event shall comply with the requirements and limitations as follows: 
(a)  Every such head lamp or head lamps shall be of sufficient intensity to reveal a person or a vehicle at a distance of not less than 100 feet when the motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is operated at any speed less than 25 miles per hour and at a distance of not less than 200 feet when it is operated at a speed of 25 or more miles per hour. 
(b)  In the event the motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped with a multiple-beam type head lamp or head lamps the upper beam shall meet the minimum requirements set forth above and shall not exceed the limitations set forth in section 345.12(a) and the lowermost beam shall meet the requirements applicable to a lowermost distribution of light as set forth in section 345.12(b). 
(c)  In the event the motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped with a single-beam lamp or lamps such lamp or lamps shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is loaded none of the high-intensity portion of light, at a distance of 25 feet ahead, shall project higher than the level of the center of the lamp from which it comes. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-23. 
345.16 - ALTERNATE ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT. 
    Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in section 345.02 when equipped with two lighted lamps upon the front thereof capable of revealing persons and objects 75 feet ahead in lieu of lamps required in section 345.12, or section 345.14, provided that at no time shall it be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-24. 
345.17 - NUMBER OF DRIVING LIGHTS REQUIRED OR PERMITTED. 
(a)  At all times specified in section 345.02 at least two lighted lamps shall be displayed, one on each side at the front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles. 
(b)  Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with head lamps as herein required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spot lamp or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when upon a street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-25. 
345.18 - SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS ON LIGHTS. 
(a)  Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than head lamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps or flashing front-direction signals which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any street or highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying other than a white or amber light visible from directly in front of the center thereof except as authorized by subsection (d) hereof. 
(c)  Except as authorized in subsections (d) and (f) of this section and section 345.11, flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles; provided, that any vehicle as a means for indicating right or left turn, or any vehicle as a means of indicating the same is disabled or otherwise stopped for an emergency may have blinking or flashing lights. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Traffic Code, the following colors of flashing warning lights are restricted for the use of the type of vehicle designated: 
(1)  Blue flashing warning lights are restricted to police vehicles. Authorization for police vehicles shall be designated by the chief administrative official of each police department. 
(2)  Except for standard vehicle equipment authorized by section 345.11, red flashing warning lights are restricted to the following: 
A.  Ambulances; 
B.  Fire-fighting vehicles; 
C.  Hazardous material response vehicles; 
D.  Industrial fire brigade vehicles; 
E.  Rescue squad vehicles not operating out of a fire department; 
F.  School buses; 
G.  Class A vehicles, as defined by W. Va. Code, § 17A-10-1 of those firefighters who are authorized by their fire chiefs to have the lights; 
H.  Class A vehicles of members of duly chartered rescue squads not operating out of a fire department; 
I.  Class A vehicles of members of ambulance services or duly chartered rescue squads who are authorized by their respective chiefs to have the lights; 
J.  Class A vehicles of out-of-state residents who are active members of West Virginia fire departments, ambulance services or duly chartered rescue squads who are authorized by their respective chiefs to have the lights; and 
K.  West Virginia Department of Agriculture emergency response vehicles. 
L.  Vehicles designated by the Secretary of the Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety for emergency response or emergency management by the Division of Corrections, Regional Jail and Correctional Facility Authority, Division of Juvenile Services and Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management; and 
M.  Class A vehicles of emergency response or emergency management personnel as designated by the Secretary of the Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety and the county commission of the county of residence. 
Red flashing warning lights attached to a Class A vehicle shall be operated only when responding to or engaged in handling an emergency requiring the attention of the firefighters, members of the ambulance services or chartered rescue squads. 
(3)  The use of red flashing warning lights shall be authorized as follows: 
A.  Authorization for all ambulances shall be designated by the Department of Health and Human Resources and the sheriff of the county of residence. 
B.  Authorization for all fire department vehicles shall be designated by the fire chief and the State Fire Marshal's office. 
C.  Authorization for all hazardous material response vehicles and industrial fire brigades shall be designated by the chief of the fire department and the State Fire Marshal's office. 
D.  Authorization for all rescue squad vehicles not operating out of a fire department shall be designated by the squad chief, the sheriff of the county of residence and the Department of Health and Human Resources. 
E.  Authorization for school buses shall be designated as set out in W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-12. 
F.  Authorization for firefighters to operate Class A vehicles shall be designated by their fire chiefs and the State Fire Marshal's office. 
G.  Authorization for members of ambulance services or any other emergency medical service personnel to operate Class A vehicles shall be designated by their chief official, the Department of Health and Human Resources and the sheriff of the county of residence. 
H.  Authorization for members of duly chartered rescue squads not operating out of a fire department to operate Class A vehicles shall be designated by their squad chiefs, the sheriff of the county of residence and the Department of Health and Human Resources. 
I.  Authorization for out-of-state residents operating Class A vehicles who are active members of a West Virginia fire department, ambulance services or duly chartered rescue squads shall be designated by their respective chiefs. 
J.  Authorization for West Virginia Department of Agriculture emergency response vehicles shall be designated by the commissioner or the Department of Agriculture. 
K.  Authorization for vehicles for emergency response or emergency management by the Division of Corrections, Regional Jail and Correctional Facility Authority, Division of Juvenile Services and Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management shall be designated by the secretary of the Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety. 
L.  Authorization for Class A vehicles of emergency response or emergency management personnel as designated by the secretary of the Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety and the county commission of the county of residence. 
(4)  Yellow or amber flashing warning lights are restricted to the following: 
A.  All other emergency vehicles, including tow trucks and wreckers, authorized by the W. Va. Code, Ch. 17C and § 17C-15-27; 
B.  Postal service vehicles and rural mail carriers, as authorized in section 345.11; 
C.  Rural newspaper delivery vehicles; 
D.  Flag car services; 
E.  Vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles; 
F.  Service vehicles of a public service corporation; 
G.  Snow removal equipment; and 
H.  School buses; and 
I.  Automotive fire apparatus owned by a municipality or other political subdivision, by a volunteer or part-volunteer fire company or department or by an industrial fire brigade. 
(5)  The use of yellow or amber flashing warning lights shall be authorized as follows: 
A.  Authorization for tow trucks, wreckers, rural newspaper delivery vehicles, flag car services, vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles, service vehicles of a public service corporation and postal service vehicles shall be designated by the sheriff of the county of residence. 
B.  Authorization for snow removal equipment shall be designated by the commissioner of the Division of Highways. 
C.  Authorization for school buses shall be designated as set out in W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-12. 
D.  Authorization for automotive fire apparatus shall be designated by the fire chief in conformity with the NFPA 1901 standard for automotive fire apparatus as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) on July 18, 2003, and adopted by the State Fire Commission by legislative rule (87 CSR 1, et seq.), except as follows: 
1.  With the approval of the State Fire Marshal, used automotive fire apparatus may be conformed to the NFPA standard in effect on the date of its manufacture or conformed to a later NFPA standard, and 
2.  Automotive fire apparatus may be equipped with blinking or flashing headlamps. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any vehicle belonging to a county board of education, an organization receiving funding from the state or federal transit administration for the purpose of providing general public transportation, or hauling solid waste may be equipped with a white flashing strobotron warning light. This strobe light may be installed on the roof of a school bus, a public transportation vehicle, or a vehicle hauling solid waste not to exceed one-third the body length forward from the rear of the roof edge. The light shall have a single clear lens emitting light 360 degrees around its vertical axis and may not extend above the roof more than six and one-half inches. A manual switch and a pilot light must be included to indicate the light is in operation. 
(f)  No person shall install or use flashing warning lights of an unauthorized color on a vehicle other than as specified in this section, except that a police vehicle may be equipped with either or both blue or red warning lights. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-26. 
345.19 - MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE BRAKES. 
(a)  Brake equipment required. 
(1)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped, when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(2)  Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot. 
(3)  Every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and such brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle the brakes shall be automatically applied. 
(4)  Every new motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer hereinafter sold in this state and operated upon the streets or highways shall be equipped with service brakes upon all wheels, with the following exceptions: 
A.  Trucks and truck-tractors having three or more axles need not have brakes on the front wheels, except when such vehicles are equipped with at least two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped with brakes, and 
B.  Any motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped and any semitrailer of less than 1,500 pounds gross weight need not be equipped with brakes. 
(5)  In any combination of motor-driven vehicles, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost trailer brakes, of any trailer equipped with brakes, in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost trailer equipped with brakes; or both of the above means capable of being used alternatively may be employed. 
(6)  Every such vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles, motor-driven cycles and mopeds, shall be equipped with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions of loading on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind. 
The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that a failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes. 
(7)  The brake shoes operating within or upon the drums on the vehicle wheels of any motor vehicle may be used for both service and hand operation. 
(b)  Performance ability of brakes. Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable, at all times and under all conditions of loading, of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the service (foot) brake, within the distances specified below, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these distances: 
Feet to stop from 20 miles per hour Deceleration in feet per second Vehicle or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels 30 14 Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all wheels 40 10.7  
(c)  Maintenance of brakes. All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-31. 
345.20 - INSPECTION OF BRAKES ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND MOPEDS. 
    No person shall operate on any street or highway any motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped in the event the commissioner of highways has disapproved the brake equipment upon such vehicle or type of vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-32. 
345.21 - HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to insure safe operation give audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a street or highway. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section. 
(c)  It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. 
    Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles, but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which such latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-33. 
345.22 - MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. Such muffler shall be the muffler originally installed by the manufacturer of the vehicle or, if a replacement, the equivalent thereof. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a street or highway. 
(b)  The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-34. 
345.23 - REAR-VIEW MIRROR. 
    Every motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the driver's view to the rear thereof from the driver's position shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street or highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-35. 
345.24 - WINDSHIELD TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; WINDSHIELD WIPER. 
(a)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings or side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the street or highway or any intersecting street or highway. 
(b)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. 
(c)  Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-36. 
345.25 - TIRE EQUIPMENT RESTRICTIONS. 
(a)  Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle shall have rubber on its entire traction surface at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery. 
(b)  No person shall operate or move on any highway any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer having any metal tire in contact with the roadway. 
(c)  No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that: 
(1)  It shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure the street or highway; 
(2)  It shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid; and 
(3)  It shall be permissible to use studded tires during the period from November 1, of each year until April 15 of the following year. Provided that in the interest of highway maintenance, no vehicle moved on a street or highway, other than school buses, shall be equipped with studded tires which are operational with a recommended air pressure greater than 40 pounds per square inch. 
(d)  No studded tires or chains shall be sold or used within the municipality which do not meet the specifications established by the rules and regulations which the commissioner of highways shall promulgate. 
(e)  Council may in its discretion issue special permits authorizing the operation upon the street or highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks or farm tractors or other farm machinery, the operation of which upon a highway would otherwise be prohibited under this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-37. 
345.26 - SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. 
(a)  On and after July 1, 1951, no person shall operate any motor vehicle as specified herein, nor shall any motor vehicle as specified herein be registered thereafter unless such vehicle is equipped with safety glass of a type approved by the commissioner of highways wherever glass is used in doors, windows and windshields. The foregoing provisions shall apply to all passenger-type motor vehicles, including passenger buses and school buses, but in respect to trucks, including truck tractors, the requirements as to safety glass shall apply to all glass used in doors, windows, and windshields in the drivers' compartments of such vehicles. 
(b)  The term "safety glass" shall mean any product composed of glass, so manufactured, fabricated or treated as substantially to prevent shattering and flying of the glass when struck or broken, or such other or similar product as may be approved by the commissioner. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-38. 
345.27 - VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES. 
    Any person operating any vehicle transporting any explosive as a cargo or part of a cargo upon a street or highway shall at all times comply with the provisions of this section: 
(a)  Such vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and the rear with the word "Explosives" in letters not less than eight inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than 24 inches square marked with the word "Danger" in white letters six inches high. 
(b)  Every such vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use and placed at a convenient point on the vehicle so used. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-41. 
345.28 - TELEVISION RECEIVER IN DRIVER'S VIEW PROHIBITED. 
    No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street or highway in this municipality when equipped with a television receiver unless such receiver is so placed that the screen or picture tube of such receiver is visible only in the rear seat of such motor vehicle and not in view of the operator of such motor vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-42. 
345.29 - SAFETY EQUIPMENT FOR MOTORCYCLISTS, MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND MOPEDS. 
(a)  No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless he is wearing securely fastened on his head by either a neck or chin strap a protective helmet designed to deflect blows, resist penetration and spread impact forces. Any helmet worn by an operator or passenger shall meet the current performance specifications established by the American National Standards Institute Standard, Z 90.1, the United States Department of Transportation Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 218 or Snell Safety Standards for Protective Headgear for Vehicle Users. 
(b)  No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless he is wearing safety, shatter-resistant eyeglasses (excluding contact lenses), or eyegoggles or face shield that complies with the performance specifications established by the American National Standards Institute for Head, Eye and Respiratory Protection, Z 2.1. In addition, if any motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped with a windshield or windscreen, the windshield or windscreen shall be constructed of safety, shatter-resistant material that complies with the performance specifications established by Department of Transportation Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205 and American National Standards Institute, Safety Glazing Materials for Glazing Motor Vehicles Operated on Land Highways, Standard Z 26.1. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped on which the handlebars or grips are more than 15 inches higher than the uppermost part of the operator's seat when the seat is not depressed in any manner. 
(d)  A person operating a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped shall ride in a seated position facing forward and only upon a permanent operator's seat attached to the vehicle. No operator shall carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on such a vehicle unless the vehicle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride behind the operator upon the permanent operator's seat if it is designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the vehicle to the rear of the operator's seat and equipped with footrests designed and located for use by the passenger or in a sidecar firmly attached to the vehicle. No person shall ride sidesaddle on a seat. An operator may carry as many passengers as there are seats and footrests to accommodate those passengers. Additional passengers may be carried in a factory produced side car provided that there is one passenger per seat. Passengers riding in a sidecar shall be restrained by safety belts. 
(e)  Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall be equipped with a rearview mirror affixed to the handlebars or fairings and adjusted so that the operator shall have a clear view of the road and condition of traffic behind him for a distance of at least 200 feet. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-44. 
345.30 - CERTIFICATION LABELS ON MOPEDS. 
    Every moped sold in this municipality shall have permanently affixed to it a certification label which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of manufacturer; 
(2)  Month and year of manufacture; 
(3)  Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR); 
(4)  Gross axle weight rating for front and rear axles (GAWR); 
(5)  Vehicle identification number; 
(6)  Classification type; and 
(7)  Statement of conformance to federal standards as required by federal law. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-45. 
345.31 - CHILD PASSENGER SAFETY DEVICE REQUIRED. 
    Every driver who transports a child under the age of eight years in a passenger automobile, van or pickup truck other than one operated for hire, shall, while such motor vehicle is in motion and operated on a street or highway of this municipality, provide for the protection of such child by properly placing, maintaining and securing such child in a child passenger safety device system meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards; provided, that if such child is under the age of eight years and at least four feet nine inches tall, a vehicle seat belt shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. 
    Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $20. 
    A violation of this section shall not be deemed by virtue of such violation to constitute evidence of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in any civil action or proceeding for damages. 
    If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity may not affect other provisions or applications of this section and to this end of subsections of this section are declared to be severable. 
    If all seat belts in a vehicle are being used at the time of examination by a law officer and the vehicle contains more passengers than the total number of seat belts or other safety devices as installed in compliance with Federal motor vehicle safety standards, the driver shall not be considered as violating this section. 
(Ord. 7-11-05) 
345.32 - CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. 
    No owner or operator of any vehicle required to be inspected under W. Va. Code, Art. 17C-16 shall operate or permit to be operated such vehicle without having displayed thereon a current and valid certificate of inspection and approval or fail to produce same upon demand of any authorized person as therein designated. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-16-9. 
345.33 - ALTERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES; BUMPER HEIGHT LIMITS. 
(a)  No person shall operate upon a public street or highway any motor vehicle registered or required to be registered in this state if it has been modified by alteration of its height from the ground to the extent that its bumpers, measured to any point on the lower edge of the main horizontal bumper bar, exclusive of any bumper guards, do not fall within the limits specified herein for its gross vehicle weight rating category. The front and rear bumper height of motor vehicles whose gross vehicle weight rating is 10,000 pounds or less shall be no less than six inches and no more than 31 inches. In the absence of bumpers, and in cases where bumper heights have been altered or modified, height measurements shall be made to the bottom of the frame rail. If a motor vehicle has a bumper, the bumper must be at least three inches in vertical width, centered on the center line of the motor vehicle and not less than the width of the wheel track distance. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "gross vehicle weight ratings" means the manufacturer's gross vehicle weight ratings established for that vehicle. 
(b)  The maximum distance between the vehicle body to the vehicle frame shall not exceed three inches. The distance from the vehicle body to the vehicle frame shall be measured from the vehicle body mount seat to the vehicle frame mount seat; provided, that the maximum distance limitation shall not prohibit a body lift kit up to three inches to be added to the manufacturer's original spacer between the body and the frame. No vehicle shall be modified to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation. No part of the original suspension system may be disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension system. Modification of the front end suspension by the use of lift blocks is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section prevents the installation of heavy duty equipment, including shock absorbers and overload springs. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section prohibits the operation on a public street or highway of a motor vehicle with normal wear to the suspension system if such normal wear does not adversely affect the control of the vehicle. 
(e)  This section does not apply to specially designed or modified motor vehicles when operated off the public streets and highways in races and similar events. Such motor vehicles may be lawfully towed on the streets and highways of this municipality. 
(f)  Modifications to motor vehicles, not prohibited herein, shall be made subject to inspection as provided in subsection (h) hereof. 
(g)  Nothing contained in this section shall subject a vehicle modified solely by the installation of tires not larger than two sizes beyond the maximum specified by the manufacturer to inspection as provided in subsection (h) hereof. 
(h)  Any motor vehicle which has been altered from the manufacturer's specification with respect to bumper height for that vehicle make and model but within the allowable limits of subsection (a) hereof or any motor vehicle which has been altered from the manufacturer's specification for that vehicle make and model with respect to the distance from the vehicle body to vehicle frame but within the allowable limits of subsection (b) hereof may be operated upon a public street or highway in this municipality, subject to inspection under W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-48; provided, that any motor vehicle which has been altered from the manufacturer's specification by lowering the bumper height for that vehicle make and model within the allowable limits of subsection (a) hereof shall be exempt from the inspection requirements hereunder and may be operated upon a public street or highway in this municipality subject to provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 17C-16. Each municipal law-enforcement agency must record on accident report forms whether a modified vehicle was involved in the accident. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-48. 
345.335 - EMISSION OF SMOKE, GAS OR FLAME. 
(a)  No person shall own, operate or have in his possession any motor vehicle equipped with a device for emitting flame or excessive smoke or gas, or equipped so as to permit oil or chemicals to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or in any other way to produce or emit flame, smoke or dangerous and annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal operation. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any street, highway or other public place, a motor vehicle which, while stationary or moving, emits from any source any unreasonable, excessive or unnecessary smoke, obnoxious or noxious gases or vapor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-125) 
345.34 - SUN SCREENING DEVICES. 
(a)  No person may operate a motor vehicle that is registered or required to be registered in the state on any public highway, road or street that has a sun screening device on the windshield, the front side wings and side windows adjacent to the right and left of the driver and windows adjacent to the rear of the driver that do not meet the requirements of this section. Provided, that law-enforcement K-9 and other emergency vehicles that are designed to haul animals are exempt from this requirement. 
(b)  A sun screening device when used in conjunction with the windshield must be nonreflective and may not be red, yellow or amber in color. A sun screening device may be used only along the top of the windshield and may not extend downward beyond the ASI line or more than five inches from the top of the windshield whichever is closer to the top of the windshield. 
(c)  A sun screening device when used in conjunction with the automotive safety glazing materials of the side wings or side windows located at the immediate right and left of the driver shall be a nonreflective type with reflectivity of not more than 20% and have a light transmission of not less than 35%. The side windows behind the driver and the rear most windows may have a sun screening device that is designed to be used on automotive safety glazing materials that has a light transmission of not less than 35% and a reflectivity of not more than 20%. If a sun screening device is used on glazing behind the driver, one right and one left outside rear view mirror is required. 
(d)  Each manufacturer shall: 
(1)  Certify to the State Police and Division of Motor Vehicles that a sun screening device used by it is in compliance with the reflectivity and transmittance requirements of this section; 
(2)  Provide a label not to exceed one and one-half square inches in size, with a means for the permanent and legible installations between the sun screening material and each glazing surface to which it is applied that contains the manufacturer's name and its percentage of light transmission; and 
(3)  Include instructions with the product or material for proper installation, including the affixing of the label specified in this section. The labeling or marking must be placed in the left lower corner of each glazing surface when facing the vehicle from the outside. 
(e)  No person shall: 
(1)  Offer for sale or for use any sun screening product or material for motor vehicle use not in compliance with this section; or 
(2)  Install any sun screening product or material on vehicles intended for use on public roads without permanently affixing the label specified in this section. 
(f)  The provisions of this section do not apply to a motor vehicle registered in this state in the name of a person, or the person's legal guardian, who has an affidavit signed by a physician or an optometrist licensed to practice in this state that states that the person has a physical condition that makes it necessary to equip the motor vehicle with sun screening material which would be of a light transmittance or luminous reflectance in violation of this section. The affidavit must be in the possession of the person so afflicted, or the person's legal guardian, at all times while being transported in the motor vehicle. 
(g)  The light transmittance requirement of this section does not apply to windows behind the driver on trucks, buses, trailers, mobile homes and multipurpose passenger vehicles. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Bus" means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed for carrying more than ten persons. 
(2)  "Light transmission" means the ratio of the amount of total light to pass through a product or material to the amount of the total light falling on the product or material. 
(3)  "Luminous reflectants" means the ratio of the amount of total light that is reflected outward by the product or material to the amount of the total light falling on the product or materials. 
(4)  "Manufacturer" means any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of sun screening products or materials designed to be used in conjunction with vehicle glazing materials for the purpose of reducing the effects of the sun. 
(5)  "Motor homes" means vehicular units designed to provide temporary living quarters built into and an integral part of or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis. 
(6)  "Multipurpose passenger vehicle" means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed to carry ten persons or less which is constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional offroad operation. 
(7)  "Nonreflective" means a product or material designed to absorb light rather than to reflect it. 
(8)  "Passenger car" means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle, motorcycle or trailer, designed for carrying ten persons or less. 
(9)  "Sun screening device" means film material or device that is designed to be used in conjunction with motor vehicle safety glazing materials for reducing the effects of the sun. 
(10)  "Truck" means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed primarily for the transportation of property or special purpose equipment. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-36a. 
345.35 - OPERATION OF VEHICLES WITH SAFETY BELTS. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a passenger vehicle on a public street or highway unless the person, any passenger in the back seat under 18 years of age, and any passenger in the front seat of such passenger vehicle is restrained by a safety belt meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards. For the purpose of this section, the term "passenger vehicle" means a motor vehicle is designed for transporting ten passengers or less, including the driver, except that such term does not include a motorcycle, a trailer or any motor vehicle which is not required on the date of the enactment of this section under a federal motor vehicle safety standard to be equipped with a safety belt system. The provisions of this section shall apply to all passenger vehicles manufactured after the first day of January, 1967, and being 1968 models and newer. 
(b)  The required use of safety belts as provided herein does not apply to a duly appointed or contracted rural mail carrier of the United States Postal Service who is actually making mail deliveries or to a passenger or operator with a physically disabling condition whose physical disability would prevent appropriate restraint in such safety belt if the condition is duly certified by a physician who states the nature of the disability as well as the reason such restraint is inappropriate. 
(c)  A violation of this section is not admissible as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in any civil action or proceeding for damages, and is not admissible in mitigation of damages; provided, that the court may, upon motion of the defendant, conduct an in camera hearing to determine whether an injured party's failure to wear a safety belt was a proximate cause of the injuries complained of. Upon a finding by the court, the court may then, in a jury trial, by special interrogatory to the jury, determine (1) that the injured party failed to wear a safety belt, and (2) that the failure to wear the safety belt constituted a failure to mitigate damages. The trier of fact may reduce the injured party's recovery for medical damages by an amount not to exceed 5% thereof. In the event the plaintiff stipulates to the reduction of 5% of medical damages, the court shall make the calculations and the issue of mitigation of damages for failure to wear a safety belt shall not be presented to the jury. In all cases, the actual computation of the dollar amount reduction shall be determined by the court. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary, no points may be entered on any driver's record maintained by the Division of Motor Vehicles as a result of a violation of this section. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abrogate or alter the provisions of section 345.31 relating to the mandatory use of child passenger safety devices. 
(f)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more that $25. No court costs or other fees shall assessed for a violation of this section. Enforcement of this section shall be accomplished as a primary action. 
(Ord. of 8-12-13(1)) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-49. 
345.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 347 - COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Red light or flag on extended load, § 345.07; transporting explosives, § 345.27. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to designate weight limits on local streets, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(a)(7); authority to permit oversized buses, W. Va. Code, § 17C-17-2(b). 

347.01 - OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES. 
(a)  Use of state route. No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in W. Va. Code, Art. 17C-17 upon any state route within the municipality, except pursuant to special written permit issued by the commissioner of highways, or upon any local truck route. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer. 
    No holder of a permit issued by the commissioner of highways shall be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or charge for movement on any state route within the municipality; however, it shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any roadway within the municipality which is not a state route, except as provided in subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  Use of local streets. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as specified in section 347.03 or exceeding a gross weight of five tons, upon any street in the municipality other than a state route, except those local streets designated as a truck route and marked as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when such operation is necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate business or act other than passage through the municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating from either a state route or a designated truck route within the municipality shall confine such deviation to that required in order to accomplish the purpose of the departure. 
(c)  Local permit and conditions. Upon application and for good cause, the director of public works may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets. 
    No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the commissioner of highways for the movement of the vehicle or combination of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction; however, the approval of the commissioner of highways shall be required for movement upon state routes as provided in subsection (a) hereof. 
    The director of public works may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the director of public works in his discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction project. The director of public works may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route, hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The director of public works may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for any damage to a roadway or road structure. 
    For each such permit, the director of public works shall charge $5, and for each hour of time or any part thereof spent by each police officer in supervising the movement of such vehicle, the applicant shall pay the sum of $10. 
    Signs shall be posted indicating "no thru trucks - gross weight 5 tons" or words of similar import to apprise drivers of the limitations imposed by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions indicated on any such sign. 
    Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the permit granted by the director of public works shall be cause for immediate revocation or suspension of such permit, and denial of request for any future permit. Such violation shall also subject the violator to the penalty prescribed by section 303.99. 
347.02 - PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES. 
(a)  No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street or highway with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders of the left side of such vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof. 
(b)  A motor home, travel trailer or truck camper may exceed the maximum width prescribed in section 347.03, if the excess width is attributable to an appurtenance that does not exceed more than six inches beyond the body of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-17-3. 
347.03 - MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH. 
(a)  A vehicle, including any load thereon, may not exceed a height of 13 feet six inches, but the owner or owners of such vehicles shall be responsible for damage to any bridge or highway structure and to municipalities for any damage to traffic control devices or other highway structures where such bridges, devices or structures have a vehicle clearance of less than 13 feet six inches. 
(b)  A motor vehicle, including any load thereon, may not exceed a length of 40 feet extreme overall dimension, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, except that a motor home and school bus may not exceed a length of 45 feet, exclusive of front and rear bumpers. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided in this subsection or in subsection (d) of this section, a combination of vehicles coupled together may not consist of more than two units and no combination of vehicles including any load thereon shall have an overall length, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 55 feet except as provided in W. Va. Code, § 17C-17-11b, and except as otherwise provided in respect to the use of a pole trailer as authorized in W. Va. Code, § 17C-17-5. The limitation that a combination of vehicles coupled together may not consist of more than two units may not apply to: 
(1)  A combination of vehicles coupled together by a saddle-mount device used to transport motor vehicles in a drive-away service when no more than three saddle mounts are used, if equipment used in the combination meets the requirements of the safety regulations of the United States Department of Transportation and may not exceed an overall length of more than 75 feet; or 
(2)  A combination of vehicles coupled together, one of which is a travel trailer or folding camping trailer having an overall length, exclusive of front and rear bumpers, not exceeding 65 feet. 
(d)  A combination of two vehicles coupled together, one of which is a motor home, or a combination of vehicles coupled together, one of which is a travel trailer or folding camping trailer, may not exceed an overall length, exclusive of front and rear bumpers of 65 feet. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section, the commissioner of highways may designate, upon his or her own motion or upon the petition of an interested party, a combination vehicle length not to exceed 70 feet. 
(f)  The length limitations for truck tractor-semitrailer combinations and truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combinations operating on the national system of interstate and defense highways and those classes of qualifying federal-aid primary system highways so designated by the United States Secretary of Transportation and those highways providing reasonable access to and from terminals, facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest and points of loading and unloading for household goods carriers from such highways and further, as to other highways so designated by the West Virginia Commissioner of Highways, shall be as follows: the maximum length of a semitrailer unit operating in a truck tractor-semitrailer combination shall not exceed 48 feet in length except where semitrailers have an axle spacing of not more than 37 feet between the rear axle of the truck tractor and the front axle of the semitrailer, such semitrailer shall be allowed to be not more than 53 feet in length and the maximum length of any semitrailer or trailer operating in a truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combination may not exceed 28 feet in length and in no event shall any combinations exceed three units, including the truck tractor; provided, that nothing herein contained shall impose an overall length limitation as to commercial motor vehicles operating in truck tractor-semitrailer or truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combinations. 
(g)  The total outside width, exclusive of safety equipment authorized by the United States Department of Transportation, of any vehicle or the load thereon may not exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in W. Va. Code, Art. 17C-17; provided, that any vehicle with a total outside width of 102 inches, exclusive of safety equipment authorized by the United States Department of Transportation, may be operated on any street or highway designated by the United States Department of Transportation or the commissioner of the department of highways or on any street or highway having a minimum lane width of ten feet. 
(h)  Motor homes, travel trailers, truck campers, and motor buses with a total outside width of 102 inches, excluding safety equipment authorized by the United States Department of Transportation may operate on any street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-17-2, 17C-17-4. 
347.04 - LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING. 
(a)  No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated on any street or highway unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  No person shall operate on any street or highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles with any load unless such load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent such covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-17-6. 
347.05 - TOWING REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  When one vehicle is towing another the drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed thereby and such drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one vehicle to the other except the connection between any two vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which cannot readily be dismembered. 
(b)  When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-17-7. 
347.06 - EXCESSIVE OPERATION OF BUS AND TRUCK ENGINES WHILE STATIONARY. 
    No person shall operate or permit the operation of a bus or truck engine for more than three minutes while such vehicle is stationary at a terminal, on a public highway or on a private or public parking lot or other outdoor location, except under the following conditions: 
(a)  When the outdoor temperature goes below 32 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  When the operation is necessary in the maintenance or repair of the engine, or in the safe operation of the vehicle. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-126) 
347.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 348 - ALL TERRAIN AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 

348.01 - AUTHORITY. 
(a)  In accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(4), municipalities have plenary power and authority to regulate the use of streets, avenues, roads, alleys, ways, sidewalks, crosswalks and public places belonging to the municipality. 
(b)  In accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(13), municipalities having plenary power and authority to prevent injury or annoyance to the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome. 
(c)  In accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(44), municipalities are empowered to protect and promote the public morals, safety, health, welfare and good order. 
(d)  In accordance with W. Va. Code, § 17F-1-3, municipalities may regulate in any manner or prohibit, by lawfully enacted ordinance, the operation of all-terrain vehicles upon any street, road or avenue within the municipal corporate limits. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
348.02 - RECITALS. 
(a)  The Huntington City Council finds that the unauthorized operation of off-road and all-terrain vehicles has resulted in serious damage to public and private lands including damage or destruction of vegetation, animal life and improvements to the land. 
(b)  The Huntington City Council finds that the unauthorized operation of off-road and all-terrain vehicles has resulted in permanent scarring of land and an increase in both erosion and air pollution. 
(c)  The Huntington City Council finds that the unauthorized operation of off-road and all-terrain vehicles may result in collisions or near-collisions threatening the life and safety of the operators of such vehicles as well as other persons. 
(d)  The Huntington City Council finds that the unauthorized operation of off-road and all-terrain vehicles has resulted in a loss of privacy, quietude and serenity to which the inhabitants of this municipality are rightfully entitled and is otherwise injurious to the public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
348.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  "Unauthorized operation" shall mean the operation of any off-road vehicle or all-terrain vehicle upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, thoroughfares, rights-of-way, parking lots, and any realty owned, leased or controlled by the City of Huntington, or any of its boards, agencies, authorities or commission's within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington or any properties owned, leased or controlled by State of West Virginia or any of its political subdivisions or, the Greater Huntington Parks and Recreation District. 
(b)  "All terrain vehicle" shall mean an engine-driven device which has a net weight of 600 pounds or less, which has a width of 46 inches or less, which is equipped with a seat designed to be straddled by the operator and which is designed to travel on three or more low-pressure tires. A low pressure tire is a tire which has a maximum width of six inches, which is designed to be mounted on a rim with a maximum diameter of 12 inches and which is designed to be inflated with an operating pressure not to exceed six pounds per square inch as recommended by the manufacturer. 
(c)  "Off-road vehicle" shall mean a motor driven recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. "Off-road vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, a multi-track or multi-wheel vehicle, an all terrain vehicle, a "dirt bike" motorcycle or related two-wheel, three-wheel or four-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than physical human exertion or wind. "Off-road vehicle" also includes any motor vehicle, which given its design and intended purpose, is not capable of licensure for use on public streets, roads and thoroughfares by the West Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. It does not include a vehicle, regardless of nature, used for governmental, military, fire, emergency or law enforcement purposes, a vehicle owned and operated by a utility company or an oil or gas company when performing maintenance on its facilities or on property over which it has an easement, a construction or logging vehicle used in the performance of its common function, or a registered aircraft. 
(d)  "Corporate limits" shall mean the entire geographic area, whether publicly or privately owned, that encompasses the City of Huntington. 
(e)  "Operation" shall mean the physical manipulation or activation of any of the controls of a motor vehicle necessary to put it in motion. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
348.04 - GENERAL REGULATIONS. 
    Notwithstanding any previously enacted ordinance to the contrary, no person shall operate an all-terrain or off-road vehicle, as the same is defined herein, upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, thoroughfares, rights-of-way, parking lots, and any realty owned, leased or controlled by the City of Huntington, or any of its boards, agencies, authorities or commissions within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington or any properties owned, leased or controlled by State of West Virginia or any of its political subdivisions or, the Greater Huntington Parks and Recreation District. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
348.05 - IMPOUNDMENT. 
    When a law enforcement officer issues a summons for a violation under this ordinance, the officer may impound the off-road or all-terrain vehicle operated in violation of this ordinance. Upon presentation of proper identification, the owner or operator may reclaim the vehicle at any time subsequent to 24 hours after the issuance of the summons and upon payment of any and all costs associated with the impoundment. In the event that the owner/operator of the all-terrain or off-road vehicle is exonerated before the municipal court judge, all costs of impoundment shall be reimbursed by the City of Huntington to the owner/operator. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
348.06 - PENALTIES. 
    Whoever violates section 348.04 of the Traffic Code for the City of Huntington shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
348.07 - SEVERABILITY. 
    The provisions of this article are severable and in the event that any provision or part hereof shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such invalidity shall not affect or impair the validity of other provisions of this article not specifically held invalid. It is hereby declared the intent of the City of Huntington that Article 348 of the Codified Ordinances would have been adopted without inclusion of the invalid provision. 
(Ord. 4-28-08) 
ARTICLE 349 - MISCELLANEOUS RULES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Obedience to traffic control devices, § 313.01. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law. 

349.01 - UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE. 
    No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key, and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street or highway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-1. 
349.02 - BACKING A VEHICLE. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  A vehicle, except when parked in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code shall not stand backed up at any angle to the curb, except while actually loading or unloading. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-78) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-2. 
349.03 - DRIVERS' VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-4. 
349.04 - PASSENGERS IN SEAT WITH OPERATOR. 
    No more than three persons including the operator shall ride or be permitted by such operator to ride in the seat with the operator of any motor vehicle while such motor vehicle is being operated on the streets or highways of this municipality; provided, however, that the limitation of this section shall not apply to a truck cab or truck crew compartment properly designed for the occupancy of four persons including the operator, and so designated on the registration card by the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-5. 
349.05 - PASSENGERS ON RUNNING BOARD. 
    No passenger shall ride nor shall the operator permit any passenger to ride on the running boards of any motor vehicle while such vehicle is being operated on the streets or highways of this municipality. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-6. 
349.06 - FOLLOWING AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business may not follow any authorized emergency vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm or other emergency closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where such authorized emergency vehicle has stopped in answer to a fire alarm or other emergency. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-9. 
349.061 - APPROACHING AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. 
    The driver of any vehicle approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, when the authorized emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately flashing red, red and white, blue, or red and blue lights or amber or yellow warning lights, shall: 
(a)  Proceed with due caution, yield the right-of-way by making a lane change not adjacent to that of the authorized emergency vehicle, if possible with regard to safety and traffic conditions, if on a highway having at least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle and reduce speed to a safe level for road conditions; or 
(b)  Proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour on any nondivided highway or street and 25 miles per hour on any divided highway depending on road conditions, if changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-9a. 
349.07 - DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-10. 
349.08 - FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Funeral director" and "funeral establishment" have the same meaning as set forth in W. Va. Code, § 30-6-4. 
(2)  "Funeral procession" means two or more vehicles accompanying the body of a deceased person, or traveling to the church, chapel, cemetery, or other location at which the funeral service or final disposition is to be held, including a funeral lead vehicle or a funeral escort vehicle. 
(3)  "Funeral lead vehicle" means any authorized law enforcement or nonlaw-enforcement motor vehicle or a funeral escort vehicle being used to lead and facilitate the movement of a funeral procession. A funeral hearse may serve as a funeral lead vehicle. 
(4)  "Funeral escort" means a person or entity that provides escort services for funeral processions, including law-enforcement personnel and agencies. 
(5)  "Funeral escort vehicle" means any motor vehicle that escorts a funeral procession. 
(b)  Funeral procession right-of-way. 
(1)  Regardless of any traffic control device or right-of-way provisions prescribed by state or local ordinance, pedestrians and operators of all vehicles, except as stated in subsection (b)(3) of this section, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which is part of a funeral procession being led by a funeral escort vehicle or a funeral lead vehicle. 
(2)  When the funeral lead vehicle lawfully enters an intersection, either by reason of a traffic control device or at the direction of law-enforcement personnel, the remaining vehicles in the funeral procession may follow through the intersection regardless of any traffic control devices or right-of-way provisions prescribed by state or local law. 
(3)  Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections regardless of traffic control devices subject to the following conditions and exceptions: 
A.  Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way to an approaching emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible signal; 
B.  Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way when directed to do so by a police officer; and 
C.  Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession must exercise due care when participating in a funeral procession. 
(c)  Driving in procession. 
(1)  All vehicles comprising a funeral procession shall follow the preceding vehicle in the funeral procession as closely as is practical and safe. 
(2)  Any ordinance, law or rule stating that motor vehicles shall be operated to allow sufficient space enabling any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger is not applicable to vehicles in a funeral procession. 
(d)  Liability. Liability for any death, personal injury or property damage suffered on or after the first day of July, 1999, by any person in a funeral procession may not be imposed upon a funeral director or funeral establishment or their employees or agents unless the death, personal injury or property damage is proximately caused by the negligent or intentional act of a funeral director or funeral establishment or their employees or agents. 
(e)  Equipment. All nonlaw-enforcement funeral escort vehicles and funeral lead vehicles may be equipped with at least one lighted circulation flashing lamp exhibiting an amber or purple light or lens. Flashing amber or purple lights may be used when such vehicles are used in a funeral procession. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, Art. 17C-23. 
349.09 - OPENING DOOR OF VEHICLE ON TRAFFIC SIDE. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than is necessary to load or unload passengers. 
349.10 - BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
349.11 - UNLAWFUL RIDING. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
349.12 - SQUEALING TIRES, CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES. 
    No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in such a manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly called "peeling". 
349.13 - INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE. 
    No person either individually or in association with one or more persons shall willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner. 
    No person with intent to commit any malicious mischief, injury or other crime shall climb into or upon a vehicle whether it is in motion or at rest or with like intent attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of a vehicle while the same is at rest and unattended or with like intent set in motion any vehicle while the same is at rest and unattended. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17A-8-6. 
349.14 - DRIVING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
349.15 - SHORTCUTTING; AVOIDING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle across public or private property marked with signs "No Through Traffic" or words of similar import for the purpose of passing from one roadway to another. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle across public or private property for the purpose of avoiding compliance with a traffic control device. 
(c)  It shall be prima-facie evidence of a violation of this section for the operator of a motor vehicle to cross public or private property as provided herein without using the service of such property, stopping the engine or both. 
349.16 - COASTING PROHIBITED. 
    The operator of any motor vehicle when traveling on a down grade on any street, alley or highway shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
349.17 - DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall drive the same over or through a safety zone. 
349.18 - DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR. 
    No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or any part thereof, which has been closed in the process of its construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by the authority having jurisdiction to close such street or highway. 
349.19 - OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC. 
    No person shall operate, stop, stand or park any motor vehicle on any street or alley within the municipality so as to obstruct or hinder the free flow of motor vehicle traffic except in compliance with a lawful order of a police officer or in compliance with a traffic control sign, signal or marking. 
349.20 - VEHICLE SECURITY. 
    Every owner or registrant of a motor vehicle shall maintain security upon such vehicle as required by W. Va. Code, Art. 17D-2A, and no person shall knowingly drive or operate on any street within the municipality any motor vehicle upon which security is required by such article unless the security is provided, and violation of any of the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 17D-2A including failure to have a certificate of insurance, if required, shall constitute a violation under this section. 
349.21 - LITTERING FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any driver or passenger of a motor vehicle or other conveyance to place, deposit, dump, throw or cause to be placed, deposited, dumped or thrown, any litter from a motor vehicle or other conveyance in or upon any public or private highway, road, street or alley; any private property; any public property; or the waters of the state or within 100 feet of the waters of this state, except in a proper litter or other solid waste receptacle. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "litter" means all waste material including, but not limited to, any garbage, refuse, trash, disposable package, container, can, bottle, paper, ashes, cigarette or cigar butt, carcass of any dead animal or any part thereof, or any other offensive or unsightly matter, but not including the wastes of primary processes of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing. 
(c)  When there is more than one occupant in a motor vehicle or other conveyance and it can not be determined which occupant is responsible for violating this section, the driver shall be presumed to be responsible for the violation. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-14. 
349.22 - NEWLY PAINTED TRAFFIC LANES. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle upon newly painted traffic lanes so marked by traffic cones or markers upon the roadway or any street or highway. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-128) 
349.23 - DRIVING ON FLOODWALL RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall drive any motor-driven vehicle over, upon or through any property owned or under the supervision of the floodwall board without the express permission of the floodwall board to do so. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-129.1) 
349.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 351 - LICENSING GENERALLY[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference- Impounding unlicensed vehicle, § 303.07; illumination of license plate, § 345.05(c). 

351.01 - REGISTRATION, CERTIFICATE OF TITLE REQUIRED. 
    No person shall drive or move and no owner shall knowingly permit to be driven or moved upon any street or highway any vehicle of a type required to be registered under W. Va. Code, Ch. 17-A which is not registered or for which a certificate of title has not been issued or applied for or for which the appropriate fee has not been paid when and as required, except as otherwise permitted by the provisions therein; provided, that in the event of the sale of a vehicle by a person other than a registered dealer, the person purchasing the same may, for a period of not more than ten days, operate such vehicle under the registration of its previous owner and display the registration thereof; provided further that he shall have and display on the demand of any proper officer the consent in writing of such previous owner so to use such registration. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17A-3-1. 
351.02 - REGISTRATION CARD. 
    Every owner upon receipt of a registration card shall write his signature thereon with pen and ink in the space provided. Every such registration card shall at all times be carried in the vehicle to which it refers or shall be carried by the person driving or in control of such vehicle who shall display the same upon demand of a police officer or any officer or employee of the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17A-3-13. 
351.03 - DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION PLATES. 
(a)  Registration plates issued for vehicles required to be registered shall be attached to the rear thereof except that on truck tractors and road tractors designed and constructed to pull trailers or semi-trailers, the registration plate shall be mounted to the front. 
(b)  Every registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent the plate from swinging and at a height of not less than 12 inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, an owner of a motor vehicle with a Class G registration as defined in W. Va. Code, § 17A-10-1 may choose to: 
(1)  Display a standard, Class G registration plate in a horizontal position; or 
(2)  Display a specially designed Class G registration plate in a vertical position. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17A-3-15. 
351.04 - OPERATION OF VEHICLE WITHOUT EVIDENCE OF REGISTRATION; USE OF TEMPORARY FACSIMILE. 
    No person shall operate or park, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated or parked upon any street or highway any vehicle required to be registered unless there is attached thereto and displayed thereon or is in the possession of the operator when and as required by this Traffic Code, a valid registration card and registration plate or plates issued therefor by the Department of Motor Vehicles for the current registration year except as otherwise expressly permitted in W. Va. Code, Ch. 17-A. 
    In the event that the registration plate or plates originally issued are lost, destroyed or stolen, a temporary facsimile of the plate or plates, showing the number of the same, may be attached to the vehicle by the owner for a period of not more than 15 days, or until a new plate or plates are issued by the department whichever is earlier; provided, that no such facsimile shall be used and no such vehicle shall be driven upon the streets or highways of this municipality until the owner has notified in writing the department of public safety of the loss of such registration plate or plates. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17A-9-2. 
351.05 - IMPROPER USE OF REGISTRATION CARD, PLATE OR PERMIT. 
    No person shall lend to another any certificate of title, registration card, registration plate, special plate or permit issued to him if the person desiring to borrow the same would not be entitled to the use thereof, nor shall any person knowingly permit the use of any of the same by one not entitled thereto, nor shall any person display upon a vehicle any registration card, registration plates or permit not issued for such vehicle or not otherwise lawfully used thereon under this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17A-9-3. 
351.06 - DRIVER OR MOTORCYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(a)  No person, except those hereinafter expressly exempted, shall drive any motor vehicle upon a street or highway in this municipality or upon any subdivision street, as used in W. Va. Code, Art. 8-24, when the use of such subdivision street is generally used by the public unless the person has a valid driver's license under the provisions of the West Virginia Code for the type or class of vehicle being driven. 
    Any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle as provided in the West Virginia Code may exercise the privilege thereby granted as provided in the West Virginia Code and, except as otherwise provided by law, shall not be required to obtain any other license to exercise such privilege by any county, municipality or local board or body having authority to adopt local police regulations. 
(b)  No person, except those hereinafter expressly exempted, shall drive any motorcycle upon a street or highway in this municipality or upon any subdivision street, as used in W. Va. Code, Art. 8-24 when the use of such subdivision street is generally used by the public unless the person has a valid motorcycle license or a valid license which has been endorsed under W. Va. Code, § 17B-2-7b for motorcycle operation or has a valid motorcycle instruction permit. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17B-2-1. 
351.07 - PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE. 
    The following persons are exempt from the license required under section 351.06: 
(a)  Any person while operating a motor vehicle in the armed services of the United States while in the performance of his official duties; 
(b)  A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age and who has in his or her immediate possession a valid driver's license issued to the person in the person's home state or country unless the commissioner determines the person's home state or country does not extend the same privileges to a resident of this state, may operate a motor vehicle in this state only as a noncommercial driver for a period not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year; 
(c)  A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age, who has in the person's immediate possession a valid driver's license issued to the person in the person's home state or country and who is employed in this state, or owns, maintains or operates a place or places of business in this state, or engages in any trade, profession or occupation in this state, in addition to the driving privileges extended under subsection (b) hereof, unless the commissioner determines the person's home state or country does not extend the same privileges to a resident of this state, may operate a motor vehicle in this state only as a noncommercial driver in traveling to and from the person's place or places of employment, place or places of business or place or places at which the person engages in the trade, profession or occupation and in the discharge of the duties of the person's employment, business, trade, profession or occupation if the duties are such that, if performed by a resident of the State of West Virginia over the age of 18 years of age, the resident would not be required under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 17 to obtain a Class A, B, C or D driver's license. However, this subsection shall not exempt any person who is required to obtain a West Virginia driver's license in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 17B-2-1a; 
(d)  A nonresident who is at least 18 years of age and who has in his or her immediate possession a valid commercial driver's license issued to the person in his or her home state or country and which meets the requirements of the federal commercial motor vehicle act of 1986, Title XI of public law 99-570 and unless the commissioner determines the person's home state or country does not extend the same privilege to a resident of this state may operate a motor vehicle in this state either as a commercial driver subject to the age limits applicable to commercial driver in this state, or as a noncommercial driver subject to the limitations imposed on nonresident drivers in subsections (b) and (c) hereof; 
(e)  Any person who is a student, properly enrolled and registered in an accredited school, college or university in this state, who is at least 16 years of age and who has in his or her immediate possession a valid driver's license issued to the person in the person's home state, notwithstanding the limitations of subsections (b) and (c) hereof may operate motor vehicle in this state only as noncommercial driver; provided, that the state of which the person is a resident shall extend the same privileges to residents of this state. This exemption shall be canceled immediately when the student is graduated from school, college or university or is expelled or ceases to be a student. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17B-2-2. 
351.08 - DISPLAY OF LICENSE. 
    Every licensee shall have his or her driver's license in such person's immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall display the same, upon demand of a magistrate, municipal judge, circuit court judge, peace officer or an employee of the Division of Motor Vehicles. However, no person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if such person produces in court or the office of the arresting officer a driver's license theretofore issued to such person and valid at the time of such person's arrest. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17B-2-9. 
351.09 - CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall commit any one of the following acts: 
(a)  Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his possession any fictitious or fraudulently altered driver's or commercial driver's license or nonoperator's identification; 
(b)  Lend his driver's or commercial driver's license or nonoperator's identification to any other person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another; 
(c)  Display or represent as one's own any driver's or commercial driver's license or nonoperator's identification not issued to him; 
(d)  Use a false or fictitious name in any application for a driver's or commercial driver's license or nonoperator's identification or knowingly make a false statement or knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in any such application; 
(e)  Permit any unlawful use of a driver's or commercial driver's license or nonoperator's identification issued to him; or 
(f)  Do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this Traffic Code or W. Va. Code, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17B-4-1. 
351.10 - DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any public street or highway of this municipality at a time when his privilege so to do has been lawfully suspended or revoked. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17B-4-3. 
351.11 - OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any street or highway by any person who is not authorized hereunder or in violation of any of the provisions of this Traffic Code. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17B-4-4. 
351.12 - REINSTATEMENT FEE FOR DRIVER'S LICENSE. 
(a)  A fee of $50 is hereby imposed upon any person whose driver's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle in this state is reinstated after having been suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to timely pay costs, fines, forfeitures or penalties imposed by the municipal court; 
(2)  Default on a payment plan for such costs, fines, forfeitures or penalties; or 
(3)  Failure to appear or otherwise respond in court when charged with a municipal violation, all as provided for by the West Virginia Code. 
(b)  The fee imposed by this section shall be paid at the time a person's drivers license or privilege to drive is reinstated by the state Division of Motor Vehicles. Such fee is imposed to defer the costs to the city associated with administrative expenses related to the suspension and reinstatement. 
(Ord. 2-26-07) 
351.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 353 - COMMERCIAL DRIVERS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Commercial vehicles, Art. 347; driver's licensing, Art. 351. 
State Law reference- Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act, W. Va. Code, Art. 17E-1. 

353.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Traffic Code, the following definitions apply to this article: 
(a)  "Alcohol" means: 
(1)  Any substance containing any form of alcohol, including, but not limited to, ethanol, methanol, propanol and isopropanol; 
(2)  Beer, ale, port or stout and other similar fermented beverages (including sake or similar products) of any name or description containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute therefor; 
(3)  Distilled spirits or that substance known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine in any form (including all dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced); or 
(4)  Wine of not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume. 
(b)  "Alcohol concentration" means: 
(1)  The number of grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood; or 
(2)  The number of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath; or 
(3)  The number of grams of alcohol per 67 milliliters of urine; or 
(4)  The number of grams of alcohol per 86 milliliters of serum. 
(c)  "Commercial driver license" means a license issued in accordance with the requirements of W. Va. Code, Art. 17E-1 to an individual which authorizes the individual to drive a class of commercial motor vehicle. 
(d)  "Commercial driver instruction permit" means a permit issued pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-9(d). 
(e)  "Commercial motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle designed or used to transport passengers or property: 
(1)  If the vehicle has a gross combination vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more inclusive of a towed unit(s) with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds; 
(2)  If the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 26,001 pounds or more; 
(3)  If the vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or 
(4)  If the vehicle is of any size transporting hazardous materials as defined in this section. 
(f)  "Conviction" means an unvacated adjudication of guilt; a determination that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original jurisdiction or by an authorized administrative tribunal or proceeding; an unvacated forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's appearance in court; a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court or the payment of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended, or probated. 
(g)  "Disqualification" means any of the following three actions: 
(1)  The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a driver's license by the state or jurisdiction of issuance. 
(2)  Any withdrawal of a person's privilege to drive a commercial motor vehicle by a state or other jurisdiction as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking or vehicle weight except as to violations committed by a special permittee on the coal resource transportation system or vehicle defect violations. 
(3)  A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R. Part 391 (2004). 
(h)  "Drive" means to drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle in any place open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic. For purposes of section 353.06 "drive" includes operation or physical control of a motor vehicle anywhere in this municipality. 
(i)  "Driver" means any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle, in any place open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, or who is required to hold a commercial driver license. 
(j)  "Driver license" means a license issued by a state to an individual which authorizes the individual to drive a motor vehicle of a specific class. 
(k)  "Employee" means any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, including full time, regularly employed drivers; casual, intermittent or occasional drivers; leased drivers and independent, owner-operator contractors (while in the course of operating a commercial motor vehicle) who are either directly employed by or under lease to drive a commercial motor vehicle for an employer. 
(l)  "Employer" means any person, including the United States, a state or a political subdivision of a state, who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle, or assigns a person to drive a commercial motor vehicle. 
(m)  "Farm vehicle" includes a motor vehicle or combination vehicle registered to the farm owner or entity operating the farm and used exclusively in the transportation of agricultural or horticultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy products from the farm or orchard on which they are raised or produced to markets, processing plants, packing houses, canneries, railway shipping points and cold storage plants and in the transportation of agricultural or horticultural supplies and machinery to such farms or orchards to be used thereon. 
(n)  "Farmer" includes owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in control of the premises used substantially for agricultural or horticultural pursuits, who is at least 18 years of age with two years licensed driving experience. 
(o)  "Farmer vehicle driver" means the person employed and designated by the farmer to drive a farm vehicle as long as driving is not his sole or principal function on the farm, who is at least 18 years of age with two years licensed driving experience. 
(p)  "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails. 
(q)  "Out-of-service order" means a temporary prohibition against driving a commercial motor vehicle as a result of a determination by a law-enforcement officer, an authorized enforcement officer of a federal, state, Canadian, Mexican, county or local jurisdiction including any special agent of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration pursuant to 49 C.F.R. §§ 386.72, 392.5, 395.13, 396.9 or compatible laws or the North American uniform out-of-service criteria that an imminent hazard exists. 
(r)  "Violation of an out-of-service order" means: 
(1)  The operation of a commercial motor vehicle during the period the driver was placed out of service; or 
(2)  The operation of a commercial motor vehicle by a driver after the vehicle was placed out of service and before the required repairs are made. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-3. 
353.02 - LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DRIVER'S LICENSES. 
    No person who drives a commercial motor vehicle shall have more than one driver license at one time except during the ten-day period beginning on the date the person is issued a driver's license. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-4. 
353.03 - EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES. 
(a)  Each employer must require the applicant to provide the information specified in W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-5. 
(b)  No employer may knowingly allow, permit, require or authorize a driver to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period: 
(1)  In which the driver has a driver's license suspended, revoked or canceled by a state; has lost the privilege to drive a commercial motor vehicle in a state, or has been disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle; or 
(2)  In which the driver has more than one driver's license at one time; or 
(3)  During any period in which the driver, or the commercial motor vehicle he or she is driving or the motor carrier operation, is subject to an out-of-service order; or 
(4)  In violation of federal, state or local law or regulation pertaining to railroad highway grade crossings; or 
(5)  During any period the driver is in violation of any provision of 49 C.F.R., Part 382 related to controlled substances and alcohol use and testing. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-6. 
353.04 - COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(a)  Except when driving under a commercial driver's instruction permit accompanied by the holder of a commercial driver's license valid for the vehicle being driven, no person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle unless the person holds a commercial driver's license and applicable endorsements valid for the vehicle they are driving. 
(b)  No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle while their driving privilege is suspended, revoked, canceled, expired, subject to a disqualification, or in violation of an out-of-service order. 
(c)  Drivers of a commercial motor vehicle shall have a commercial driver's license in their possession at all times while driving. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-7. 
353.05 - EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  Farmers. Bona fide farmers or farm vehicle drivers, as defined, operating a vehicle otherwise covered by the commercial driver's license requirements may be exempted from the provisions of this article only if the vehicle used is: 
(1)  Driven by a farmer or farm vehicle driver; 
(2)  Used only to transport either agricultural products, farm machinery, farm supplies, to or from a farm; 
(3)  Not used in the operation of a common or contract motor carrier; and 
(4)  Used within 150 miles of the qualifying farm. Farmers who wish to be exempted from the commercial driver's license requirements must apply to the Division of Motor Vehicles for a certificate of exemption. 
(b)  Military personnel. Active duty military personnel operating vehicles being used for military purposes are exempted from the provisions of this article in accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR § 383.3(c)(2006). 
(c)  Fire fighting and rescue equipment. Operators of vehicles authorized to hold an authorized emergency vehicle permit for use of red signal lights only are exempt from the provisions of this article while the authorized emergency vehicle permit is in force. Vehicles in this class include, but are not limited to, fire fighters and rescue equipment: 
(1)  Owned and operated by state, county and municipal fire departments. 
(2)  Owned and operated by state, county and municipal civil defense organizations. 
(3)  Owned and operated by a manufacturer engaged in a type of business that requires fire fighter equipment to protect the safety of their plants and its employees. 
(4)  Owned and operated by volunteer fire departments. 
(d)  Operators of off-road construction and mining equipment. Operators of equipment which, by its design, appearance and function, is not intended for use on a public road, including, without limitation, motorscrapers, backhoes, motorgraders, compactors, excavators, tractors, trenches and bulldozers, are exempt from the provisions of this article; provided, that the exemption recognized by this subsection shall not be construed to permit the operation of such equipment on any public road except such operation as may be required for a crossing of such road; provided, however, that no such equipment may be operated on a public road for a distance exceeding 500 feet from the place where such equipment entered upon the public road. 
(e)  Exempt vehicles. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999 exempts vehicles used exclusively for personal use such as recreation vehicles and rental trucks used only to transport the driver's personal or household property. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-8. 
353.06 - DRIVERS PROHIBITED FROM OPERATING WITH ANY ALCOHOL IN SYSTEM. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties provided by the West Virginia Code or these Codified Ordinances, any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration in his or her blood, breath or urine of four hundredths of one percent or more, by weight, shall be imprisoned for not less than 24 hours nor more than 30 days, and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. A person convicted of a second or any subsequent offense under the provisions of this subsection shall be imprisoned for a period of 30 days, and the court may, in its discretion, impose a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $3,000. 
(b)  A person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be treated in the same manner set forth in W. Va. Code, § 17C-19-3, as if he or she had been arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or of any controlled substance. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalties provided by the West Virginia Code or these Codified Ordinances, a person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle having any measurable alcohol in such person's system or who refuses to take a preliminary breath test to determine such person's blood alcohol content as provided by W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-15 shall be placed out of service for 24 hours by the arresting law-enforcement officer. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-14. 
353.99 - PENALTY. 
    Unless another penalty is provided in this article, whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both except that for the second violation of section 353.04, the offender shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For the third or any subsequent conviction for violation of section 353.04, the offender shall be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17E-1-25. 
CHAPTER SEVEN - PARKING 
ARTICLE 361 - PARKING GENERALLY[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Impounding of abandoned vehicles, § 303.07; duty to stop engine, set brake on grade and remove key, § 349.01. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to regulate the standing or parking of vehicles, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(a)(1); authority to regulate parallel and angle parking, W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-4. 

361.01 - PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS. 
(a)  Upon any street or highway outside of a business or residence district no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the street or highway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of the street or highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the street or highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway or street. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a street or highway in such a manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-1. 
361.02 - POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or highway in violation of section 361.01, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of such street or highway. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-2. 
361.03 - PROHIBITED STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PLACES. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway or in such manner as to block ingress or egress; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly signposted); 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a street or highway tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking, or where the curbing or street is painted yellow or red, or at any place in excess of the maximum time limited by signs; 
(15)  Within 20 feet of any mail receptacle served regularly by a carrier using a motor vehicle for daily deliveries, if such parking interferes with or causes delay in the carrier's schedule; 
(16)  Upon any controlled-access highway; 
(17)  At any place on any street or highway where the safety and convenience of the traveling public is thereby endangered; 
(18)  Over or across any lines or marks established by the municipality to indicate parking spaces; (A.O.) 
(19)  Within 30 feet of any street intersection, measured from the point of intersection of curblines projected; 
(20)  In a parking space marked "No Parking-Government Licensed Vehicles Only" unless such vehicle has attached thereto a license plate issued by the United States government; 
(21)  Within that area along the Ohio River known as David W. Harris Riverfront Park, with the exception of those areas designated as parking lots. The provisions of this subsection shall in no event apply to official emergency vehicles or service vehicles; 
(22)  At any place which has been designated a fire lane by the fire chief, the fire marshal or other official authorized under the laws of the state to designate an area as a fire lane; 
(23)  Parking in any yard abutting upon a street including, but not limited to, residential, commercial and industrial uses, shall be prohibited unless there is a permitted curb cut as allowed by section 913.09(j) of the Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code. Parking shall be limited to paved areas of property used for multi-family residential, commercial and industrial uses. Provided, that nothing herein shall relieve any person from complying with all other applicable ordinances including the Zoning Code. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  It shall not be necessary to erect signs at any of the locations specified in subsection (a) herein in order to enforce the provisions of such subsection. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any truck, tractor, air compressor or other equipment, while being used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of facilities near, on, over or under any street or highway, may stop, stand or park where and as necessary in order to perform such work; provided traffic on such street or highway is given proper warning by a flagman on duty, warning signs, lights or other devices prescribed by the Traffic Engineer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-143; Ord. 9-24-84; Ord. 4-13-87; Ord. 9-8-97) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-3. 
361.04 - VEHICLES PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall stop, park or leave standing unattended any vehicle on a private road or driveway or on private property without having express or implied permission from the owner, tenant or lessee of such land. The owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or driveway or private property may move, or have moved, any vehicle stopped, parked or left standing unattended on his private road, driveway or private property as above prohibited without any liability for the cost of moving any vehicle, nor shall he be liable to the owner of the vehicle for any damage done to such vehicle in moving it, unless the owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or driveway or private property was negligent in removing or authorizing the removal of the vehicle. The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible to the persons removing such vehicle for paying all removal costs. Any person who removes any vehicle under the provisions of this section shall notify the State Department of Public Safety of such action, and, in addition notify the police department. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-14-13. 
361.05 - MANNER OF ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING. 
(a)  Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the curb-side wheels of such vehicle parallel with and not more than 18 inches from the curb, unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop shall be as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. 
(b)  This subsection does not apply to streets or parts thereof where angle parking is lawfully permitted. However, no angle parking shall be permitted on a state or federal-aid route unless approved by the state commissioner of highways. 
(c)  Upon streets where angle parking is permitted, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as is indicated by appropriate signs or marks. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or street with the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or street except as provided in section 361.13. 
361.06 - ACCESSIBLE PARKING. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following terms have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
(1)  A person or applicant with a "mobility impairment" means a person who is a citizen of West Virginia and as determined by a physician, allopath or osteopath chiropractor, advanced nurse practitioner or physician's assistant licensed to practice in West Virginia: 
A.  Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest; 
B.  Cannot walk without the use of or assistance from a brace, cane, crutch, prosthetic device, wheelchair, other assistive device or another person; 
C.  Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the person's force (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter or the arterial oxygen tension is less than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest; 
D.  Uses portable oxygen; 
E.  Has a cardiac condition to such an extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV according to standards established by the American heart association; or 
F.  Is severely limited in his or her ability to walk because of an arthritic, neurological, or other orthopedic physical condition. 
(2)  "Special registration plate" means a registration plate that displays the international symbol of access, as adopted by the Rehabilitation International Organization in 1969 at its Eleventh World Congress on Rehabilitation of the Disabled, in a color that contrasts with the background, in letters and numbers the same size as those on the plate, and which may be used in lieu of a regular registration plate. 
(3)  "Removable windshield placard" (permanent or temporary) means a two-sided, hanger style placard measuring three inches by nine and one-half inches, with all of the following on each side: 
A.  The international symbol of access, measuring at least three inches in height, centered on the placard, in white on a blue background for permanent designations and in white on a red background for temporary designations; 
B.  An identification number measuring one inch in height; 
C.  An expiration date in numbers measuring one inch in height; and 
D.  The seal or other identifying symbol of the issuing authority. 
(4)  "Public entity" means state or local government or any department, agency, special purpose district or other instrumentality of a state or local government. 
(5)  "Public facility" means all or any part of any buildings, structures, sites, complexes, roads, parking lots or other real or personal property, including the site where the facility is located. 
(6)  "Place(s) of public accommodation" means a facility or facilities operated by a private entity whose operations affect commerce and fall within at least one of the following categories: 
A.  Inns, hotels, motels and other places of lodging; 
B.  Restaurants, bars or other establishments serving food or drink; 
C.  Motion picture houses, theaters, concert halls, stadiums or other places of exhibition or entertainment; 
D.  Auditoriums, convention centers, lecture halls or other places of public gatherings; 
E.  Bakeries, grocery stores, clothing stores, hardware stores, shopping centers or other sales or rental establishments; 
F.  Laundromats, dry cleaners, banks, barber and beauty shops, travel agencies, shoe repair shops, funeral parlors, gas or service stations, offices of accountants and attorneys, pharmacies, insurance offices, offices of professional health care providers, hospitals or other service establishments; 
G.  Terminals, depots or other stations used for public transportation; 
H.  Museums, libraries, galleries or other places of public display or collection; 
I.  Parks, zoos, amusement parks or other places of recreation; 
J.  Public or private nursery, elementary, secondary, undergraduate or post-graduate schools or other places of learning and day care centers, senior citizen centers, homeless shelters, food banks, adoption agencies or other social service establishments; and 
K.  Gymnasiums, health spas, bowling alleys, golf courses or other places of exercise or recreation. 
(7)  "Commercial facility" means a facility whose operations affect commerce and which are intended for nonresidential use by a private entity. 
(8)  "Accessible parking" formerly known as "handicapped parking" is the present phrase consistent with language within the American with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(9)  "Parking enforcement personnel" includes any law enforcement officer as defined by W. Va. Code, § 30-29-1, and private security guards, parking personnel and other personnel authorized by a city, county or the state to issue parking citations. 
(b)  An accessible parking space should comply with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act accessibility guidelines, contained in 28 C.F.R. 36, Appendix A, Section 4.6. In particular, the parking space should be a minimum of eight feet wide with an adjacent eight-foot access aisle for vans having side mounted hydraulic lifts or ramps or a five-foot access aisle for standard vehicles. Access aisles should be marked using diagonal two- to four-inch-wide stripes spaced every 12 or 24 inches apart along with the words "no parking" in painted letters which are at least 12 inches in height. All accessible parking spaces should have a signpost in front or adjacent to the accessible parking space displaying the international symbol of access sign mounted at a minimum of eight feet above the pavement or sidewalk and the top of the sign. Lines or markings on the pavement or curbs for parking spaces and access aisles may be in any color, although blue is the generally accepted color for accessible parking. 
(c)  A vehicle from any other state, United States territory or foreign country displaying an officially issued special registration plate, placard or decal bearing the international symbol of access shall be recognized and accepted as meeting the requirements of this section, regardless of where the plate, placard or decal is mounted or displayed on the vehicle. 
(d)  Stopping, standing or parking places marked with the international symbol of access shall be designated in close proximity to all public entities including state, county and municipal buildings and facilities, places of public accommodation and commercial facilities. These parking places shall be reserved solely for persons with a mobility impairment at all times. 
(e)  Any person whose vehicle properly displays a valid, unexpired special registration plate or removable windshield placard may park the vehicle for unlimited periods of time in parking zones unrestricted as to length of parking time permitted; provided, that this privilege does not mean that the vehicle may park in any zone where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited or which creates parking zones for special types of vehicles or which prohibits parking during heavy traffic periods during specified rush hours or where parking would clearly present a traffic hazard. To the extent any provision of any ordinance of any political subdivision of this state is contrary to the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section take precedence and apply. 
    The parking privileges provided for in this subsection apply only during those times when the vehicle is being used for the loading or unloading of a person with a mobility impairment. Any person who knowingly exercises, or attempts to exercise these privileges at a time when the vehicle is not being used for the loading or unloading of a person with a mobility impairment, upon first conviction thereof, in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur, shall be fined $200; upon second conviction thereof, in addition to any other penalty, he or she may otherwise incur, shall be fined $300; and upon third and subsequent convictions thereof, in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur, shall be fined $500. 
(f)  Any person whose vehicle does not display a valid, special registration plate or removable windshield placard may not stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in an area designated, zoned or marked for accessible parking with signs or instructions displaying the international symbol of access, either by itself or with explanatory text. The signs may be mounted on a post or a wall in front of the accessible parking space and instructions may appear on the ground or pavement, but use of both methods is preferred. Accessible parking spaces for vans having an eight-foot adjacent access aisle should be designated as "van accessible" but may be used by any vehicle displaying a valid special registration plate or removable windshield placard. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be fined $200; upon second conviction thereof, in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur, shall be fined $300; and upon third and subsequent convictions thereof, in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur, shall be fined $500. 
(g)  All signs that designate areas as "accessible parking" or that display the international symbol of access shall also include the words "Up to $500 fine". 
(h)  No person may stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in an area designated or marked off as an accessible aisle to a van-accessible parking space or regular accessible parking space. Any person, including a driver of a vehicle displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special registration plate, who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be fined $200; upon second conviction thereof, in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur, shall be fined $300; and upon third and subsequent convictions thereof, in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur, shall be fined $500. 
(i)  Parking enforcement personnel who otherwise enforce parking violations may issue citations for violations of this section and shall reference the number on the vehicle's license plate, since the driver normally will not be present. 
(j)  Law-enforcement agencies may establish a program to use trained volunteers to collect information necessary to issue citations to persons who illegally park in designated accessible parking spaces. Any law-enforcement agency choosing to establish a program shall provide for workers' compensation and liability coverage. The volunteers shall photograph the illegally parked vehicle and complete a form, to be developed by supervising law-enforcement agencies, that includes the vehicle's license plate number, date, time and location of the illegally parked vehicle. The photographs must show the vehicle in the accessible space and a readable view of the license plate. Within the discretion of the supervising law-enforcement agency, the volunteers may issue citations or the volunteers may submit the photographs of the illegally parked vehicle and the form to the supervising law-enforcement agency, who may issue a citation, which includes the photographs and the form, to the owner of the illegally parked vehicle. Volunteers shall be trained on the requirements for citations for vehicles parked in marked, zoned or designated accessible parking areas by the supervising law-enforcement agency. 
(k)  The municipality in enforcing this section shall retain all fines and associated late fees. These revenues shall be used first to fund the provisions of subsection (j) of this section, if adopted by the municipality or otherwise shall go into the municipality's general revenue fund. 
(l)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate certain parking meters, or groups of parking meters, or certain other areas on the public streets as reserved for handicapped persons, and to cause signs to be placed as notice that such area is reserved. 
(Ord. 6-8-81) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-13-6. 
361.07 - PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CLEANING OF STREETS. 
    No person shall park any vehicle on any street, highway or avenue within the city during hours designated for the cleaning of any such street, highway or avenue. Such designation shall be made by the mayor or traffic engineer of the city and such street, highway or avenue shall be posted by appropriate signs prohibiting parking during the period of cleaning. In addition to the general penalty prescribed in section 303.99, it shall be lawful for any such vehicle to be towed away and impounded as provided by section 303.07. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-168.1) 
361.08 - PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon any street within the municipality for the principal purpose of: 
(a)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(b)  Displaying advertising. 
(c)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs made necessary by an emergency. 
(d)  Relieving the crowded condition of any parking lot, used car lot, automobile sales lot, repair garage, automobile sales agency or used car sales agency. 
361.09 - TRUCK LOADING ZONES. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivering or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
361.10 - BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted as such, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking provisions at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
361.11 - PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes. (A.O.) 
(b)  (1)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such manner, or under such conditions, as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be parked in any alley at any time in the Central Business District except when in the act of loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise and in compliance with subsection (b)(1) hereof, provided that, parking shall be allowed in, on and along the following alleys in the Central Business District: 
A.  21/2 Alley from 10th Street, east to Veterans Memorial Boulevard. 
B.  41/2 Alley from 10th Street, east to 11th Street, east. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-148; Ord. 1-9-95) 
361.12 - REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA-FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING. 
    In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate was issued to the defendant, shall be prima-facie evidence that the vehicle which was unlawfully parked was so parked by the defendant. A certified copy of registration from the Department of Motor Vehicles shall be proof of such ownership. 
361.13 - PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(c)  Parking on such street less than 20 feet in width shall be parallel with the curb of such streets. Vehicles may be parked on such streets headed in either direction and in parking such vehicles the driver thereof may cross the line of the opposing lane of traffic. 
(d)  Upon all such streets, avenues, roads, courts and public thoroughfares in the city whereon the vehicles shall be parked as herein set out, vehicles traveling over, along and upon such streets, roads, courts, avenues and public thoroughfares on the opposite side from the side so designated for the parking of such vehicles shall yield and give the right-of-way to vehicles traveling in the opposite direction. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-145) 
361.14 - STANDING OR PARKING ON DIVIDED ROADWAYS. 
    In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-146) 
361.15 - PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-150) 
361.16 - NO STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-152) 
361.17 - PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to or across the curb and sidewalk for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials, subject to the terms and conditions of the permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. 
(b)  No permittee or other person shall violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-154) 
361.18 - PARKING MORE THAN 48 HOURS PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall leave any vehicle parked on any street or alley in the city for a period of more than 48 consecutive hours. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-155) 
361.19 - DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES; JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES; ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES; CRIMINAL PENALTIES. 
(a)  Statement of policy. The city council recognizes and declares that abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles and certain abandoned or inoperative household appliances are a public nuisance and a hazard to both adults and children and therefore are dangerous and constitute a clear and present danger; that said abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles and certain abandoned or inoperative household appliances serve as harborage and breeding places for rodents, insects and pests injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare; that the accumulation and storage of any of such items or parts thereof on private or public property, including but not limited to highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property and to promote blight and deterioration which if permitted to remain will continue to destroy the natural beauty of this city and have adverse economic and social effects; that said abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles and certain abandoned or inoperative household appliances constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; that all such visual pollution is a deterrent to economic development; and that it is in the public interest and welfare to provide for a program to eliminate the unsightly practice of abandoning motor vehicles and certain abandoned or inoperative household appliances. In view of these findings, the city declares it to be the public policy of the City of Huntington to eliminate the present danger resulting from abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles, and certain abandoned or inoperative household appliances and to eliminate the visual pollutions resulting from these items, and that in order to provide for the public health, safety and welfare, and quality of life, to enact a section to that end by providing expeditious means and methods for effecting the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles and certain abandoned household appliances. The city further finds and declares that the presence of an abandoned motor vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or an abandoned or inoperative household appliance, or any part thereof, on private or public property, including but not limited to highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is a public nuisance injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of this city which shall be abated as such by the methods provided in this section. This policy is to further provide for the elimination of hazards to public health and safety and to abate or cause to be abated anything which is in the opinion of the majority of city council a public nuisance. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
(1)  "Abandoned household appliance" means a refrigerator, deep freeze, range, stove, automatic dishwasher, clothes washer, clothes dryer, trash compactor, television set, radio, air conditioning unit, commode or bed springs, to which no person claims ownership and which is not in an enclosed building or a licensed salvage yard or in the actual possession of a demolisher. 
(2)  "Abandoned motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle or major part thereof which is inoperative and which has been abandoned on public or private property for any period of time over five days, other than in an enclosed building or in a licensed salvage yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher, or at the business establishment of a licensed towing/wrecker service, or any motor vehicle or major part thereof, which has remained illegally on public or private property for any period of time over five days; or any motor vehicle or major part thereof which has remained on private property without consent of the owner or person in control of the property for any period of time over five days; or any motor vehicle or a major part thereof which is unattended, discarded, deserted and is unlicensed and is not in an enclosed building or a licensed salvage yard or in actual possession of a demolisher. This definition of an abandoned vehicle shall not include any vehicle located at an automobile dealer business or automobile repair business that is legally licensed and zoned by the city. 
(3)  "Demolisher" means any person licensed by the state whose business to any extent or degree, is to convert a motor vehicle or any part thereof or an inoperative household appliance into processed scrap or scrap metal, or into saleable parts, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle vehicles or appliances. 
(4)  "Enclosed building" means a structure surrounded by walls or one continuous wall, and having a roof enclosing the entire structure, including a permanent appendage thereto. 
(5)  "Enforcement agency" means the director of public works, members of the Huntington Police Department, compliance inspector, or any other city official or employee designated by the mayor. 
(6)  "Inoperative household appliance" means a refrigerator, deep freeze, range, stove, automatic dishwasher, clothes washer, clothes dryer, trash compactor, television set, radio, air conditioning unit, commode or bed springs, which by reason of mechanical or physical defects can no longer be used for its intended purpose, and which either is not serving a functional purpose or use, or is not in an enclosed building, a licensed salvage yard or in the actual possession of a demolisher. 
(7)  "Junk motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle, or any part thereof other than an on-premise farm utilities vehicle, which: 
A.  Is discarded, wrecked, ruined, scraped or dismantled; 
B.  Cannot pass the state inspection required by W. Va. Code, § 17C-16-1 et seq.; fails to display a State inspection sticker or displays a state inspection sticker which has been expired for more than sixty days; 
C.  Fails to display a valid registration plate; or 
D.  Is either not serving a functional purpose or use or is not in an enclosed building, a licensed salvage yard or in actual possession of a demolisher. 
(8)  "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle which is or was self-propelled, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses and motorcycles. 
(9)  "Old vehicle tire" means a pneumatic tire in which compressed air is designed to support a load, but which, because of wear, damage or defect, can no longer safely be used on a motor vehicle, and which is either not serving a functional purpose or use or is not in an enclosed building, a licensed salvage yard or in actual possession of a demolisher. 
(10)  "Person" means a natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association or society and the plural as well as the singular. 
(c)  Abandonment of vehicles. 
(1)  No person shall, within the city, abandon a motor vehicle upon the right-of-way of any public highway, upon any other public property, or upon any private property which he does not own, lease, rent or otherwise control unless it be a licensed salvage yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher. 
(2)  The keeping of one vehicle is allowed upon private property as long as such vehicle is kept in a covered state. Such vehicle shall be covered with a commercial covering that renders it unobservable from public view; and, is allowed to be kept for a period of not more than 45 days, after which the vehicle shall be removed from the property and not returned to such property until it is operable, licensed, and registered as required by the laws of the State of West Virginia. 
(d)  Junk vehicles prohibited. No person shall, within the city, place or deposit any junk motor vehicle upon the right-of-way of any public highway or upon any other public property; nor shall any person within this city place or deposit any junk motor vehicle upon any private property which he does not own, lease, rent or otherwise control unless it is at a licensed salvage yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher. 
(e)  Old vehicle tires; abandoned household appliances. No person shall, within this city, place or deposit any old vehicle tires or inoperative household appliance upon the right-of-way of any public highway or upon any other public property nor abandon the same upon any private property which he does not own, lease, rent or otherwise control, unless it be a licensed salvaged yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher. 
(f)  Authority to take possession of abandoned vehicles; enforcement; notification to owner. Any enforcement agency which has knowledge of or discovers or finds any abandoned motor vehicle, any junk motor vehicle, old vehicle tire or inoperative or abandoned household appliance on either public or private property shall take the same into its custody and possession. For that purpose, the enforcement agency shall employ its own personnel, equipment and facility or hire persons, equipment and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving and storing abandoned motor vehicles, junk motor vehicles, old vehicle tires, or inoperative or abandoned household appliances. Before taking any abandoned motor vehicle or junk motor vehicle into custody and possession from private property, the enforcement agency shall give the private property owner and the owner of such motor vehicle, if ascertainable, thirty days notice by registered or certified mail, that such action shall be taken unless such motor vehicle is restored to a functional use. 
(g)  Notification of vehicle owner and lien holders. 
(1)  The enforcement agency which takes into custody and possession an abandoned motor vehicle or a junk motor vehicle shall, within seven days after taking custody and possession thereof, notify the last known registered owner of such motor vehicle and all lien holders of record that such motor vehicle has been taken into custody and possession, such notification to be by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the following: 
A.  Description of such motor vehicle, including the year, make, model, manufacturer's serial or identification number, or any other number which may have been assigned to such motor vehicle by the state and any distinguishing marks; 
B.  Set forth the location of the facility where such motor vehicle is being held and the location where such motor vehicle was taken into custody and possession; 
C.  Inform the owner and any lien holders of record of their right to reclaim such motor vehicle within ten days after the date notice was received by the owner or lien holders upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from taking and placing such motor vehicle into custody and possession; and 
D.  State that the failure of the owner or lien holders of record to exercise their right to reclaim such motor vehicle within such ten-day period shall be deemed a waiver of the owner and lien holders of record of all right, title and interest in such motor vehicle and of their consent to the sale or disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle or junk motor vehicle at a public auction or to a licensed salvage yard or demolisher. 
(2)  If the identity of the last registered owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or junk motor vehicle cannot be determined, or if the certificate of registration or certificate of title contains no address for the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of all lien holders, notice shall be published as a class I legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 59-3-1 et seq., and the publication area for such publication shall be the city wherein such motor vehicle was located at the time such enforcement agency took custody and possession thereof, and such notice shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to this article. Any notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles and junk motor vehicles. The notice shall be published within ten days after such motor vehicle is taken into custody and possession and shall have the same contents required for a notice pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, except that the ten-day period shall run from the date such notice is published as aforesaid 
(3)  An enforcement agency which hires any person or entity to take into custody and possession an abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor vehicle pursuant to this section shall notify the person or entity hired of the name and address of the registered owner of the motor vehicle, if known, and all lien holders of record, if any, within 15 days after the vehicle is taken into custody and possession; provided, that the requirements of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles for which the registered owner cannot be ascertained by due diligence or investigation. 
(4)  The person or entity hired by an enforcement agency to take into custody or possession an abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor vehicle shall, within thirty days after the possession, notify the registered owner of the vehicle and all lien holders of record, if any, as identified by the enforcement agency pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, by registered mail, return receipt requested, that the motor vehicle has been taken into custody and possession. The notice shall have the same contents required for a notice pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, including the ten-day period the owner or lien holder has to reclaim the motor vehicle. Upon the issuance of the notice, the identified owner of the motor vehicle is liable and responsible for all costs for towing, preservation and storage of the motor vehicle; provided, that failure to issue the notice required by this subsection within 30 days after possession of the motor vehicle relieves the identified owner of the motor vehicle of any liability for charges for towing, preservation and storage in excess of the sum of the first five days of the charges; provided, however, that the requirements of this subsection do not apply to motor vehicles for which the registered owner thereof cannot be ascertained by due diligence or investigation. 
(5)  For an abandoned motor vehicle or junked vehicle having a loan value of $2,500 or less, as ascertained by values placed upon motor vehicles using a standard industry reference book, a person or entity hired by an enforcement agency to tow the abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor vehicle may, if the motor vehicle is not claimed by the owner or a lien holder after notice within the time set forth in subsection (4) of this section or if the identity of the last registered owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor vehicle cannot be determined or if the certificate of registration or certificate of title contains no address of the owner or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of all lien holders after publication as set forth in subsection (2) of this section, file an application with the Division of Motor Vehicles for a certificate of title and registration which, upon payment of the appropriate fees, shall be issued. The person or entity may then sell the motor vehicle at private sale or public auction. 
(6)  For an abandoned motor or junked motor vehicle having a loan value of $2,500 or less, as ascertained by values placed upon motor vehicles using a standard industry reference book, a licensed motor vehicle dealer, as defined in W. Va. Code, § 17A-1-1, or a motor vehicle repair facility may, if a motor vehicle is abandoned on the property or place of business of the dealer or a motor vehicle repair facility and is not claimed by the owner or a lien holder after notice within the time set forth in subsection (4) of this section or if the identity of the last registered owner of the abandoned motor vehicle cannot be determined or if the certificate of registration or certificate of title contains no address of the owner or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of all lien holders after publication as set forth in subsection (2) of this section, file an application with the Division of Motor Vehicles for a certificate of title and registration which upon payment of the appropriate fees, shall be issued. The dealer or motor vehicle repair facility may then sell the motor vehicle at private sale or public auction. 
(7)  The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle or junk motor vehicle within the ten-day period after notice is received by registered or certified mail or within ten days after the notice is published in a newspaper as aforesaid shall be set forth in such notice. 
(h)  Disposal of unclaimed vehicles. 
(1)  If an abandoned motor vehicle or junk motor vehicle is not reclaimed as provided for in subsection (f) hereof, the enforcement agency in possession of the abandoned motor vehicle or junk motor vehicle shall sell it either at a public auction or to a licensed salvage yard or demolisher. The purchaser of such motor vehicle shall take title to such motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership and shall receive a sales receipt from the enforcement agency which disposed of such motor vehicle. The sales receipt at such sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring such motor vehicle to a licensed salvage yard or to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking or dismantling, and no further titling of such motor vehicle shall be necessary by either the purchaser at the auction, the licensed salvage yard or the demolisher, who shall be exempt from the payment of any fees and taxes required pursuant to the W. Va. Code, § 17A-3-1 et seq.; provided, that the purchaser at the auction shall place such motor vehicle in the possession of a licensed salvage yard or demolisher within 20 days from the date he purchases such motor vehicle; and if such licensed salvage yard or demolisher does not demolish such vehicle, such licensed salvage yard or demolisher shall be required to pay all fees and taxes required pursuant to W. Va. Code, Art. 17A-3. 
(2)  When an enforcement agency has in its custody and possession old vehicle tires or inoperative or abandoned household appliances collected in accordance with subsection (f) hereof, it shall sell such property from time to time at public auction, or to a licensed salvage yard or demolisher. 
(i)  Proceeds from sale. 
(1)  From the proceeds of the sale, the police department shall reimburse itself for any expenses it may have incurred in conducting the auction, and costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned vehicle in custody and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Any remainder from the proceeds of sale after payment of these costs shall be held for the last registered owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for ninety days, after which time, if no owner or lien holder claims the remainder, it shall be deposited in the city treasury to be kept and maintained as a special revolving account designated as the abandoned vehicle disposal account and any monies so collected and deposited shall be used solely by the police department for the payment of auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs which result from placing other abandoned vehicles in custody, whenever the proceeds from the sale of those abandoned vehicles are insufficient to meet these expenses and costs 
(3)  The abandoned vehicle disposal account shall be under the direction and control of the city recorder, who shall assure that all the money is properly deposited in the account by the police department and that any money necessary to pay costs and expenses of those sales, as specified in the preceding paragraph are disbursed in accordance with required accounting procedures applicable to law enforcement agencies selling abandoned vehicles. 
(4)  The abandoned vehicles disposal account shall never be maintained in excess of the amount necessary to efficiently and properly carry out the intentions of this article and in no event shall the abandoned vehicle disposal account be maintained in excess of the sum of $1,000; and whenever the abandoned vehicle disposal account exceeds that amount, the city recorder shall transfer the excess to the general revenue fund. 
(j)  Injunctive relief. In addition to all other remedies provided for in this section, the city attorney may apply to the circuit court for an injunction to restrain, prevent or abate the maintenance and storage of abandoned motor vehicles, junk motor vehicles, old vehicle tires or inoperative or abandoned household appliances which are in violation of any provisions of this section. 
(k)  Junk on private property with permission of owner. 
(1)  It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall store or allow to be stored, accumulate or exist on real estate within the city any junk, disabled and non-serviceable automobiles, automobile bodies, automobile parts and other debris. 
(2)  In addition to the penalty provided below, the city, in order to abate such nuisance, shall have the power and authority to order the removal of such nuisance by giving the owner of the property, or the person in lawful possession thereof, ten days notice and in the event such nuisance is not abated within ten days, the city shall have such right to abate such nuisance and remove any junk, disabled and non-serviceable automobiles, automobile bodies, automobile parts and other debris and charge the expense thereof against such property, and the expense of removing and abating such nuisance shall constitute a lien against such property. 
(l)  Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-13-07; Ord. of 8-27-12(2)) 
361.20 - PARKING BETWEEN SIDEWALK AND CURB; STREET SURFACE AND PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(a)  Where a portion of any street, avenue or highway is paved and curbed, no person shall park any vehicle between the sidewalk and the curb thereof. 
(b)  No person shall park or operate any vehicle on that part of the city right-of-way lying between the edge of the surfaced portion of any city street or alley and any private property abutting such right-of-way without having first obtained the necessary approval as set forth elsewhere in these Codified Ordinances. 
(1964 Code Secs. 22-156, 22-156.1) 
361.21 - PARKING ON GROUNDS OF FACTORY, SCHOOL OR INSTITUTION. 
    No vehicles shall be parked within the grounds surrounding any manufactory plant, school or institution so as to interfere in any way with the free operation of any fire apparatus, police patrol or emergency ambulance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-157) 
361.22 - UNLAWFUL TO CHARGE FEE FOR PARKING ON CITY PROPERTY. 
    No person shall charge a fee, for private gain, for the parking of a vehicle or any part thereof, on any city property, street, alley, avenue, highway, right-of-way or easement. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-157.1) 
361.23 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 9, 2012, repealed § 361.23, which pertained to streets adjoining Fairfield Stadium. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
361.24 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 9, 2012, repealed § 361.24, which pertained to no parking in alleys near Memorial Field House. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
361.25 - DOUBLE PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING. 
    No person shall double park a vehicle on any street in the central business district for the purpose of loading and unloading goods, merchandise or other cargo for delivery to any place of business that has a rear or side entrance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-160) 
361.26 - UNHITCHING TRACTOR FROM TRAILER WHILE LOADING OR UNLOADING. 
    No operator of any tractor-trailer combination shall permit a tractor unit under his control to remain attached to any trailer for a period of time longer than 15 minutes while such trailer is being loaded or unloaded at any location where such tractor-trailer combination is of such length that the tractor will extend into the traveled portion of any street where such loading or unloading is taking place. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-160.1) 
361.27 - LOADING ZONES. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any place marked as a commercial loading zone for any purpose or length of time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily, except Sundays and holidays, or at such other hours and days as shall be designated on posted signs, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery pickup and loading of materials. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading exceed 30 minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop in a passenger loading zone, by whatever name designated, except for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-162) 
361.28 - RESTRICTED PARKING NEAR CITY HALL AND COURTHOUSE. 
(a)  The following special parking restrictions shall apply on streets adjacent to City Hall and the Cabell County Courthouse: 
(1)  Only city or county vehicles shall be parked in the designated, non-metered parking spaces on the west side of Eighth Street between Fourth and Fifth Avenues. 
(2)  Only city vehicles shall be parked in the designated, non-metered parking spaces on the east side of Eighth Street immediately north of the intersection of Eighth Street and 41/2 Alley to the intersection of Eighth Street with Fourth Avenue. 
(3)  The first and seventh parking spaces on the east side of Eighth Street immediately north of the intersection of Eighth Street and Fifth Avenue to the intersection of Eighth Street with 41/2 Alley is hereby designated for parking by handicapped persons only, when the handicapped person's vehicle is properly identified by a lawful identification plate or sticker. The remaining five spaces between the two handicap spaces shall be reserved for city vehicles only. 
(4)  Only county vehicles shall be parked in the designated, non-metered parking spaces on the east and west sides of Seventh Street between the intersections of Fourth and Fifth Avenues with Seventh Street. 
(5)  Beginning with the first designated parking space on the north side of Fifth Avenue in front of City Hall and continuing eastward along Fifth Avenue for eight parking spaces, said eight spaces shall be reserved and identified for the use of residents and other persons having business with City Hall. Of these eight spaces: 
A.  The first designated parking space is hereby designated for parking by handicapped persons only, when the handicapped person's vehicle is properly identified by a lawful identification plate or sticker and shall provide for 30 minutes of free parking; 
B.  The second through seventh designated parking spaces shall provide for 30 minutes of free parking; and 
C.  The eighth designated parking spaces shall be designated as "express" parking and provide for five minutes of free parking. 
(6)  Beginning immediately east of City Hall and continuing eastward along Fifth Avenue are three parking lots. In the space between the curb cuts for the second and third parking lot is one parallel parking space which shall be reserved and designated for parking for city vehicles only. 
(7)  The first parking lot to the east of City Hall shall be for parking of such city vehicles as designated by the mayor with the exception of the first five spaces on the east side of the lot moving north from Fifth Avenue which are reserved for city council members and the sixth space which is reserved for the city clerk. 
(8)  To the north of City Hall beginning at the intersection of Eighth Street and 41/2 Alley and continuing eastward along the north side of 41/2 Alley for four parking spaces to a private alley, said spaces shall be reserved for permitted city vehicles. Immediately east of said private alley shall be one parking space hereby designated for parking by handicapped persons only, when the handicapped person's vehicle is properly identified by a lawful identification plate or sticker. 
(b)  As used in this section "city vehicle," means city vehicles owned by the city or privately owned vehicles of city officials to whom a parking permit has been issued. As used in this section "county vehicle" means either county-owned vehicles or vehicles owned by county officials to whom a space has been assigned. The mayor or his designee shall issue permits for use of the reserved spaces referenced in this section. 
(Ord. 3-9-87; Ord. 4-27-92; Ord. of 1-26-15(4) ) 
361.29 - PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. 
    No person shall park any vehicle on the public streets of the city within the business district between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for the purpose of actually taking on or letting off passengers or loading or unloading merchandise, and the vehicles, when so parked, shall be constantly attended by its operator; provided that such parking may be allowed between such hours by and with the written consent of the chief of police, the mayor or the traffic officer in charge. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-168) 
361.30 - PARKING TRUCKS OR TRAILERS ON PUBLIC STREETS. 
    No person shall park any truck or trailer, the gross vehicle weight rating of which exceeds 16,000 pounds, on the public streets of the city, except for the purposes of actually taking on or letting off passengers or loading or unloading merchandise; and the vehicle, when so parked, shall be constantly attended by its operator. 
(Ord. 6-8-81) 
361.31 - SEPARATE OFFENSE PROVISIONS. 
    Each 30 minutes that a vehicle is parked overtime in a loading zone, each two hours a vehicle is overparked in a two-hour parking zone and each three hours that a vehicle is overparked in a three-hour parking zone shall constitute a separate offense under this Traffic Code. 
361.32 - CITATION ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this Traffic Code or other ordinances of this city or by state law, the officer or other duly authorized employee of the city finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice, on a form provided by the city, that such vehicle is parked in violation for the provisions of this Traffic Code, and that the driver shall report at a time and place specified in the notice. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-26) 
361.33 - AUTHORIZATION OF HUNTINGTON MUNICIPAL PARKING BOARD. 
    In accordance with state law, employees of the Huntington Municipal Parking Board are expressly authorized to issue notices of violation for any vehicle that is parked in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 2-26-07) 
361.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer or other duly authorized employee of the City of Huntington determines that a vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this article, he or she shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been so illegally parked, and instructing such owner or operator to report to the Finance Division of the City of Huntington in regard to such violation. 
(b)  Whoever violates section 361.06 shall be fined $50. Failure to make payment within seven business days shall subject the owner or operator to the penalties provided in section 303.99. 
(c)  Whoever violates section 361.19 shall be fined not less than $25 or more than $100 for each offense. 
(Ord. 2-26-07) 
Editor's note- See Section 303.99 for General Code Penalty. 
ARTICLE 363 - PARKING METERS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- Registered owner is prima facie liable, § 361.12; tampering with meters, § 533.05. 

363.01 - PARKING METER ZONES ESTABLISHED; TIME LIMITS; RATES; HOURS. 
(a)  Parking meters are hereby permitted as determined by the Huntington Municipal Parking Board to be located in all areas zoned R-5, C-1, C-2, C-3 and I-1 as defined in part 13, chapter 5 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington. 
(b)  Parking meters installed as provided in subsection (a) above shall be adjusted so as to provide certain maximum parking periods at a rate not less than $0.10 per hour nor more than $0.25 per hour, as determined by the Huntington Municipal Parking Board. Provided, that at no time can more than 75% of the total number of meters be placed at a rate of $0.25 per hour. 
(c)  The provisions of this article as to the deposit of coins or currency in parking meters by the operators of vehicles parked in metered parking spaces shall be effective between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Saturdays and Sundays and the following legal holidays: 
New Year's Day. 
Memorial Day. 
Independence Day. 
Labor Day. 
Thanksgiving Day. 
Christmas Day. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.02 - INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING METERS. 
    The municipal parking board shall provide for the installation, regulation, maintenance and use of the parking meters in the areas and at the rates specified in sections 363.01(a) and 363.01(b). 
    Parking meters shall be placed adjacent to the individual parking spaces. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking period established by the city, and when operated, shall indicate on and by its dial pointer the duration of the legal parking period, and upon the expiration of such period, shall indicate time expired. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.03 - DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES; HOW VEHICLE SHALL BE PARKED. 
    The municipal parking board shall have lines or markings painted or placed adjacent to each parking space, for the purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so established. No person shall park any vehicle across any such line or marking or shall park the vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.04 - DEPOSIT OF COINS OR CURRENCY; OVERTIME PARKING. 
    When any vehicle is parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this article, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, purchase parking time by immediately depositing or causing to be deposited such coins or currency in U.S. dollars appropriate to the particular parking meter controlling the space occupied. Failure to deposit such coins or currency shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject such person to the penalty prescribed in section 363.99. Upon deposit of such coins or currency and placing the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time purchased as indicated by the parking meter dial and pointer. If such vehicle remains in any such parking space beyond the parking time purchased, the parking meter shall by its dial and pointer indicate such illegal parking; and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and in violation of this article. 
    A parking space, controlled by a parking meter provides for a maximum parking time as indicated on the parking meter. No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of maximum parking time established for that parking space as indicated on the parking meter or permit such vehicle to be parked beyond the period of maximum parking time established for that parking space by depositing or causing to be deposited other or additional coins or currency in such meter. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.05 - CONTINUED ILLEGAL PARKING TO CONSTITUTE SEPARATE OFFENSE. 
    Each hour that any vehicle remains parked in violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense hereunder, and an additional notice shall be attached to such vehicle for each hour the vehicle remains so parked, and each owner or operator shall pay in accordance with the provisions of section 363.04 on each individual notice so attached. The failure of the owner or operator to make such payment or payments on each of the notices within the time specified on each shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided for a violation of the provisions of this article for each separate notice so issued. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.06 - INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH METERS. 
    No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.07 - USE OF SLUGS IN METERS. 
    No person shall deposit in or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug device or metallic substitute or any other substitute for a coin or currency of the United States. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.08 - DISPOSITION OF REVENUE. 
    The coins or currency required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this article are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the acquisition, maintenance, regulation and control of the municipal parking systems, including, but not limited to, parking garages, parking meters and parking lots. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.09 - PARKING TIME LIMITED IN CERTAIN SPACES NEAR CITY HALL. 
    No person shall park a vehicle for longer than 30 minutes at any one time in any parking area reserved for city business. These parking spaces on the north side of Fifth Avenue immediately east of Eighth Street are hereby designated as reserved for city business. 
(Ord. 6-26-00) 
363.99 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION; PAYMENT OF FINES. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer or other duly authorized employee of the city determined that a vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this article, he shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been so illegally parked, and instructing such owner of operator to report to the finance division of the city in regard to such violation. The penalty for an overtime meter parking violation shall be $5 if paid within seven days of issuance of said notice. One hundred percent of penalties collected within seven days shall be paid to the Huntington Municipal Parking Board. If not paid within seven days of issuance of said notice, the penalty for said parking violation shall increase to $30. One hundred percent of penalties collected after the initial seven days shall be paid to the Huntington Municipal Parking Board. The failure of such owner or operator to make the payments within seven days time shall render the owner or operator subject to the penalties provided in section 303.99. 
(b)  Whoever parks in a space designated in section 362.09 except for the purposes and within the time limit stated therein shall be fined $25. 
(Ord. of 6-26-00; Ord. of 3-24-14(1)) 
CHAPTER NINE - PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLES 
ARTICLE 371 - PEDESTRIANS[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- Pedestrian defined, § 301.21; pedestrians at traffic signal, § 313.03; pedestrian control signal, § 313.04. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law. 

371.01 - COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at intersections as provided in section 313.03, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-1(a). 
371.02 - RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 371.03(b). 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-2. 
371.03 - CROSSING ROADWAY OUTSIDE CROSSWALK. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. (W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-3) 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in the central business district other than in a crosswalk. 
371.04 - DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-4. 
371.05 - MOVING UPON RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-5. 
371.06 - WALKING ALONG STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; SOLICITING RIDES. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a street or highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(c)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-6. 
371.07 - PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to persons engaged in maintenance or construction work on a street or highway whenever he is notified of their presence by an official traffic control device or flagman. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-10-8. 
371.08 - PROTECTION OF BLIND PEDESTRIANS. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a blind pedestrian who knows, or in the exercise of reasonable care should know, that such pedestrian is blind because such pedestrian is carrying a cane predominantly white or metallic in color with or without a red tip, or is using a guide dog or otherwise, shall exercise care commensurate with the situation to avoid injuring such pedestrian. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 5-15-5. 
371.09 - ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the definition of an "electric personal assistive mobility device" is the same definition as previously set forth in section 303.081 and "operator" shall refer to the operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device. 
(b)  An electric personal assistive mobility device shall be equipped with: 
(1)  Front, rear and side reflectors; 
(2)  A braking system that enables the operator to bring the device to a controlled stop; and 
(3)  If operated at any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, a lamp that emits a white light that sufficiently illuminates the area in front of the device. 
(c)  An operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device traveling on a sidewalk, roadway or bicycle path shall have the rights and duties of a pedestrian and shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with pedestrians. An operator shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians. 
(d)  Except as provided in this section, no other provisions of the motor vehicle code shall apply to electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 17C-10A-1, 17C-10A-2. 
371.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See sction 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 373 - BICYCLES GENERALLY[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference- Bicycle defined, § 301.03; moped equipment and operation, § 345.29. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to regulate bicycle operation, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(a)(8). 

373.01 - COMPLIANCE; CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES. 
(a)  No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this Traffic Code. 
(c)  These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(d)  This article shall also apply to vehicles moved by human power other than bicycles where practical. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-1. 
373.02 - OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES; EXCEPTIONS. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this Traffic Code, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their nature can have no application. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-2. 
373.03 - RIDING UPON SEATS; NUMBER OF PERSONS. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-3. 
373.04 - ATTACHING BICYCLE OR SLED TO VEHICLE. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-4. 
373.05 - RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall ride in the lane marked for bicycle use or, if no lane is marked for bicycle use, as close as practicable of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under any of the following situations: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; or 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid any condition or potential conflict, including, but not limited to, a fixed or moving object, parked or moving vehicle, bicycle, pedestrian, animal, surface, hazard, turn lane, or substandard-width lane, which makes it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge or within a bicycle lane. For the purposes of this subsection, a "substandard-width lane" is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle and another vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane. 
(b)  Any person operating a bicycle upon a one-way roadway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable. 
(c)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway may not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
( Ord. of 1-26-15(1) ) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-5. 
373.06 - CARRYING ARTICLES. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 17C-11-6. 
373.07 - EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES. 
(a)  Every bicycle which is operated in the city shall be equipped with the following safety apparatus or safety devices: 
(1)  Reflectors. 
A.  A red reflector shall be attached to the back portion of the bicycle and be capable of reflecting light aimed at the rear portion of the bicycle. 
B.  Additional reflectors, including reflectors on the side portion and pedals, are encouraged. 
(2)  Lamp. Every bicycle, when operated at nighttime, shall have attached to the front portion thereof a lamp emitting a white light visible from at least 500 feet in front of and behind the bicycle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(3)  Sound device. Each bicycle may have attached thereto a bell or other device other than a siren or whistle capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred feet from the bicycle. 
(4)  Brakes. Each bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that enables the operator thereof to make the braked wheel(s) skid on dry, level, and clean pavement. 
(b)  This section shall comply in all respects to the rules and regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission regarding bicycle safety equipment; and any provisions of this section in conflict therewith shall be void. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-197; Ord. of 1-26-15(1) ) 
373.08 - RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle: 
(a)  Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or sidewalks or any other public or private property; 
(b)  Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle; 
(c)  In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe operation in compliance with law; 
(d)  Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in section 373.06; 
(e)  At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
373.09 - OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-189) 
373.10 - EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon the approach to a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon approaching the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-193) 
373.11 - PARKING. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk or curb except in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. When space in a bicycle rack is available, the bicycle operator shall park his or her bicycle in the space so provided. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-195) 
373.12 - RIDING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to ride, operate or use any of the following: 
(1)  Bicycles, 
(2)  Unicycles, 
(3)  Tricycles, 
(4)  Roller skates, 
(5)  Roller blades, 
(6)  Skateboards, 
(7)  Coasters, 
(8)  Wagons, 
(9)  Scooters, or 
(10)  Any other device with wheels propelled by human power upon which a person may ride or skate except as medically necessary. 
    Upon the sidewalks of the following streets and/or avenues: the north and south sides of Third Avenue from Seventh Street to Eleventh Street, north and south sides of Fourth Avenue from Seventh Street to Eleventh Street, north and south sides of Fifth Avenue from Seventh Street to Eleventh Street, east and west sides of Eighth Street and Eleventh Street between Third and Fifth Avenues, the Ninth Street Plaza between Third Avenue and Fifth Avenue and the east side of Seventh Street between Third Avenue and Fifth Avenue. 
(b)  No person shall be permitted to catch or attach himself to any moving vehicle on the street while riding, operating or using any of the vehicles listed in subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  No person shall be permitted to ride, operate or use any of the vehicles listed in subsection (a) hereof upon any public playground equipment. 
(d)  Whenever any person is operating any of the vehicles listed in subsection (a) hereof upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. Further, such operator must operate any of the vehicles listed in subsection (a) hereof, whether operating the same on the street or sidewalk, in a safe, responsible and courteous manner, observing all rules and regulations contained in these Codified Ordinances. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by confiscation of the particular device or devices along with any and all other penalties set forth in section 303.99. 
(Ord. 7-14-08) 
373.13 - BICYCLE HELMETS FOR CHILDREN. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  "Bicycle" means a human-powered vehicle with wheels designed to transport, by the action of pedaling, one or more persons seated on one or more saddle seats on its frame. Such term also includes a human-powered vehicle, and any attachment to such vehicle designed to transport by pedaling when the vehicle is used on a public roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way, but does not include a tricycle. 
(2)  "Tricycle" means a three-wheeled human-powered vehicle designed for use as a toy by a single child under the age of six years, the seat of which is no more than two feet from ground level. 
(3)  "Public roadway" means a right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of this state or the municipality for use primarily by motor vehicles. 
(4)  "Public bicycle path" means a right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of this state or the municipality for use primarily by bicycles and pedestrians. 
(5)  "Other public right-of-way" means any right-of-way other than a public roadway or public bicycle path that is under the jurisdiction and control of this state or the municipality and is designed for use and used by vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(6)  "Protective bicycle helmet" means a piece of headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standards for protective bicycle helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's standards for protective headgear or American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) for use in bicycling. 
(7)  "Passenger" means any person who travels on a bicycle in any manner except as an operator. 
(8)  "Operator" means a person who travels on a bicycle seated on a saddle seat from which that person is intended to and can pedal the bicycle. 
(b)  Requirements for helmet use. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person under 17 years of age to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle or any attachment to a bicycle used on a public roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless at all times when the person is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit, fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of a person under the age of 17 years to knowingly permit such person to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle or on any attachment to a bicycle used on a public roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless at all times when the person is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit, fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet. 
(c)  Sale of bicycle helmets. Any helmet sold or offered for sale for use by operators and passengers of bicycles shall be conspicuously labeled in accordance with the standard described in subsection (a)(6) hereof, which shall constitute the manufacturer's certification that the helmet conforms to the applicable safety standards. 
(d)  Civil actions. A violation of subsection (b) hereof is not admissible as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in any civil action or proceeding for damages, and shall not be admissible in mitigation of damages. 
(Ord. 12-13-99; Ord. of 1-26-15(1) ) 
373.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 303.99, any parent or legal guardian violating any requirement set forth in section 373.13(b) shall be fined $10.00 or be required to perform two hours in community service related to a child injury prevention program which includes injury prevention education or both fined and required to perform such community service. Notwithstanding the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 8-11-1, no court costs may be assessed to any person violating the requirements of section 373.13(b). 
(b)  In the case of a first violation of section 373.13(b), the court may waive the fine upon receipt of satisfactory proof that the person has a helmet or within two weeks from the date of the violation, purchased or otherwise obtained, a protective bicycle helmet. 
(c)  It is an absolute defense to a charge for a violation of section 373.13 that a parent or legal guardian is unable to pay for the protective bicycle helmet. Inability to pay may be demonstrated by the filing of a financial affidavit in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 59-2-1(c). Any person who demonstrates inability to pay shall be referred to the Governor's highway safety program for assistance in obtaining the appropriate helmet or helmets. 
(Ord. 12-13-99) 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 375 - BICYCLE LICENSING[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, W. Va. Code, § 17C-2-8(a)(8). 

375.01 - BICYCLE LICENSE. 
    Any city resident who owns a bicycle may apply to the City of Huntington for a bicycle license. If a bicycle is used for commercial purposes such as delivery, a bicycle license shall be required. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-181; Ord. of 1-26-15(3) ) 
375.02 - LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE. 
    Applications for a bicycle license and license plates shall be made upon a form provided by the city, and shall be made to the director of the division of finance. A license fee of $1 shall be paid to the city before each license is granted. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-182) 
375.03 - LICENSE ISSUANCE; TERM; TRANSFERABILITY; REPLACEMENT; RECORDS. 
(a)  The director of the division of finance, upon receiving proper application therefor, is authorized to issue a bicycle license. Bicycle license plates shall not transfer when ownership of the bicycle changes. The current license holder may transfer a previously issued license plate to another bicycle upon payment of a fee of one dollar ($1.00) and submission of another application. 
(b)  The director shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle. 
(c)  The director shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, the number of the frame of the bicycle for which issued and a record of all bicycle license fees collected by him. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-183; Ord. of 1-26-15(3) ) 
375.04 - ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE PLATE; UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL. 
(a)  The director of the division of finance, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue a license plate, bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city. 
(b)  The director shall cause such license plate to be firmly attached to the rear mudguard or frame of the bicycle for which issued, in such position as to be plainly visible from the rear. 
(c)  No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle except upon a transfer of ownership, or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-184) 
375.05 - BICYCLE RENTAL AGENCIES. 
    A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto, as provided in this article, and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required by this Traffic Code. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-186) 
375.06 - RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 26, 2015 , repealed § 375.06, which pertained to bicycle dealers. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
375.07 - AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND BICYCLES. 
    In the event of a violation of section 375.01, members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a bicycle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city, in the same manner as is provided for the impounding of motor vehicles under section 303.07. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-198) 
375.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 303.99 for general Traffic Code penalty. 
PART FIVE - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE 
ARTICLE 501 - ADMINISTRATION AND LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Failure to comply with lawful order of police officer, § 303.02. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; specific types of bribery, W. Va. Code, §§ 3-1-1 et seq., 15-2-17 et seq., 18-2A-9, 61-10-15 and 61-10-22; penalty not to exceed that provided in W. Va. Code, Ch. 61, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(57); crimes against public justice, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-5; bribery and corrupt practices generally, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-5A. 

501.01 - REFUSAL TO AID OFFICER. 
    No person shall, when required by the police chief or any other officer, refuse or neglect to assist him in the execution of his office in a criminal case, in the preservation of the peace or in the apprehension or securing of any person for a breach of the peace or in any case of escape or rescue. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-5-14. 
501.02 - OBSTRUCTING OR GIVING FALSE INFORMATION TO AN OFFICER; FLEEING. 
(a)  No person shall by threats, menaces, acts or otherwise, forcibly or illegally hinder or obstruct, or attempt to hinder or obstruct, any law-enforcement officer, probation officer, or parole officer acting in his or her official capacity. 
(b)  No person shall, with intent to impede or obstruct a law enforcement officer in the conduct of an investigation of a felony offense, knowingly and willfully make a materially false statement. Provided, that the provisions of this subsection (b) shall not apply to statements made by a spouse, parent, stepparent, grandparent, sibling, half-sibling, child, stepchild or grandchild, whether related by blood or marriage, of the person under investigation. Statements made by the person under investigation may not be used as the basis for prosecution under this subsection. For the purposes of this subsection, "law enforcement officer" shall not include watchman, State Police or college security personnel. 
(c)  No person shall intentionally flee or attempt to flee by any means other than the use of a vehicle from any law-enforcement officer, probation officer, or parole officer acting in his or her official capacity who is attempting to make a lawful arrest of the person, and who knows or reasonably believes that the officer is attempting to arrest him or her. 
(d)  No person shall intentionally flee or attempt to flee in a vehicle from any law-enforcement officer, probation officer, or parole officer acting in his or her official capacity, after the officer has given a clear visual or audible signal directing the person to stop. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, "vehicle" includes any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, all-terrain vehicle or snowmobile, as those terms are defined in W. Va. Code, § 17A-1-1 whether or not it is being operated on a public highway at the time and whether or not it is licensed by the state. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, "flee" and "fleeing" do not include any person's reasonable attempt to travel to a safe place, allowing the pursuing law-enforcement officer, probation officer, or parole officer to maintain appropriate surveillance, for the purpose of complying with the officer's direction to stop. 
(g)  No person shall refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, direction or signal of a police officer. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-5-17. 
501.03 - FALSE FIRE ALARM. 
    No person shall make, turn in or telephone, or by use of any means or method of communication aid or abet in the making or turning in of any alarm of fire which he knows to be false at the time of making such alarm. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 29-3-21. 
501.04 - FALSE REPORTS CONCERNING BOMBS OR OTHER EXPLOSIVE DEVICES. 
(a)  No person shall impart or convey or cause to be imparted or conveyed any false information, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe such information to be false, concerning the presence of any bomb or other explosive device in, at, on, near, under or against any dwelling house, structure, improvement, building, bridge, motor vehicle, vessel, boat, railroad car, airplane or other place, or concerning an attempt or alleged attempt being made or to be made to so place or explode any such bomb or other explosive device. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section for a second offense or whose violation of the subsection results in another suffering serious bodily injury shall be guilty of a felony and prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-6-17. 
501.05 - IMPERSONATING AN OFFICIAL OR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. 
(a)  No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be a law-enforcement officer or law-enforcement official or be under the order or direction of any such person. No person not a law-enforcement officer or law-enforcement official shall wear the uniform prescribed for such persons, or the badge or other insignia adopted for use by such persons with the intent to deceive another person. 
    For purposes of this section, "law-enforcement officer" and "law-enforcement official" shall have the meanings set forth in W. Va. Code, § 30-29-1 except that such terms shall not include members of the state division of public safety and shall not include individuals hired by non-public entities for the provision of security services. 
(b)  No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the municipality, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a municipal officer. No person not a member of the fire department, for the purpose of such false representation, shall wear a uniform or part thereof similar to the uniform worn by a member of the fire department. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-1-9. 
501.06 - ATTEMPTS. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense, but fails to commit or is prevented from committing it, shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 501.99 if the offense is punishable by confinement in jail. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-11-8. 
501.07 - CITATION IN LIEU OF ARREST; FAILURE TO APPEAR. 
    A police officer may issue a citation instead of making an arrest for the following offenses, if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person being cited will appear to answer the charge: 
(a)  Any misdemeanor, not involving injury to the person, committed in a police officer's presence; provided, that the officer may arrest the person if he has reasonable grounds to believe that the person is likely to cause serious harm to himself or others; and 
(b)  When any person is being detained for the purpose of investigating whether such person has committed or attempted to commit shoplifting, pursuant to section 533.01 of this Code. 
    The citation shall provide that the defendant shall appear within a designated time. 
    If the defendant fails to appear in response to the citation or if there are reasonable grounds to believe that he will not appear, a complaint may be made and a warrant shall issue. When a physical arrest is made and a citation is issued in relation to the same offense, the officer shall mark on the citation, in the place specified for court appearance date, the word "arrested" in lieu of the date of court appearance. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 62-1-5(a). 
501.08 - FALSELY REPORTING AN EMERGENCY INCIDENT. 
    A person is guilty of reporting a false emergency incident when knowing the information reported, conveyed or circulated is false or baseless, he: 
(a)  Initiates or circulates a false report or warning of or impending occurrence of a fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, accident, illness or other emergency under circumstances in which it is likely that public alarm or inconvenience will result or that firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, one or more rescue vehicles or other emergency apparatus might be summoned; or 
(b)  Reports, by word or action, to any official or quasi-official agency or organization having the function of dealing with emergencies involving danger to life or property, an alleged occurrence or impending occurrence of a fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, accident, illness or other emergency in which it is likely that public alarm or inconvenience will result or that firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, one or more rescue vehicles or other emergency apparatus might be summoned, which did not occur, does not in fact exist; or 
(c)  Reports to a law enforcement officer or agency the alleged occurrence of any offense or incident which did not in fact occur or an allegedly impending occurrence of an offense or incident which is not in fact about to occur or false information relating to an actual offense or incident or to the alleged implication of some person therein; or 
(d)  Without just cause, calls or summons by telephone, fire alarm system or otherwise, any firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, rescue vehicles or other emergency vehicles. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-6-20. 
501.09 - FALSE REPORT. 
    No person shall make false report of any nature or give false information to any officer or member of the police or fire department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-40) 
501.10 - ESCAPE OF PRISONERS. 
    Any person who is incarcerated in the county jail or other place of incarceration within the city for the violation of an ordinance of the city or who has been arrested or convicted for the violation of an ordinance of the city and is in the custody of a duly authorized officer of the law, and who escapes from such jail or place of incarceration, or custody, shall be sentenced by the municipal judge for a term of not less than 30 days in jail. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-36) 
501.11 - VIOLENT INJURIES; REPORTS BY PHYSICIANS, SURGEONS AND HOSPITAL SUPERINTENDENTS. 
(a)  Every physician and surgeon practicing in the city who attends or treats any person for wounds or injuries caused by contact or collision with any type of motor vehicle or public conveyance, by cutting, stabbing, shooting or other wounding of like kind, by attempts at self-destruction by any means or injuries sustained in public thoroughfares or buildings under conditions which indicate possible legal responsibility on the part of the municipal government shall make a report thereof in writing to the chief of police. 
(b)  The superintendent or other person in charge of every hospital located in the city that receives or treats any person for wounds or injuries as is set out in subsection (a) hereof shall make a report thereof in writing to the chief of police. 
(c)  The report required by subsections (a) and (b) hereof shall be forwarded to the chief of police within 24 hours after such person has been attended or treated by such physician or surgeon or has been received or treated by such hospital; except, that in all cases treated in a hospital, one report only shall be made and signed by such hospital superintendent and attending physician. 
(d)  Such written report shall include the name of the injured person, time and hour treated or received, sex, color, age, occupation, nationality, place of residence, cause of injury, extent of injury, place where injury occurred, name and address of person causing injuries and the name and address of the nearest relative. 
(e)  In addition to the written report hereinabove required, such physician and surgeon or the superintendent or other person in charge of any hospital as herein contemplated shall immediately make a report by telephone to the police department of the city where the injuries sustained are the result of being shot, cut, stabbed or otherwise wounded, or by being struck by an automobile. The report by telephone shall give such pertinent information included in subsection (d) hereof as will enable the police to immediately begin an investigation. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-41) 
501.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this Part Five - General Offenses Code for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Whoever violates section 501.01 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(c)  Whoever violates section 501.02(c) shall be fined not more than $1,000 and shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days. 
(d)  Whoever violates section 501.04 shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(e)  Whoever violates section 501.05(a) shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $1,000. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 61-1-9, 61-5-14, 61-5-17, 61-6-17. 
ARTICLE 502 - ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF EXTERNAL SANITATION AND COMMON NUISANCES 

502.01 - AUTHORITY. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of W. Va. Code, § 8-1-5a, Home Rule Pilot Program Act. 
(Ord. of 5-23-13(1)) 
502.02 - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to provide additional and alternative methods and processes to enforce the municipal code provisions regarding exterior sanitation and common nuisances related to property located within the city in a fair, speedy and inexpensive manner, and to improve compliance with such provisions. To the extent this article conflicts with an existing ordinance identified below, article 502 shall be controlling. 
(2)  This section shall be in addition to those methods and processes otherwise contained in the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington and shall be applied at the discretion of the enforcement officer enforcing the provisions of this section. 
(3)  This section shall apply to the following exterior sanitation and common nuisance violations contained in the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington: 
(a)  Sanitation (IPMC 302.1, City Code Article 951); 
(b)  Drainage (IPMC 302.2, City Code § 905.14); 
(c)  Sidewalks in disrepair (IPMC 302.3, City Code Article 909, § 905.11); 
(d)  High weeds/grass (IPMC 302.4, City Code Article 953); 
(e)  Graffiti (IPMC 302.9, City Code Article 536); 
(f)  Exterior garbage and/or rubbish accumulation (IPMC 307.1, City Code Article 951); 
(g)  Junk storage (City Code Article 534); 
(h)  Structural integrity (City Code Article 1739); and 
(i)  Public health concerns. 
(4)  Any and all planning, zoning, building, and law enforcement officers shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this section and shall be referred to herein collectively as enforcement officials. 
(Ord. of 5-23-13(1)) 
502.03 - INVESTIGATIONS. 
    Upon receipt of information indicating the likelihood of a violation of any provision of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington regarding external sanitation or common nuisance, the enforcement official shall investigate the facts and may, to the extent permitted by law, make an inspection of the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-23-13(1)) 
502.04 - ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS. 
(1)  If an investigation reveals that a code violation exists, the enforcement official may issue a citation for such violation to the person having either ownership or control of any land, building, structure, sign, property, licensed or permitted business or operation which violation, and shall order that violation be corrected. 
(2)  A citation may be served by personal or substituted service in accordance with the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure, by either delivering the notice to the person in violation personally or by delivering the notice to a member of that person's family who is above the age of 16 years and by advising such person of the purpose of the citation. Proof of personal service shall be made at the time of service by a written declaration executed by the enforcement official effecting service and shall declare the time, date and manner by which service was made. If personal service cannot be effectuated, the enforcement official may send the citation to the person via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person's last known address. If the return receipt is not returned, a citation shall be conclusively presumed to have been served if it is also sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, which is not returned as undeliverable by the postal service. 
The citation shall be in writing and shall contain the following: 
(a)  The date the citation is issued; 
(b)  The name and address of the person(s) charged with the violation; 
(c)  The section of the ordinance that has been violated; 
(d)  The nature of the violation; 
(e)  The place and time the violation occurred; 
(f)  The amount of the fine imposed for the violation; 
(g)  The name, address and telephone number of the enforcement official issuing the citation; 
(h)  The time period allowed for the violation to be corrected. The time period allowed shall take into consideration the threat posed by the violation to the health, safety and welfare of the public and the nature of the work required to correct the violation, provided that no such time period for correction shall be less than ten days; and 
(i)  The name, address and telephone number of the office of the city collector, where fines are to be paid, and of the municipal court, where citations may be appealed. 
(Ord. of 5-23-13(1)) 
502.05 - PENALTIES. 
(1)  Any person issued a citation pursuant to section 502.04 shall be punished by a fine as follows: within any 12-month period, $100 for the first citation, $200 for the second citation, $300 for the third citation, and $500 for each citation thereafter. 
(2)  Any person issued a citation pursuant to section 502.04 shall be found not guilty of the offense provided that the defendant produces evidence that the code violation that caused the citation to be issued has been corrected within ten days of the date of receipt. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the penalty provisions set forth herein, any person or entity owning property and whom is cited under section 502.04, and if the property subject to the citation is property held for the purpose of leasing or renting for residential use, the fine for violation of this ordinance shall be a mandatory amount of $500 for each violation. 
(Ord. of 5-23-13(1); Ord. of 7-13-15(1) ) 
502.06 - NONPAYMENT OF FINES. 
    All fines imposed by citations under this section shall be due within ten days of service of the citation. The failure to pay when due any fine imposed under this section shall result in the issuance of a warrant and notification of the department of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 5-23-13(1)) 
502.07 - APPEAL. 
(1)  Issuance of a citation under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of the violation indicated on the face of the citation. As such, any person who is issued a citation shall pay the fine indicated for the violation, as set forth in section 502.05, in full to the office of the city collector within ten days of service of the citation. Any person alleging he or she was improperly issued such citation may, within ten days of service of such citation, file a petition for appeal of the citation or payment thereof, along with the required bond, with the municipal court clerk in accordance with the following: 
(a)  In order to properly and timely appeal his or her citation, within ten days of service of the citation, the alleged violator shall pay the required amount of the applicable fine in full to the municipal court clerk, which amount will be held by the municipal court as bond pending evidentiary hearing before and resolution of the case by the municipal court; the municipal court clerk shall issue a receipt to the alleged violator showing the amount of the bond paid. In addition to the bond, the alleged violator shall file with the municipal court clerk a petition for appeal of the citation. If any petition for appeal filed in accordance with this section is not timely filed or is not accompanied with the required bond, the alleged violator shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to appeal the citation, and such petition shall be summarily denied as untimely filed; provided, however, that nothing set forth hereinabove shall prevent the municipal court judge from finding, upon a proper showing, that an alleged violator suffers from financial hardship, and, as a result, waiving the requirement that the bond be posted as a prerequisite to filing a petition for appeal. 
(b)  Any petition for appeal filed with the municipal court clerk must be in writing, on the form to be provided by the municipal court clerk, and must be signed by the alleged violator affirming that the contents of the petition are true and accurate to the best of the alleged violator's knowledge at that time. Such petition for appeal shall state the facts and reasons in support of the petition. Upon filing any such petition for appeal with the municipal court clerk, the alleged violator shall serve a copy of the petition and receipt showing proof of bond or waiver thereof upon the city attorney. 
(2)  Upon filing of a petition for appeal with the municipal court clerk, the clerk or his or her designee shall place the case on the municipal court docket, set the case for evidentiary hearing within 30 days from the date of the filing of the petition for appeal, provide a notice of hearing to the alleged violator, and forward a copy of the petition to the enforcement officer. Upon receipt of the petition, the enforcement officer shall cause a copy of the citation at issue to be forwarded to the municipal court clerk who shall file it as the original complaint alleging the violation indicated therein. 
(3)  The municipal court shall treat the citation itself as the original complaint before the court, and shall treat it as prima facie evidence of the violation alleged therein. At the close of all of the evidence, should the municipal judge find against the alleged violator, the bond posted by the alleged violator shall be applied as payment for the fine imposed for the violation. In the event the municipal court judge finds that a violator suffers from financial hardship, the municipal court judge may permit alternative sentencing. Should the court find in favor of the alleged violator, the bond shall be refunded to the alleged violator by the municipal court clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-23-13(1)) 
ARTICLE 503 - DEFINITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- General definitions, § 101.02; animal control definitions, § 507.01; obscene matter defined, §§ 517.09, 517.10; liquor control definitions, § 521.01. 

503.01 - GENERAL TERMS. 
    For the purpose of this Part Five, the following definitions shall be considered terms of art and shall apply unless clearly indicated otherwise: 
(1)  "Bet" or "wage" means to hazard, risk, venture, lay, stake or pledge upon the event of a contingent issue; for example, "He bet or wagered three dollars that his hand of cards would beat the other hand of cards." 
(2)  "Bet" or "wager" means the act of betting or waging a stake upon the event of a contingent issue. 
(3)  "Brandish" means to shake or wave, usually menacingly. 
(4)  "Chance" means that which happens to one as a result of unknown or unconsidered forces, fortune, luck or lot. 
(5)  "Conduct" means to carry on, manage, direct or administer. 
(6)  "Contraband" means those items which have been used to violate provisions of these Codified Ordinances or are of such a nature as and are designed to be used to violate provisions of these Codified Ordinances. For example, the following are items of contraband: gambling devices as defined in this article, alcoholic liquor manufactured or acquired in violation of the laws of the state or toy hydrogen balloons. 
(7)  "Control" means to exercise or have the right to exercise a restraining or directing influence over; to exercise or have the right to exercise dominion over; for example, one who controls a building would have the ability at that point in time to direct how the building would be used, what activities may be conducted within the building, who may enter or leave the building or who may engage in what activities within the building. 
(8)  "Controlled substance" means a drug, substance or immediate precursor in Schedules I through V of Article Two of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, W. Va. Code, Ch. 60A. 
(9)  "Custodian" or "depositary" means a person who is given or assumes the responsibility of caring, keeping, guarding, watching, inspecting, preserving or securing a thing. 
(10)  "Deal" means to distribute cards, tokens or other things to players or participants in a game. 
(11)  "Deliver" means to place the res, or substance thereof, within the actual or constructive possession or control of another. 
(12)  "Distribute" means to divide among several or many; to deal out; allot; to deal or divide out in proportion or in shares. 
(13)  "Drug" means: 
A.  Substances recognized as drugs in the official "United States Pharmacopoeia," official "Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United States," or official "National Formulary" or any supplement to any of them; 
B.  Substances intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals; 
C.  Substances, other than food, intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or animals; and 
D.  Substances intended for use as a component of any article specified in subsections (13)A., B. or C. hereof. 
It does not include devices or their components, parts or accessories. 
(14)  "Emergency work" means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger involving health or safety, including work by a utility, public or private, when restoring utility service. 
(15)  "Employ" means to engage or hire a person for compensation to perform work or other duties. 
(16)  "Employee" means any individual who renders personal services in the course of a business, who receives compensation therefor at a fixed rate and who has no financial interest in the ownership or operation of the business other than his salary or wages. 
(17)  "Exhibit" means to present to view; to show, especially publicly for purposes of demonstration; to display. 
(18)  "Forward" means to help onward; to transmit. 
(19)  "Gain" means an increase in profit, resources, things or advantage acquired; the opposite of loss. 
(20)  "Gambling device" means all paraphernalia, devices, tables, books, machines, slot machines, vending machines, tickets, cards, bills, certificates, tokens, other printed matter or instruments, which by their nature and design are to be used in violating sections 513.10 and 513.11. For example, the following shall be considered gambling devices: roulette wheels, tip boards, betting slips, crap tables and blackjack tables. 
"Game of chance" means a contest usually conducted according to set rules in which chance is a factor in determining the outcome and which is played in a public or private place. "Game of chance" includes card games, lotteries, raffles, games played with dice, bingo games, all sporting events unless specifically exempted, billiards and pool and other similar games, darts and any game or contest between or among animals other than human beings, for example, horse racing or dog racing. 
(21)  "Gram" means a metric measurement for weight or mass of a substance. One gram is equal to 0.035 ounce in Troy weight. 
(22)  "Hashish" means a resin of the plant "cannabis sativa L." 
(23)  "Immediate precursor" means a substance which the state board of pharmacy has found to be and by rule designates as being the principal compound commonly used or produced primarily for use, and which is an immediate chemical intermediary used or likely to be used in the manufacture of a controlled substance, the control of which is necessary to prevent, curtail or limit manufacture. 
(24)  "Knowingly" means to have knowledge of or to be aware of the content or character of pornographic matter. 
(25)  "Lease" means to contract for the possession or right of possession of lands or structures thereon, generally for a determinate period. 
(26)  "Lookout" means any person who engages in a careful looking or watching for police officers or their agents. He may act as a guard in the sense that he screens prospective customers to determine if they may be admitted to a building, premises or establishment or participate in an illegal activity. He may act as a doorman in the sense that he controls which customers may enter through the entrance of the building, premises or establishment. He may give a signal intended to, or calculated to warn, or give warning of the approach of police officers or their agents to another person in or about a building, premises or establishment. 
(27)  "Lottery" means a scheme in which one or more items of value are distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised a consideration for a chance to win them. 
(28)  "Marihuana" means all parts of the plant "cannabis sativa L.," whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. "Marihuana" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
(29)  "Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing or photograph, motion picture or other visual representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials, or live conduct. 
(30)  "Minor" means any individual under the age of 18 years. 
(31)  "Noise" means sound; the vibrational energy which causes a human sensation by stimulating the auditory nerves and auditory centers of the brain. 
(32)  "Offer" means to proffer, propose, present or exhibit something to another for acceptance or rejection. 
(33)  "Official records" means all records which evidence the fact that a person once pleaded guilty or was adjudged guilty of possession of less than 15 grams of marihuana; and all records which evidence that a person was arrested pursuant to an arrest warrant issued by the municipal judge which arrest warrant states that the arrestee did possess less than 15 grams of marihuana. 
(34)  "Operate" means to cause a machine, device or thing to function or work. 
(35)  "Own" means to have a good legal title to a piece of property whether the interest in the property is a fee simple absolute or a lesser estate. 
(36)  "Participate" means to have a share in common with others; to partake; to share; for example, "He participated in the card game as a player." 
(37)  "Peeping" means the act of peeping through; for example, "He peeped through the window." 
(38)  "Permit" means to allow the act or existence of; to tolerate; to consent to expressly or formally; to grant leave for or the privilege of; to authorize; to grant one license or liberty. 
(39)  "Person" means an individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association or any other legal entity. 
(40)  "Possess" means to control a thing, either constructively or actively, with or without the lawful right of possession, and not necessarily to the exclusion of the right of possession belonging to others. 
(41)  "Potential contraband" means those items which allegedly have been used to violate provisions of these Codified Ordinances. 
(42)  "Practitioner" means: 
A.  A physician, dentist, veterinarian, scientific investigator or other person licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or to administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state; or 
B.  A pharmacy, hospital or other institution licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or to administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state. 
(43)  "Privacy" means the state of being apart from company or from observation by any means. 
(44)  "Private place" means a place in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(45)  "Procure" means to persuade, induce, prevail upon or cause. 
(46)  "Prostitution" means the performance of a sexual act by one or more persons for money, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value. 
(47)  "Prurient interest" means an itching or longing; uneasy or lustful desire or appetite, for example, sexual desire or appetite. 
(48)  "Public display" means the placing of material on or in a billboard, viewing screen, theater, marquee, newsstand, display rack window, showcase, display case or similar public place so that the material within the meaning of "obscene matter" is easily visible from a public thoroughfare, from the property of others or from commercial or business premises generally open to minors at the time of such placing. 
(49)  "Public place" means a place in which a person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(50)  "Raffle" means a kind of lottery in which a number of persons pay in shares the value or assessed value of something put up as a stake and then determine by chance which one of them will become the sole possessor. 
(51)  "Reasonable person of normal sensibility" means a person of normal physical attributes, intelligence, memory, perception, experience and information and who is not abnormally sensitive to physical stimuli, for example sound stimuli. 
(52)  "Receive" means to take, as something that is offered, sent or the like; to accept; to let something come to one, whether passively, with permission, with approval, with some measure of mental assent or actively; a receiving by letting into one's hands, one's mind or one's possession. 
(53)  "Record" means to commit to writing or otherwise preserve a thought, spoken words, communication, signal, other writing or evidence thereof. 
(54)  "Sadistic" or "masochistic act" means a form of perversion for sexual pleasure when one person is beaten or otherwise physically abused or physically mistreated by another person. 
(55)  "Sell" means to enter into an agreement whereby property is transferred from one person to another for a consideration of value, implying the passing of the general and absolute right to possession of the property. 
(56)  "Sexual act" means any of the following acts done by any person: sexual intercourse per vagina or per anus, with another human being or with an animal, cunnilingus, fellatio, masturbation and any sadistic or masochistic act designed to sexually arouse another person, for example, whipping, bondage, excretion. 
(57)  "Slot machine" means a machine the operation of which is started by dropping a coin, token or similar object into a slot therein. 
(58)  "Solicit" means to try to obtain by asking for; to entreat; to importune; to approach with a request or plea; for example, "He solicited John to play in the poker game. She solicited John to engage in an act of prostitution." 
(59)  "Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound; except that "sound amplifying equipment" shall not include radio receivers and tape players when used and heard solely by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio receiver or tape player is installed; further, "sound amplifying equipment" shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(60)  "Sound truck" means any vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. 
(61)  "Sporting event" means any athletic contest having in view the development or exercise of muscular strength, skill or agility. "Sporting event" includes: archery, badminton, baseball, basketball, bowling, boxing, cricket, croquet, football, golf, handball, hockey, ice skating, jai alai, ping pong, racing with cars, boats or other vehicles, roller skating, rugby, soap box derby, soccer, squash, swimming, target shooting, tennis, track and field, volleyball, wrestling, and other such contests, including races, between or among human beings. "Sporting event" does not include any game or contest between or among animals other than human beings, for example, horse racing or dog racing. 
(62)  "Spying" means the act of watching secretly or surreptitiously. 
(63)  "Stake" means that which is bet or waged. 
(64)  "Use" means to avail oneself of a thing as a means or instrument to one's end; to utilize. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-1) 
ARTICLE 505 - ANIMALS AND FOWL GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Unlawful noises, § 509.03. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate the keeping of animals, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(26); authority to prevent ill-treatment of animals, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(27); disposing of dead animals, W. Va. Code, § 16-9-3; diseases among domestic animals, W. Va. Code, Art. 19-9; hunting, W. Va. Code, Art. 20-2. 

505.01 - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Mistreat an animal in a cruel manner; 
(2)  Abandon an animal; 
(3)  Withhold, 
A.  Proper sustenance, including food or water; 
B.  Shelter that protects from the elements of weather; or 
C.  Medical treatment, necessary to sustain normal health and fitness or to end the suffering of any animal; 
(4)  Abandon an animal to die; 
(5)  Leave an animal unattended and confined in a motor vehicle when physical injury to or death of the animal is likely to result; 
(6)  Ride an animal when it is physically unfit; 
(7)  Bait or harass an animal for the purpose of making it perform for a person's amusement; 
(8)  Cruelly chain or tether an animal; or 
(9)  Use, train or possess a domesticated animal for the purpose of seizing, detaining or maltreating any other domesticated animal. 
(b)  No person, other than a licensed veterinarian or a person acting under the direction or with the approval of a licensed veterinarian, shall knowingly and willfully administer or cause to be administered to any animal participating in any contest any controlled substance or any other drug for the purpose of altering or otherwise affecting such animal's performance. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall forfeit his or her interest in any such animal and all interest in such animal shall vest in the humane society or county pound of the county in which the conviction was rendered, and such person shall, in addition to any fine imposed, be liable for any costs incurred or to be incurred by the humane society or county pound as a result. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, "controlled substance" has the same meaning ascribed to it by W. Va. Code, § 60A-1-101(d). 
(e)  The provisions of this section do not apply to lawful acts of hunting, fishing, trapping or animal training or farm livestock, poultry, gaming fowl or wildlife kept in private or licensed game farms if kept and maintained according to usual and accepted standards of livestock, poultry, gaming fowl or wildlife or game farm production and management, nor to humane use of animals or activities regulated under and in conformity with the provisions of 7 U.S.C. Section 2131 et seq. and the regulations promulgated thereunder, as both such statutes and regulations are in effect on the effective date of this section. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-19. 
505.02 - ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE. 
(a)  No person being the owner or having charge of cattle, sheep, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens or other fowl or animals shall permit them to run at large upon any public place, or upon any unenclosed lands, or upon the premises of another. 
(b)  The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places mentioned in this section is prima facie evidence that it is running at large in violation of this section. 
505.03 - IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS FOUND AT LARGE. 
    The chief of police shall, upon finding any cattle, horses, mules, geese or sheep at large, take up, impound and securely keep the same subject to the provisions of this section. If the owner is known, notice shall be given of the time his animal or fowl was taken up and the place of keeping, and ten days' notice of the time and place of sale shall be posted at three public places in the city, and in the event such animal is not redeemed before the day of sale by payment to the chief of police of all expenses and costs incident to the capturing, confinement and keeping of such animal, the same shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder and the surplus proceeds turned in to the city treasury, after deducting the costs of impounding and the expenses of sale, if the owner of such animal fails to apply for such surplus of the proceeds within six months from the day of sale. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-2) 
505.04 - DAMAGE TO PROPERTY BY STOCK RUNNING AT LARGE; REMEDIES. 
    Should any livestock, while running at large, destroy or injure the property of another, the owner of such stock shall be liable to the party whose property may be injured or destroyed for the amount of damages sustained by him by reason of such destruction or injury. 
    The party so injured may, if he finds such stock on his premises, impound and sell them under the provisions of W. Va. Code, §§ 19-18-8, 19-18-9 and 19-18-10. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-3) 
505.05 - CONFINEMENT OF FOWL. 
    All chicken, ducks, geese, turkeys or other fowl of any kind owned by any person shall be confined upon the owner's premises and shall not be permitted to pass from or off such premises and upon the premises of another or upon the public streets or places of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-4) 
505.06 - PERMIT FOR FOWL REQUIRED. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or other fowl within the city until such person first obtains from the health officer a permit to do so, as provided in this section. Such permit shall be in writing and shall designate the name and address of the owner or keeper of such chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or other fowl, together with the location where the same are to be kept or maintained. The owner or keeper to whom such permit is issued shall keep a copy thereof posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the fowl are kept or maintained. The health officer shall keep in his office a copy of every such permit issued and the same may be revoked by the health officer or by council whenever such revocation is deemed necessary for the public health or welfare. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-5) 
505.07 - KEEPING HOGS AND GOATS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION. 
    No person shall keep, house or pen any hog, pig, swine or goat within the city; provided, that the health officer shall have discretion to grant permits to keep goats within the city under such conditions as may be prescribed by him, and further provided, that the health officer shall have discretion to grant permits to keep no more than three of the vietnamese pot bellied pigs as pets within the city in a clean, safe manner in keeping with zoning and health standards as prescribed by the health officer. The goats now living in the city can remain; when they are deceased no more can come in. 
(Ord. 2-24-92) 
505.08 - PERMIT FOR KEEPING HORSES OR COWS. 
    No person shall keep, house or stable any horse or cow in the city until such person first obtains from the health officer a permit to do so, as provided in this section. Such permit shall be in writing and shall designate the name of the owner or keeper of such horse or cow, together with the location of such stable or enclosure. The owner or keeper to whom such permit is issued shall keep a copy thereof posted in a conspicuous place upon such stable or enclosure. The health officer shall keep in his office a copy of every permit issued and the same may be revoked by the health officer or by council whenever such revocation is deemed necessary for the public health, welfare or good. No such permit shall allow the privilege of maintaining a stable or enclosure for horses or cows within less than 150 feet of any residence. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-7) 
505.09 - VETERINARIAN'S REPORT OF DISEASED ANIMALS. 
    Every veterinarian or other person who is called to examine or professionally attend any animal within the city having the glanders, farcy, rabies, tuberculosis or other communicable disease shall, within 24 hours thereafter, report in writing to the health officer the following facts: 
(a)  A statement of the location of such diseased animal. 
(b)  The name and address of the owner thereof. 
(c)  The type and character of the disease. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-9) 
505.10 - DRIVING ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS. 
    No person shall drive any animal on the sidewalks of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-10) 
505.11 - RABID ANIMALS. 
    No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal or any animal suspected of being rabid. 
    No person shall remove any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, from the city. The owner shall surrender any such animal to the Animal Control Authority, or he may, with written consent of such authority, take such animal to a licensed veterinarian for confinement for a period of 14 days. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-11) 
505.12 - WILD ANIMALS. 
    No person shall own, keep or harbor any wild animals within the city limits; provided, however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by the Animal Control Authority. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-12) 
505.13 - CITY DESIGNATED BIRD SANCTUARY; MOLESTING PROTECTED BIRDS PROHIBITED. 
    The city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary and provides protection to all state and federally protected bird species. The city also adheres to all state and federal laws restricting the take, possession, or transport of state and federally protected bird species. 
(Ord. 11-26-01) 
505.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  (1)  Whoever violates section 505.01(a) shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for a first offense. Any person convicted of a second violation of section 505.01(a) shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days or fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, or both. The incarceration set forth in this subsection shall be mandatory unless the provisions of subsection (a)(2) are complied with. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, no person who has been convicted of a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of section 505.01(a) may be granted probation until the defendant has undergone a complete psychiatric or psychological evaluation and the court has reviewed such evaluation. Unless the defendant is determined by the court to be indigent, he or she shall be responsible for the cost of said evaluation. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalty which can be imposed for a violation of section 505.01, a court may, as a condition of probation, prohibit any person so convicted from possessing or owning any animal or type of animal during the period of probation. 
(b)  Whoever violates section 505.01(b) shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000. 
Editor's note- See section 501.99 for General Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-19. 
ARTICLE 507 - DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Unlawful noises, § 509.03. 
State Law reference- Domestic animal tax, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-10; dogs generally, W. Va. Code, Art. 19-20; vaccination, W. Va. Code, Art. 19-20A. 

507.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Animal control authority" means a department known as the animal control department, created for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(b)  "Animal shelter" means any premises designated as the shelter of, and operated under the supervision of, the animal control department. 
(c)  "Animal warden" means the person employed by the Animal Control Authority. 
(d)  "At large" means any dog which is off or away from the premises of its owner or keeper thereof, unless such dog is: 
(1)  Restrained by means of a leash or chain not over six feet in length; or 
(2)  Is under such effective direction, supervision or command of a competent person as to be in fact restrained. 
(e)  "Harboring" means any person sheltering and feeding a dog for 15 days or more. 
(f)  "Kennel" means the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding dogs. 
(g)  "Owner" means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog. 
(h)  "Restraint" means any dog at "heel or on a leash beside a competent person or within a vehicle. 
(i)  "Dangerous animal" means and includes the following: 
(1)  Any mammal, amphibian, fish, reptile or fowl which, due to size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life, physical well-being, or property, including but not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, apes, gorillas, monkeys of a species whose average adult weight is 20 pounds or more, foxes, elephants, alligators, crocodiles, and snakes which are venomous or otherwise present a risk of serious makeup including, but not limited to, boa constrictors, Madagascar ground boas, green and yellow anacondas, Cuban boas, Indian pythons, reticulated pythons, African rock pythons, Amethystine pythons, Boelen's pythons and all members of the family pythonidac that exceed six feet in length. 
(2)  Any dog or cat having a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation is hereby defined as a "dangerous animal." For the purposes of this chapter, where the official records of the chief animal control officer or city clerk indicate a dog or cat has bitten any person or persons, it shall be prima facie evidence that said dog or cat is a dangerous animal. 
(3)  "Pit bull dog" is defined to mean any and all of the following dogs: 
A.  The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dogs; 
B.  The American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dogs; 
C.  The American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dogs; 
D.  Dogs which have the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly of the breeds of dogs known as Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, or American Staffordshire Terrier. 
The registration of a dog at any time in any jurisdiction as a pit bull or any of the dogs listed above shall constitute prima facie evidence the animal is prohibited by this section. 
(4)  Any domesticated dog that has in its known genetic history and/or formal pedigree crossbreeding with the wolf species to include, but not be limited to, animals referred to a wolf-hybrids or wolf-mixed breeds or the breed known as Tundra Shepherd. The registration of an animal at any time in any jurisdiction as a wolf-hybrid, wolf mix or Tundra Shepherd shall constitute prima facie evidence the animal is prohibited by this section. For the purposes of this section all references to animals described herein shall be to wolf-hybrids. 
(Ord. 8-12-01) 
507.02 - ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Animal Control Authority and any duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-15; Ord. of 8-9-10(1)) 
507.03 - RESTRAINT AND RUNNING AT LARGE; MANDATORY MINIMUM FINES AND PENALTIES. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to keep his/her dog under effective restraint at all times or allow the same to run at large, as defined in section 507.01. 
(b)  Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof shall be subject to the following fines and penalties: 
(1)  First violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $25. 
(2)  Second violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $200. 
(3)  Third violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $300. 
(4)  Fourth violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $400. 
(5)  Fifth and subsequent violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $500. 
(c)  There shall be no exceptions to or waivers of the fines and penalties provided for in subsection (b) hereof. 
(d)  In addition to imposing the mandatory minimum fines and penalties provided for in subsection (b) hereof, the municipal judge shall have plenary power and authority to order and direct any person found to be in violation of subsection (a) hereof to take necessary action to come into compliance therewith within a reasonable period of time. Failure to comply with such order and directive of the municipal judge shall constitute a separate offense and result in the imposition of an additional fine of not more than $500, or imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(e)  Any increased revenue, resulting from this section, over the base year, shall be placed in escrow to be used for further enforcement of the leash law and shall not be placed in the general fund. 
(Ord. 4-10-95) 
507.04 - RABIES VACCINATION; TAGS; CERTIFICATES. 
(a)  Every person owning, keeping or harboring in the city a dog of the age of five months or older shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian licensed by the state. All dogs shall be vaccinated or revaccinated at least once each two years. 
    The city shall furnish proper vaccination tags and certificates to licensed veterinarians. Each veterinarian shall keep detailed records of vaccinations, and shall issue a certificate and tag for each dog vaccinated, and shall, on the first day of each month, forward to the Animal Control Authority a copy of each vaccination certificate issued in the preceding month. The rabies vaccination tag shall be attached and kept attached to a substantial collar worn by each dog. 
(b)  Any person having been found to have violated subsection (a) hereof shall be subject to the following fines and penalties: 
(1)  First violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $25. 
(2)  Second violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $50. 
(3)  Third violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $100. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent violation: A mandatory minimum fine of not less than $200. 
(c)  There shall be no exceptions to or waivers of the fines and penalties provided for in subsection (b) hereof. 
(d)  In addition to imposing the mandatory minimum fines and penalties provided for in subsection (b) hereof, the municipal judge shall have plenary power and authority to order and direct any person found to be in violation of subsection (a) hereof to take necessary action to come into compliance therewith within a reasonable period of time. Failure to comply with such order and directive of the municipal judge shall constitute a separate offense and result in the imposition of an additional fine of not more than $500, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-17; Ord. of 8-9-10(1)) 
507.05 - ANNUAL LICENSE TAX: TAGS; REGISTRATION OF PIT BULL DOG OR WOLF HYBRID. 
(a)  Every person owning, keeping or harboring a dog in the City shall pay to the Director of the Division of Finance an annual license tax of $1 for each such dog, which tax shall become due on July 1 of each year. Upon payment of such tax, a metal tag shall be issued identifying the dog and the tax year, and the tag shall be attached and kept attached to a substantial dog collar worn by the dog. 
(b)  Every person owning, keeping or harboring a pit bull dog or wolf hybrid shall register each such dog with the office of the Animal Control Authority. Such registration shall be in writing and shall designate the owner or keeper of such dog(s) full legal name and the address of the location where each such dog is kept or harbored. Any person having failed to register each such dog shall be fined a mandatory minimum of $50 for a first offense, a mandatory minimum fine of $100 for second offense, and a mandatory minimum fine of $200 for each subsequent violation. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-18; Ord. of 8-9-10(1)) 
507.06 - IMPOUNDING; DISCRETION OF ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. 
(a)  Any dog found running at large or not under restraint in the city, without proper license and rabies tags, as required by this article, or any unspayed female dog found running at large while in heat, or any dog known to be vicious, dangerous or in the habit of attacking or biting persons, or any dog known or suspected to be suffering with rabies running at large, or any dog on which complaints have been received of having caused property damage or destruction, running at large, shall be impounded by the appropriate authority for a period of five days, and may thereafter be disposed of unless redeemed by the owner or placed for adoption by the Animal Control Authority. 
(b)  Any dog found running at large or not under restraint, whose owner is known, need not be impounded, but the Animal Control Authority may, in its discretion, cite the owner to appear in the municipal court of the city, in lieu of impounding such animal; provided, that in the event the animal is one as to which the rights of the owners are determined by state law, such law shall be complied with. 
(c)  The Animal Control Authority shall obtain the name and address of each person notifying such authority of any dog running at large or not under restraint. 
(d)  In the event that a dog is impounded for attacking or biting persons, such impoundment shall occur at the animal control shelter or a veterinary kennel and the animal owner shall bear all costs associated with said impoundment. 
(Ord. 6-27-05) 
507.07 - REDEMPTION; DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED DOGS. 
(a)  To redeem an impounded dog, the owner shall pay the cost of impounding and feeding, all delinquent dog license taxes and shall secure proper license and rabies tags, and, in addition, shall be subject to an assessment pick-up fee for each dog, and an additional impounding fee for each day the dog remains in the shelter. These fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of council. Provided, however, before any such dog shall be released to any such owner, the owner shall provide evidence satisfactory to the officials of the Animal Control Authority that such dog has received all appropriate shots, particularly evidence that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies as hereinbefore provided in this article. 
(b)  If any impounded dog is not redeemed within five days, it shall be sold, if salable, or adopted, and the proceeds therefrom, over and above taxes and other charges, shall be paid over to the owner if any is found. If any unredeemed dog is not salable or adoptable because of disease, temperament or other cause, it shall be destroyed in a humane way. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-20) 
507.08 - MUZZLES REQUIRED; DESTRUCTION OF VICIOUS DOGS. 
(a)  Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a registered pit bull dog or wolf-hybrid to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than six feet in length. No person shall permit a pit bull dog or wolf-hybrid to be kept on a chain, rope or other type leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all pit bull dogs or wolf-hybrids on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dogs from biting persons or other animals. 
(b)  Confinement. All registered pit bull dogs or wolf-hybrids shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine registered pit bull dogs or wolf-hybrids must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house pit bull dogs or wolf-hybrids must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such dogs or wolf-hybrids must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  Confinement indoors. No pit bull dog or wolf-hybrid may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(d)  Signs. All owners, keepers, or harborers of registered pit bull dogs or wolf-hybrids must within ten days of the effective date of this ordinance display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. 
(e)  Penalty. If the municipal court shall find, as a result of the hearing upon a complaint, that a dog is vicious or dangerous, as provided under this section, the owner or guardian of such dog shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days or both. In addition, if the municipal court may, as a result of said finding that a dog is vicious or dangerous, order such dog be destroyed. 
(Ord. of 8-12-02; Ord. of 8-9-10(1)) 
507.09 - REPORT OF BITE CASES. 
(a)  Whenever any person is bitten by a dog, such person or his parents or guardian shall report to the animal control department within 24 hours his name, address and telephone number and the complete circumstances surrounding such incident. 
(b)  Attending physicians treating an animal bite case shall report to the animal control department within 24 hours the name, address and telephone number of the person having been bitten. Weekly reports shall be made by the Animal Control Authority to the Cabell-Huntington Health Department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-22) 
507.10 - DOGS BELONGING TO NONRESIDENTS; LICENSING AND VACCINATION. 
    The licensing and vaccination requirements of this article shall not apply to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for not longer than 30 days. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-23) 
507.11 - RIGHT OF ENTRY OF ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. 
(a)  For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and to enforce its provisions, a dog warden or member of the Animal Control Authority is authorized and empowered to obtain an appropriate warrant or other legal process and, in the company of any legal officer to whom such process may be directed, and who is authorized by law to enforce the same, may enter upon any premises upon which a dog or other animal is kept or harbored, and require exhibition by the owner of such dog or animal, and the various licenses and rabies tags required therefor, and may impound such animal, or may take possession of such animal when such animal requires humane treatment or care. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the Animal Control Authority in the performance of his duty, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the Animal Control Authority. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-24) 
507.12 - IMMUNITY FROM CIVIL LIABILITY. 
    It shall be lawful for any veterinarian, licensed to practice under the laws of the state, to determine in any given case whether any mutilated animal or fowl should be destroyed. Such licensed veterinarian in taking such action in good faith shall not be liable for any civil damages as a result of any act or omission in connection therewith; provided, however, that such action shall be taken only with the knowledge and consent of the bona fide owner when such owner's identity can be reasonably established. 
(1964 Code Sec. 4-25) 
507.13 - CRUELTY TO DOGS AND CATS. 
    No person shall cruelly, or needlessly beat, torture, torment, mutilate, kill or willfully deprive necessary sustenance, to any dog or cat, irrespective of whether any such dog or cat is his or her own or that of another person. No person shall impound or confine any dog or cat in any place unprotected from the elements or fail to supply the same with a sufficient quantity of food and water, or abandon to die any maimed, sick or diseased dog or cat or be engaged in or employed at dogfighting, or pitting one dog or cat to fight against another dog or cat or any similar cruelty to any dog or cat, or receive money for the admission of any person, or use, train or possess a dog or cat for the purpose of seizing, detaining or maltreating any other dog or cat. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-19a. 
507.14 - DISPOSAL OF DOG WASTE. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any sidewalk, street or other public area in the city. It shall further be the duty of each person who owns, possess or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person. 
(b)  No person who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area without the means of removal of any feces left by such dog. Furthermore, no person who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person without the means of removal of any feces left by said dog. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement, or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to said person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such feces to a place suitable for the disposal of canine feces. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to a dog accompanying any handicapped person who, by reasons of his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirements of this section, or to any individual who utilizes a guide dog. 
(e)  The provisions of this section are severable; and if any of the provisions of this section shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(Ord. 8-10-98) 
507.15 - UNLAWFUL NOISE BY DOGS AND/OR CATS. 
    No person shall permit or cause to be made or continued to be made any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise upon the premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, by any dog or cat otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, cry or behavioral noise, causes annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(Ord. 6-28-99) 
507.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates section 507.13 shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. In addition the humane officer may remove the dog or cat involved and place it in the pound and such dog or cat shall not be returned to the owner or perpetrator of the act of cruelty, but shall be put up for adoption to a desirable home or given into the care of a humane society or upon the recommendation of a licensed veterinarian shall be humanely destroyed. 
    Whoever violates section 507.14 shall be fined a minimum of $75 for the first offense; for the second offense shall be fined a minimum of $100; and for the third and subsequent offenses shall be fined a minimum of $150, but not more than $500 for any offense. 
(Ord. 8-10-98) 
Editor's note- See section 501.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
ARTICLE 508 - TETHERING OF DOGS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Dogs, Art. 507. 

508.1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Tethering. Attaching a dog to a stationary object by means of a chain, rope, tether, cable or similar restraint. "Tethering" does not include the use of a leash to walk a dog. 
(Ord. of 12-14-09) 
508.2 - TETHERING, PROHIBITED CONDUCT. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person controlling or possessing any dog to tether a dog outdoors without direct supervision of the animal's guardian. 
(Ord. of 12-14-09) 
508.3 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    In addition to local law enforcement authorities, the Cabell-Wayne Animal Control Shelter and its duly authorized humane officers, in accordance with state law, shall be charged with enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-14-09) 
508.4 - PENALTY. 
    Any person who is convicted of, pleads guilty or no contest to a violation of this section shall suffer the following minimum punishment: 
(a)  First offense, a minimum fine of $50; 
(b)  Second offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of $100; 
(c)  Third offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of $200; and 
(d)  Fourth or subsequent offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of $500 and seizure of the animal by the Animal Control Authority. 
(Ord. 12-14-09) 
508.05 - SEVERABILITY. 
    The sections and subsections of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or subsection of the same shall be declared to be illegal by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or subsections of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-14-09) 
ARTICLE 509 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND PEACE DISTURBANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Intoxication or drinking in public places, § 521.05; breach of peace with weapon, § 545.02. 
State Law reference- Authority to maintain order, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(19), (44); crimes against the peace, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-6. 

509.01 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT. 
    No person shall commit or cause any of the following acts in or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, building or other public place, or in or on a place open to public view or place from which sounds may be heard by members of the public: 
(a)  Any unreasonable disturbance of the peace or quiet of the city or of any person because of a riot, noise, disorder, tumult, affray or fighting; 
(b)  An act of violence or an act likely to produce violence; 
(c)  The addressing of abusive language or threats to another person to the extent that it creates a clear and present danger of violence; 
(d)  The failure to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer where two or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct, as defined above, in the immediate vicinity of the police officer, and where such failure to obey the lawful order of dispersal causes likelihood of harm to any person or likelihood of serious inconvenience to the police officer in the performance of his duties; 
(e)  Hindering or preventing the movement of persons or vehicles on a public street, road, highway right-of-way or to, from, within or upon public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, by any act which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose; (A.O.) 
(f)  Begging, or to cause children to beg alms of the people within the limits of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-35; Ord. 9-8-80) 
509.02 - LOITERING ON SCHOOL PROPERTY. 
    No person, not a student in regular attendance, shall loiter in or about any school, school building or school grounds in violation of any posted rules or regulations governing the use of any such school without written permission from the principal. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-6-14a. 
509.03 - UNLAWFUL NOISES; EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which annoys or discomforts a reasonable person of normal sensitivity, within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Animals; fowl. The keeping, maintaining or permitting the keeping of, upon the premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, cry or behavioral noise, causes annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(2)  Hawkers and peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which causes annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(3)  Horns; signalling devices. The sounding of any horn, whistle or signalling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; or the sounding of any horn, whistle or signalling device for an unnecessary and unreasonable length of time such that the noise thereof causes annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(4)  Musical instruments; radios; phonographs; tape players. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical or percussion instrument, phonograph, tape player, other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(5)  Schools; courts; churches; hospitals. The creation of any noise which causes annoyance or discomfort to persons within, or interferes with the operation of schools, courts, churches, hospitals and other places of public assemblage; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed near such school, court, church, hospital or other place of public assemblage indicating that the immediate vicinity contains a school, court, church, hospital or other place of public assemblage, and that quiet should be maintained. 
(6)  Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets or sidewalks in such manner as to annoy and discomfort a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations in this section: 
(1)  Noise as a result of emergency work as defined herein; 
(2)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves; 
(3)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
509.04 - LOITERING ON CITY PROPERTY. 
    No person shall loiter or loaf on any sidewalk, street corner, vacant lot, parking lot or any public place or building within the city and there conduct himself or herself in a manner creating a danger of a breach of the peace or disturbing the comfort and repose of passers-by or occupants of the same or adjacent lots or buildings; nor shall any person loiter or loaf at any place described in this section and there obstruct, molest, threaten or interfere with other persons in any manner likely to cause such other persons to fear for their safety. 
(Ord. 10-11-88) 
509.05 - PROSTITUTION LOITERING. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Commit prostitution" means to engage in sexual conduct for money or other valuable consideration but does not include sexual conduct engaged in as part of any stage performance, play or other entertainment open to the public. 
(2)  "Known prostitute or procurer" means a person who within two years previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of an offense involving prostitution. 
(3)  "Public place" is an area generally visible to the public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(b)  No person shall commit prostitution loitering in the City of Huntington. A person is guilty of prostitution loitering if he or she remains in a public place and intentionally solicits, induces, entices, or procures another to commit prostitution. 
(c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the individual intends such prohibited conduct are that he or she: 
(1)  Repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passerby in conversation; or 
(2)  Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waiving of arms or any other bodily gesture; or 
(3)  Circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to, contacts, or attempts to stop pedestrians; or 
(4)  Is a known prostitute or procurer; or 
(5)  Inquires whether a potential patron, procurer or prostitute is a police officer, searches for articles that would identify a police officer, requests the touching or exposing of genitals or female breasts to prove that the person is not a police officer. 
(Ord. 10-9-07) 
509.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  If no specific penalty is provided for any section within this article, that penalty found in section 501.99 shall apply. 
(b)  Whoever violates section 509.02 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for a first offense. For a second or subsequent offense, such person shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(c)  Whoever violates section 509.04 shall for a first offense be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For a second offense, such person shall be fined at least $100 but not more than $500 and shall be imprisoned for at least 24 hours but not more than 30 days. For a third or subsequent offense, such person shall be fined at least $250 but not more than $500 and shall be imprisoned at least 72 hours but not more than 30 days. 
(d)  Whoever violates any provision of section 509.05 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. 10-9-07) 
ARTICLE 513 - GAMBLING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; gambling at fairs prohibited, W. Va. Code, § 19-7-8; pari-mutuel system of wagering at race track permitted, W. Va. Code, § 19-23-9; gaming contracts, W. Va. Code, Art. 55-9; crimes against public policy, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-10. 

513.01 - KEEPING OR EXHIBITING GAMBLING APPARATUS. 
    No person shall keep or exhibit a gaming table, commonly called an A.B.C. or E.O. table, faro bank, keno table, or any slot machine, multiple coin console machine, multiple coin console slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine, or any other gaming table or device of like kind, under any denomination or which has no name, whether the game, table, bank, machine or device is played with cards, dice or otherwise, or be a partner, or concerned in interest, in keeping or exhibiting such table, bank, machine or gaming device of any character. Any such table, faro bank, machine or gaming device, and all money staked or exhibited to allure persons to bet at such table or upon such gaming device, may be seized by order of the police court and the money so seized shall be forfeited to the municipality and paid into the municipal treasury and the table, faro bank, machine or gaming device shall be completely destroyed. However, the provisions of this section shall not extend to coin-operated nonpayout machines with free play features or to automatic weighing, measuring, musical and vending machines which are so constructed as to give a certain uniform and fair return in value or services for each coin deposited therein and in which there is no element of chance. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-1. 
513.02 - PERMITTING GAMBLING APPARATUS ON PREMISES. 
    No person shall knowingly permit a gaming table, bank or device, as mentioned in section 513.01, to be kept or exhibited on any premises in his occupation. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-2. 
513.03 - ACTING AS LOOKOUT OR GUARD FOR KEEPER OF GAMBLING APPARATUS. 
    No person shall act as doorkeeper, guard or watch, or employ another person to act as such, for a keeper or exhibitor of any gaming table, bank or device as mentioned in section 513.01, nor resist, nor by any means or device, prevent, hinder or delay the lawful arrest of such keeper or exhibitor, or the seizure of the table, bank or device, or money exhibited or staked thereat, nor unlawfully take the same from the person seizing it. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-3. 
513.04 - PLAYING ON GAMBLING APPARATUS; HOTELS, PUBLIC PLACES. 
    No person shall bet or play at any gaming table, bank or device as mentioned in section 513.01, or, at any hotel or tavern, other public place or place of public resort, play at any game except bowling, chess or backgammon, draughts or a licensed game, or bet on the side of those who play at any game, whether or not the game is permitted or licensed. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-4. 
513.05 - CONDUCTING GAMES OF CHANCE. 
(a)  Unless authorized by law, no person shall deal in, participate in, solicit for or conduct a game of chance which exists for the purpose of providing to participants or players therein or to other persons some form of gain, whether that gain be money, checks, merchandise, credits or other thing of value, except that this section shall not apply to sporting events. 
(b)  No person shall bet or wage money, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value on a game of chance, unless authorized by law to do so. 
(c)  No person shall receive, record, or forward a bet or wager of money, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value on a game of chance, unless authorized by law to do so. 
(d)  No person shall become a custodian or depository of any stake of moneys, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value which is to be, is or has been bet or waged upon a game of chance, unless authorized by law to do so. 
(1964 Code Secs. 23-2, 23-3) 
513.06 - PERMITTING GAMBLING AT PUBLIC PLACES. 
    No keeper of a hotel, tavern or other public place shall permit unlawful gaming at his house, or at any outhouse, booth, arbor or other place appurtenant thereto. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-6. 
513.07 - CHEATING OR FRAUDULENT ACTIONS WHILE GAMBLING OR MAKING A WAGER. 
    No person playing at any game or making a wager, or having a share in any stake or wager, or betting on the hands or sides of others playing at any game or making a wager, shall cheat, or by fraudulent means win or acquire for himself, or another, money or any other valuable thing. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-9. 
513.08 - POOLROOMS AND POOL TICKETS. 
    "Poolroom" , wherever used in this section, means any room where any pool ticket, chance voucher or certificate is sold entitling or purporting to entitle the holder or promisee thereof, or any other person, to money or other thing of value, contingent upon the result of any horse race, prizefight, game of chance, game of skill or science or other sport or contest. No person shall set up or promote, or be connected with or interested in the management or operation of any poolroom. The buying, selling or transferring of tickets or chances in any lottery is hereby prohibited. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-10. 
513.09 - LOTTERIES AND RAFFLES. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall set up, promote or be concerned in managing or drawing a lottery or raffle for money or other thing of value; knowingly permit such lottery in any house under his control; knowingly permit money or other property to be raffled for in such house or to be won therein by throwing or using dice or by any other game of chance; knowingly permit the sale in such house of any chance or ticket, or share of a ticket in a lottery, or any writing, certificate, bill, token or other device purporting or intended to guarantee or assure to any person or to entitle him to a prize, or a share of or interest in a prize to be drawn in a lottery. No person shall for himself or any other person, buy, sell, transfer or have in his possession for the purpose of sale or with intent to exchange, negotiate or transfer, or aid in selling, exchanging, negotiating or transferring a chance or ticket, or a share of a ticket, in a lottery or any such writing, certificate, bill, token or device. However, this section shall not be deemed to apply to that certain type or form of lottery or raffle designated and familiarly known as "policy" or "numbers". 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-10-11. 
513.10 - PARAPHERNALIA USED IN GAME OF CHANCE. 
    No person, unless authorized by law to do so, shall possess, exhibit or use any device, paraphernalia, table, book, magazine, ticket, bill, certificate, token or instruction of any kind or character for the purpose of: 
(a)  Conducting, dealing, soliciting for or participating in a game of chance, except sporting events, which game of chance exists for the purpose of providing to participants or players therein, or to other persons, some form of gain, whether that gain be money, checks, merchandise, credits or other thing of value; 
(b)  Receiving, recording or forwarding any bet or wager of money, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value upon a game of chance; or 
(c)  Becoming custodian or depository of any stake of money, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value bet or waged upon a game of chance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-5) 
513.11 - SLOT MACHINES. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to coin-operated, nonpayout machines with free play features or to automatic weighing machines, musical and vending machines which are constructed so as to give a certain uniform and fair return in value or services for each coin deposited therein and in which there is no element of chance. Unless authorized by law, no person shall: 
(a)  Possess any slot machine, vending machine or other instrument or device which delivers, releases or vends money, tokens, checks, merchandise or other things of value, where chance is a factor in determining the value or quantity of money, tokens, checks, merchandise or other things delivered, released or vended; 
(b)  Possess any slot machine, vending machine or other instrument or device which delivers, releases or vends money, tokens, checks, merchandise or other things of value and which contains or has thereon any words, letters, emblems, pictures or other things which indicate or state that the vendee, purchaser or player thereof is or shall be entitled to anything of value other than the money, tokens, checks, merchandise or other things of value which are released, delivered or vended thereby; 
(c)  Deliver or agree to deliver anything of value in addition to any money, token, check, merchandise or other thing of value which is, can be or has been delivered, released or vended from a slot machine, vending machine or other instrument or device. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-6) 
513.12 - CONTRABAND; SEIZURE AND DISPOSITION. 
(a)  All money, checks, merchandise, credits or other things of value which allegedly are being or have been bet or waged upon a game of chance, or which allegedly will be, are being or have been bet or waged upon a game of chance and are in the possession of a custodian or depository, or which allegedly are to be used or are used in a game of chance in which a person allegedly has violated any section of this article unless authorized by law to be bet, waged or used in such manner, shall be considered potential contraband; and when the money, checks, merchandise, credits or other thing of value above are seized by police officers pursuant to proper process of law, these potential items of contraband shall be brought before the municipal court, and if the court, upon hearing the evidence, finds the money, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value to have been bet or waged upon a game of chance in violation of these Codified Ordinances, or is to be, is or has been bet or waged upon a game of chance and is in the possession of a custodian or depository in violation of these Codified Ordinances, or is used in a game of chance in which a person allegedly has violated any section of this article such money, checks, merchandise, credits or anything of value shall be forfeited to the city. 
(b)  All paraphernalia, devices, tables, books, machines, slot machines, vending machines, tickets, cards, bills, certificates, tokens or instruments of any kind or character, which allegedly are exhibited, possessed or used in violation of section 513.10 or 513.11 and which are seized by police officers pursuant to proper process of law, shall be brought before the municipal court and held for use as evidence; and all gambling devices as defined heretofore shall be destroyed after being used as evidence, while all potential contraband, when found to have been exhibited, possessed or used in violation of section 513.10 or 513.11, shall be considered contraband and destroyed thereafter. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-7) 
513.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates section 513.04 or 513.06 shall be fined not more than $100. 
Editor's note- See section 501.99 for General Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
ARTICLE 517 - INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to prohibit distribution of obscene literature, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(17); authority to suppress houses of ill fame, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(18); authority to prevent indecent practices, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(19); equitable remedies, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-9. 

517.01 - OPERATING A PLACE FOR OR PERMITTING OR ENGAGING IN PROSTITUTION, LEWDNESS OR ASSIGNATION. 
(a)  No person shall keep, set up, maintain or operate any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp, other structure or part thereof, or vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation; or own any place, house, hotel, tourist camp, other structure or part thereof, or trailer or other conveyance knowing the same to be used for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or let, sublet or rent any such place, premises or conveyance to another with knowledge or good reason to know of the intention of the lessee or rentee to use such place, premises or conveyance for prostitution, lewdness or assignation; or offer, or offer to secure another for the purpose of prostitution or for any other lewd or indecent act; or receive or offer or agree to receive any person into any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure, or vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or permit any person to remain there for such purpose; or for another or others, direct, take or transport, or offer or agree to take or transport, or aid or assist in transporting any person to any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp, other structure, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance, or to any other person with knowledge or having reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or assignation; or aid, abet or participate in the doing of any acts herein prohibited. Whoever violates this subsection (a) shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of prostitution, lewdness or assignation nor shall any person seek or receive services of a prostitute; or reside in, enter or remain in any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure, or enter or remain in any vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation; or aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts herein prohibited. 
    Whoever violates this subsection (b) shall, for a first or second offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
    The subsequent offense provision shall apply only to the pimp, panderer, solicitor, operator or any person benefiting financially or otherwise from the earnings of a prostitute. 
(c)  All leases and agreements, oral or written, for letting, subletting or renting any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure which is used for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, shall be void from and after the date any person who is a party to such an agreement shall be convicted of an offense hereunder. "Tourist camp" includes any temporary or permanent buildings, tents, cabins or structures, or trailers or other vehicles which are maintained, offered or used for dwelling or sleeping quarters for pay. 
(d)  In the trial of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this section, testimony concerning the reputation or character of any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure, and of the person or persons who reside in or frequent them, and of the defendant or defendants, shall be admissible in evidence in support of the charge. 
(Ord. 8-26-91) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-5. 
517.02 - DETAINING FEMALE FOR PURPOSE OF PROSTITUTION. 
    No person shall by any means keep, hold, detain against her will or restrain any female person in a house of prostitution or other place where prostitution is practiced or allowed; or directly or indirectly keep, hold, detain or restrain or attempt to keep, hold, detain or restrain, in any house of prostitution or other place where prostitution is practiced or allowed, any female person, by any means, for the purpose of compelling such female person, directly or indirectly, to pay, liquidate or cancel any debt, dues or obligations incurred or said to have been incurred by such female person. 
    Whoever violates this section shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-6. 
517.03 - PANDERING. 
    No person shall procure a female inmate for a house of prostitution or by promises, threats, violence or any device or scheme cause, induce, persuade or encourage a female person to become an inmate of a house of prostitution, or procure a place as an inmate of a house of prostitution for a female person. No person shall by promises, threats, violence or any device or scheme cause, induce, persuade or encourage an inmate of a house of prostitution to remain therein as such inmate. No person shall by fraud, artifice, duress of person or goods or by abuse of any position of confidence or authority procure any female person to become an inmate of a house of ill fame, to enter any place in which prostitution is encouraged or allowed within the city, to come into the city for the purpose of prostitution, procure any female person who has not previously practiced prostitution in the city to come into the city or leave the city for the purpose of prostitution or receive, give or agree to receive or give, money or anything of value for procuring or attempting to procure any female person to become an inmate of a house of ill fame within the city, for the purpose of prostitution. 
    Whoever violates this section shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-7. 
517.04 - PIMPING. 
    No male person knowing a female person to be a prostitute, shall live or derive support or maintenance, in whole or in part, from the earnings or proceeds of the prostitution of such prostitute, or from money loaned or advanced to or charged against such prostitution by any keeper, manager or inmate of a house or other place where prostitution is practiced or allowed, or shall tout or receive compensation for touting for such prostitution. 
    Whoever violates this section shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-8. 
517.05 - PROFANE SWEARING AND DRUNKENNESS. 
    No person having arrived at the age of discretion shall profanely curse or swear or get drunk in public. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-15. 
517.06 - OBSCENE OR HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS. 
(a)  No person with intent to harass or abuse another by means of telephone shall: 
(1)  Make any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene; or 
(2)  Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his identity and with intent to harass any person at the called number; or 
(3)  Make or cause the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or 
(4)  Make repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or 
(5)  Threaten to commit a crime against any person or property. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section. 
(c)  Any offense committed under this section may be deemed to have occurred at the place at which the telephone call was made, or the place at which the telephone call was received. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-16. 
517.07 - INDECENT EXPOSURE. 
    No person shall intentionally expose his or her sex organs or anus or the sex organs or anus of another person, or intentionally cause such exposure by another or engage in any overt act of sexual gratification, under circumstances in which the person knows that the conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; provided, that it is not considered indecent exposure for a mother to breast feed a child in any location, public or private. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-9. 
517.08 - INVASION OF PRIVACY BY LOOKING. 
    No person shall unlawfully enter upon the property of another or secretly or furtively peep through or attempt to peep into, through, or spy through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied by or intended for occupancy as a dwelling or dormitory, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure be permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy be permanent or temporary. 
517.09 - PREPARATION, DISTRIBUTION OR EXHIBITION OF OBSCENE MATTER TO MINORS. 
(a)  Definitions of terms used in this section, and any variations thereof required by the context, shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  "Distribute" means to transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
(2)  "Employee" means any individual who renders personal services in the course of a business, who receives compensation therefor at a fixed rate and who has no financial interest in the ownership or operation of the business other than his salary or wages. 
(3)  "Exhibit" means to display or offer for viewing, whether with or without consideration. 
(4)  "Knowingly" means to display or offer for viewing, whether with or without consideration. 
(5)  "Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing or photograph, motion picture, or other visual representation, or any statue or other figure, or live conduct, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials. 
(6)  "Minor" means any individual under the age of 18 years. 
(7)  "Obscene matter" means to the average individual, applying contemporary state standards, matter which: 
A.  Considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interests; 
B.  Depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner ultimate sexual acts, both normal and perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, sodomy, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, sadism, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and 
C.  Considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(8)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. 
(9)  "Prepare" means to produce, publish or print. 
(10)  "Public display" means the placing of material on or in a billboard, viewing screen, theater, marquee, newsstand, display rack, window showcase, display case or similar public place, so that the material within the meaning of "obscene matter" is easily visible from a public thoroughfare, from the property of others or from commercial or business premises generally open to minors at the time of such placing. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly send or cause to be sent or bring or cause to be brought into this municipality any obscene matter for distribution, exhibition or public display to a minor, or in this municipality prepare for, distribute to, exhibit to or publicly display to a minor any obscene matter, or offer to prepare for, distribute to, exhibit to or publicly display to a minor any obscene matter, or have in his possession with the intent to distribute, exhibit or make a public display of, any obscene matter to a minor. 
(c)  No employees shall be guilty of a violation of this section when such employee is a projectionist, ticket taker, usher or when such employee distributes, prepares or exhibits obscene matter while acting within the scope of his employment. 
(d)  Any person who distributes or exhibits obscene matter, or possesses obscene matter with the intent to distribute or exhibit the same in the course of his business, is presumed to do so with knowledge of its content or character. 
(e)  No person shall be guilty of distributing or exhibiting obscene matter to a minor when such person has reasonable cause to believe that the minor involved was 18 years of age or more and such minor exhibited to such person a driver's license, draft card or other official or apparently official document purporting to establish that such minor was 18 years of age or more. 
(f)  No person who, with knowledge that a person is a minor under 18 years of age, or who, while in possession of such facts that he should reasonably know that such person is a minor under 18 years of age, shall hire, employ or use such minor to do or assist in doing any of the acts described in subsection (a)(7)B. hereof. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, Art. 61-8A. 
517.10 - SALE OR DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATTER. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Knowingly" means to have knowledge of or to be aware of the content or character of obscene matter. 
(2)  "Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing or photograph, motion picture, or other visual representation, or live conduct, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials. 
(3)  "Individual" means any human being regardless of age. 
(4)  "Obscene" means matter which the average individual applying contemporary community standards would find 
A.  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; 
B.  Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; and 
C.  The matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, and which either: 
1.  Depicts or describes patently offensive representation of masturbation, excretory functions, lewd exhibition of the genitals, sodomy, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, sadism, masochism; or 
2.  Depicts or describes nudity or sexual acts of persons, male or female, below the age of 18 years. 
(5)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. 
(6)  "Prepare" means to produce, publish or print. 
(7)  "Public display" means the placing of material on or in a billboard, viewing screen, theater, marquee, newsstand, display rack, window, showcase, display case or similar public places so that material can be purchased or viewed by individuals. 
(b)  Individual relief. The circuit court shall have jurisdiction to issue an injunction to enforce the purposes of this section upon petition by the attorney for the municipality or a representative thereof or any citizen of the municipality who can show a good faith and valid reason for making such application. No bond shall be required unless for good cause shown. 
(c)  Activities prohibited. No person shall knowingly send or cause to be sent or cause to be brought into the municipality for sale or public display, or prepare, sell or make a public display, or in the municipality offer to prepare, sell or make a public display, or have in his possession with the intent to sell or make a public display of any obscene matter to any individual. 
(d)  Employees not prosecuted. No employee shall be guilty of a violation of this section when such employee is a projectionist, ticket taker, usher, or when such employee prepares, sells or makes a public display of obscene matter while acting within the scope of his regular employment, unless such employee has a proprietary interest in such obscene matter or is a shareholder or officer of a corporation which has a proprietary interest in such obscene matter. 
(e)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to apply to any person exercising a right secured by the Constitution or laws of this state or of these United States. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(b). 
517.11 - OBSCENITY; PORNOGRAPHIC LIVE CONDUCT. 
    No person, in a public place or place open to public view, where unwilling viewers are likely to be present, shall perform any of the following acts: 
(a)  The actual performance of any sexual act; 
(b)  The actual touching, caressing or fondling of the naked anus, genitals or female breast; 
(c)  The actual displaying of the pubic hairs, vulva, genitals or nipples of the female breast. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-13) 
517.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates section 517.01(a) shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. (A.O.) 
(b)  Whoever violates section 517.01(b) shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  For a first offense, the penalty shall be not less than $250 nor more than $500 and such penalty may not be waived or suspended by the municipal judge. 
(2)  For a second offense, the penalty shall be not less than $250 and not less than three days in jail. Neither the monetary fine nor the jail term may be waived or suspended by the municipal judge. 
(3)  For a third offense, the penalty shall be $500 and not less than ten days in jail. Neither the monetary fine nor the jail term may be waived or suspended by the municipal judge. 
(4)  All offenses subsequent to the third offense shall be treated as a third offense. 
(5)  The office of the municipal court shall keep and maintain records of each conviction under section 517.01(b). Upon conviction of any offense, whether it be first, second or third, each defendant shall be required to execute an enhancement form stating the offense and further stating that such offense shall be used to enhance the penalties of further convictions under section 517.01(b). 
(c)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2), any person who violates the provisions of section 517.07 shall be confined in jail not more than 30 days, or fined not more than $250 or both. 
(2)  Any person who violates the provisions of section 517.07 by intentionally exposing himself or herself to another person and the exposure was done for the purpose of sexual gratification, shall be fined not more than $500, or confined in jail not more than 30 days, or both. For a second offense, the person shall be fined not more than $1,000 and confined in jail for 30 days. For a third or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(d)  Whoever violates section 517.10 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for a first offense. For a second or subsequent offense such person shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. 8-26-91) 
Editor's note- See Section 501.99 for General Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
ARTICLE 521 - LIQUOR CONTROL[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Public drunkenness, § 517.05. 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to regulate liquor sales, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(20); nonintoxicating beer, W. Va. Code, Art. 11-16; local option, W. Va. Code, Art. 60-5; search warrants, W. Va. Code, 60-6-18. 

521.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Alcoholic liquor" includes alcohol, beer, wine and spirits, and any liquid or solid capable of being used as a beverage, but shall not include nonintoxicating beer. 
(b)  "Beer" means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or substitute, and containing more alcohol than that of nonintoxicating beer. 
(c)  "Intoxicated" means having one's faculties impaired by alcohol or other drugs to the point where physical or mental control or both are markedly diminished. 
(d)  "Manufacturer" means any person engaged in the manufacture of any alcoholic liquor, including, among others, a distiller, rectifier, wine maker and brewer. 
(e)  "Nonintoxicating beer" means all cereal malt beverages or products of the brewing industry commonly referred to as beer, lager beer, ale and all other mixtures and preparations produced by the brewing industry, including malt coolers and containing at least 0.5% alcohol by volume, but not more than 4.2% of alcohol by weight, or 6% by volume, whichever is greater, all of which are hereby declared to be nonintoxicating and the word "liquor" as used in this article shall not be construed to include or embrace nonintoxicating beer nor any of the beverages, products, mixtures or preparation included within this definition. 
(f)  "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, corporation or voluntary association. 
(g)  "Public place" means any place, building or conveyance to which the public has or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement. "Public place" does not mean or include any of the above-named places or any portion or portions thereof which qualify and are licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 60 or the Codified Ordinances to sell alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises. 
(h)  "Sale" means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means, for a consideration, and includes all sales made by any principal, proprietor, agent or employee. 
(i)  "Selling" includes the solicitation or receipt of orders, possession for sale, and possession with intent to sell. 
(j)  "Wine" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural content of fruits or other agricultural products, containing sugar. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-1-5. 
521.02 - ARTICLE NOT APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN USES BY PHYSICIANS, DRUGGISTS AND OTHERS. 
    The provisions of this article shall not prevent: 
(a)  A physician from prescribing the use of alcoholic liquors when necessary for a bona fide patient; 
(b)  A druggist from selling, upon a prescription properly issued by a physician, alcoholic liquors for medicinal purposes; 
(c)  A physician, dentist or veterinarian, in the legitimate practice of his profession, from using and administering alcoholic liquors; 
(d)  Hospitals, sanitariums or that division of any institution which is regularly conducted as a hospital, dispensary or infirmary from using or administering alcoholic liquors to bona fide patients. Institutions and the divisions thereof provided in this section may carry a stock of alcoholic liquors sufficient for this purpose; 
(e)  Religious organizations from using wine for sacramental purposes. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-6-5. 
521.03 - PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY. 
    No person shall: 
(a)  Manufacture or sell in this city, without a license, any alcoholic liquor except as permitted by W. Va. Code, Ch. 60; 
(b)  Aid or abet in the manufacture or sale of alcoholic liquor without a license, except as permitted by W. Va. Code, Ch. 60; 
(c)  Sell without a license any alcoholic liquor other than provided by W. Va. Code, Art. 60-6; 
(d)  Adulterate any alcoholic liquor by the addition of any drug, methyl alcohol, crude, unrectified or impure form of ethyl alcohol, or any other foreign or deleterious substance or liquid; 
(e)  Refill, with alcoholic liquor, any bottle or other container in which alcoholic liquor has been sold at retail in this state; 
(f)  Advertise any alcoholic liquor in this state except in accordance with the rules and regulations of the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner; 
(g)  Distribute, deal in, process or use crowns, stamps or seals required under the authority of W. Va. Code, Ch. 60, except in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner. 
(h)  Manufacture, sell, give or offer to make a sale or gift of, transport or otherwise possess any alcoholic liquor or nonintoxicating beer except as permitted by W. Va. Code, Chs. 11 and 60. 
(i)  Whoever violates subsections (a) to (g) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor for a first offense. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-6-7. 
521.04 - UNLAWFUL SALE OR POSSESSION BY ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR LICENSEE. 
    No person licensed under W. Va. Code, Ch. 60 shall: 
(a)  Sell alcoholic liquors of a kind other than that which is permissible under W. Va. Code, Ch. 60; 
(b)  Sell beer to which wine, spirits or alcohol has been added; 
(c)  Sell wine to which other alcoholic spirits have been added, otherwise than as required in the manufacture thereof under regulations of the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner; 
(d)  (1)  Sell alcoholic liquors or nonintoxicating beer to a person who is: 
A.  Less than 21 years of age; 
B.  An habitual drunkard; 
C.  Intoxicated; 
D.  Addicted to the use of any controlled substance as defined by W. Va. Code, Ch. 60A; 
E.  Mentally incompetent. 
(2)  It shall be a defense to a violation of subsection (d)(1)A. hereof if the seller shows that the purchaser: 
A.  Produced written evidence which showed his or her age to be at least the required age for purchase and which bore a physical description of the person named on the writing which reasonably described the purchaser; or 
B.  Produced evidence of other facts that reasonably indicated at the time of sale that the purchaser was at least the required age. 
(e)  Keep on the premises covered by his license any alcoholic liquor other than that which is authorized by W. Va. Code, Ch. 60. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 60-3-22; 60-6-8. 
521.05 - UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS FROM STATE AGENCY. 
    No person shall: 
(a)  Being under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of purchasing alcoholic liquors from a state liquor store or an agency, misrepresent his or her age, or for such purpose present or offer any written evidence of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or illegally attempt to purchase alcoholic liquors from a state liquor store or an agency. 
(b)  Knowingly buy for, give to or furnish to anyone under the age of 21 years to whom they are not related by blood or marriage, any alcoholic liquors from whatever source. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-3-22a. 
521.06 - INTOXICATION OR DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES. 
(a)  Legislative findings. Council hereby finds that the service or consumption in public places of beverages containing alcohol is an activity that could endanger the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, that the municipality is empowered to regulate this activity; and that such activity shall be severely restricted in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  "Alcoholic liquor" includes alcohol, spirits and any liquid or solid capable of being used as a beverage, but shall not include beer or wine. 
(2)  "Beer" means all cereal malt beverages or products of the brewing industry commonly referred to as beer, lager beer, ale and all other mixtures and preparations produced by the brewing industry, including malt coolers and containing at least 0.5% alcohol by volume, but not more than 4.2% of alcohol by weight, or 6% by volume. 
(3)  "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, corporation or voluntary association. 
(4)  "Public place" means any place, building or conveyance to which the public has, or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement; provided, that "public place" shall not mean or include any of the above-named places or any portion or portions thereof which qualify and are licensed under the applicable provisions of the West Virginia Code to sell alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises. 
(5)  "Wine" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural content of fruits, or other agricultural products, containing sugar. 
(c)  No person shall: 
(1)  Appear in a public place in an intoxicated condition; 
(2)  Drink alcoholic liquor, wine or beer or have an open container of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in or on any public sidewalk, walkway, entranceway, street, lane or other public place; 
(3)  Drink alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in a motor vehicle on any highway, street, alley or in any public garage. No person shall possess an open container of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in a motor vehicle; 
(4)  Tender a drink of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer to another person in a public place; 
(5)  Possess alcoholic liquor in an amount in excess of one gallon, in containers not bearing stamps or seals of the state, without having first obtained written permission from the state; or 
(6)  Possess any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer which was manufactured or acquired in violation of the laws of the state. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) hereof, or any other section of this Code, the service and consumption of beer in a public place is strictly prohibited unless each of the requirements stated in subsections (d)(1) through (4) below are met: 
(1)  The person intending to serve beer or allow the consumption of beer on his or her premises has obtained a permit specifically for that purpose from the city. 
(2)  If the person obtaining the permit intends to serve beer, he or she shall have a valid nonintoxicating beer license from the state. 
(3)  The person shall have a valid business license from the city and shall not be delinquent in any taxes or service fees due the city. 
(4)  A permit application shall contain: 
A.  The applicant's name, address and other general information as the permit application shall require. 
B.  An accurate map or sketch showing all areas in which beer will be served and consumed. 
C.  A narration of the applicant's plan for enforcing the separation of drinking and nondrinking areas. The narration shall also include the applicant's plan for enforcing the observance of all applicable laws and to control the public consumption in order to avoid public intoxication and other nuisances. 
(e)  The application may be approved by the mayor. The application may be approved if, in his opinion, such approval would not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. Upon approval, the applicant shall pay a permit fee of $100. 
(f)  For any permit granted under subsection (d) above, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  The duration of the permit shall be limited by the mayor, and shall under no circumstances exceed 14 days. A permit may be renewed for one period of 14 days. 
(2)  The permit area shall not be located immediately adjacent to an established church or other place of worship that is at the time conducting a regularly scheduled worship service or other event. 
(3)  The applicant shall be a resident of the state and shall not have been convicted of any felony or crime of moral turpitude. 
(4)  The applicant shall assume all potential liability in writing and shall provide proof of insurance. As a condition to the issuance of a permit under this section, the applicant shall execute an agreement with the city which will hold the city harmless for any claim or suit arising out of the use of the permit. 
(5)  The city may add other conditions that are consistent with this article and the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(g)  Subsection (c) hereof notwithstanding, it shall be legal for adult persons to consume beer in public places if the beverage is consumed on the premises specified in an application filed with the city, and a permit has been granted pursuant to the application. 
(h)  Any applicant aggrieved by a decision on an application may appeal the decision to an appeal board created to determine such appeals. The board shall consist of five members with one to be a city employee appointed by the administration, one to be a member of council and appointed by the council chairperson and three residents of the city to be appointed by the administration with council approval. The term of each appointee shall be three years from the date of appointment. Persons serving on the board may be reappointed to two additional terms. 
    All appeals shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision. The board shall hear the aggrieved person's appeal and, within 14 days of such hearing, it shall either affirm or reverse the administration's decision. 
(i)  A police officer may transport any person arrested for a violation of section 521.06(c)(1) to a facility established for the treatment and recovery of substance abuse and there release a person upon the issuance of a citation to municipal court. 
(Ord. 10-15-91; Ord. of 6-8-15(1) ) 
521.07 - ACTS PROHIBITED BY NONINTOXICATING BEER LICENSEE. 
(a)  No licensee under W. Va. Code, Art. 11-16, his, her, its or their servants, agents or employees shall sell, give or dispense, and no individual shall drink or consume, in or on any licensed premises or in any rooms directly connected therewith, nonintoxicating beer or cooler on weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. in the Wayne County portion of the City of Huntington and 10:00 a.m. in the Cabell County portion of the City of Huntington on any Sunday, except in private clubs licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code. Art. 60-7, where the hours shall conform with the hours of sale of alcoholic liquors; 
(b)  No licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or employees shall sell, furnish or give any nonintoxicating beer as defined in this article to any person visibly or noticeably intoxicated, or to any person known to be insane or known to be a habitual drunkard: 
(c)  No licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or employees, shall sell, furnish or give any nonintoxicating beer as defined in this article to any person who is less than 21 years of age; 
(d)  No distributor shall sell or offer to sell, and no retailer shall purchase or receive, any nonintoxicating beer as defined in this article, except for cash; and no right of action shall exist to collect any claims for credit extended contrary to the provisions of this subsection. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a licensee from crediting to a purchaser the actual price charged for packages or containers returned by the original purchaser as a credit on any sale, or from refunding to any purchaser the amount paid or deposited for such containers when title is retained by the vendor; 
(e)  No brewer or distributor or brewpub or his, her, its or their agents, shall transport or deliver nonintoxicating beer as defined in this article to any retail licensee on Sunday; 
(f)  No brewer or distributor shall give, furnish, rent or sell any equipment, fixtures, signs or supplies directly or indirectly or through a subsidiary or affiliate to any licensee engaged in selling products of the brewing industry at retail, or offer any prize, premium, gift or other similar inducement, except advertising matter of nominal value, to either trade or consumer buyers; provided, that a distributor may offer, for sale or rent, tanks of carbonic gas. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a brewer from sponsoring any professional or amateur athletic event or from providing prizes or awards for participants and winners in any such events; provided, however that no such event shall be sponsored which permits actual participation by athletes or other persons who arc minors, unless specifically authorized by the nonintoxicating beer commissioner; 
(g)  No licensee shall permit in his premises any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice; 
(h)  No licensee except the holder of a license to operate a private club issued under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-7, or a holder of a license for a private wine restaurant issued under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8, shall possess a federal license, tax receipt or other permit entitling, authorizing or allowing such licensee to sell liquor or alcoholic drinks other than nonintoxicating beer; 
(i)  No licensee shall obstruct the view of the interior of his premises by enclosure, lattice, drapes or any means which would prevent plain view of the patrons occupying such premises. The interior of all licensed premises shall be adequately lighted at all times; provided, that provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the premises of a Class B retailer, the premises of a private club licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-7, or the premises of a private wine restaurant licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8; 
(j)  No licensee shall manufacture, import, sell, trade, barter, possess or acquiesce in the sale, possession or consumption of any alcoholic liquors on the premises covered by such license or on premises directly or indirectly used in connection therewith; provided, that the prohibition contained in this subsection with respect to the selling or possessing or to the acquiescence in the sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors shall not be applicable with respect to the holder of a license to operate a private club issued under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-7, nor shall the prohibition be applicable to a private wine restaurant licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8, insofar as such private wine restaurant is authorized to serve wine; 
(k)  No retail licensee shall sell or dispense nonintoxicating beer as defined in this article, purchased or acquired from any source other than a distributor, brewer or manufacturer licensed under the laws of this state; 
(l)  No licensee shall permit loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct of any kind upon his or her premises or permit the use of loud musical instruments if either or any of the same may disturb the peace and quietude of the community wherein such business is located; provided, that no licensee shall have in connection with his or her place of business any loudspeaker located on the outside of the licensed premises that broadcasts or carries music of any kind; 
(m)  No person whose license has been revoked, shall obtain employment with any retailer within the period of one year from the date of such revocation, and no retailer shall employ knowingly any such person within such time; 
(n)  No distributor shall sell, possess for sale, transport or distribute nonintoxicating beer except in the original container; 
(o)  No licensee shall knowingly permit any act to be done upon the licensed premises, the commission of which constitutes a crime under the laws of this state or municipality; 
(p)  No Class B retailer shall permit the consumption of nonintoxicating beer upon his licensed premises; 
(q)  No Class A licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or employees, or any licensee by or through such servants, agents or employees, shall allow or permit any person less than 18 years of age to loiter in or upon any licensed premises; except, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply where such person under the age of 18 years is in or upon such premises in the immediate company of his or her parent or parents, or where and while such person under the age of 18 years is in or upon such premises for the purpose of and actually making a lawful purchase of any items or commodities therein sold, or for the purchase of and actually receiving any lawful service therein rendered, including the consumption of any item of flood, drink or soft drink therein lawfully prepared and served or sold for consumption on such premises; 
(r)  No distributor shall sell, offer for sale, distribute or deliver any nonintoxicating beer outside the territory assigned to such distributor by the brewer or manufacturer of such nonintoxicating beer or sell, offer for sale, distribute or deliver any such nonintoxicating beer to any retailer whose principal place of business or licensed premises is within the assigned territory of another distributor of such nonintoxicating beer; provided, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit sales of convenience between distributors licensed in this state wherein one such distributor sells, transfers or delivers to another such distributor a particular brand or brands for sale at wholesale; 
(s)  No licensee or any agent, servant or employee of any such licensee shall knowingly violate any rule or regulation lawfully promulgated by the commissioner; 
(t)  Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any rule, regulation or order lawfully promulgated by the commissioner, or who makes any false statement concerning any material fact in submitting application for license or for a renewal of a license or in any hearing concerning the revocation thereof, or who commits any of the acts herein declared to be unlawful, shall be punished as provided in section 521.99; 
(u)  Nothing in this section nor any rule or regulation of the commissioner shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any licensee from employing any person who is at least 18 years of age to serve in such licensee's lawful employ, including the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer as defined in this article. With the prior approval of the commissioner, a licensee whose principal business is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of recreation activities, including, but not limited to, nationally franchised fast food outlets, family-oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores, discount stores, grocery stores and convenience stores, may employ persons who are less than 18 years of age but at least 16 years of age; provided, that such person's duties shall not include the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer or alcoholic liquors; provided, however, that the authorization to employ such persons under the age of 18 years shall be clearly indicated on the licensee's license. 
(Ord. of 12-26-17(1) ) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 11-16-18. 
521.08 - UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF NONINTOXICATING BEER. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, consume, sell, possess or serve nonintoxicating beer. 
    Nothing in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the alcohol beverage control commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any person who is at least 18 years of age from serving in the lawful employment of any licensee, which may include the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer. Further, nothing in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any person who is less than 18 but at least 16 years of age from being employed by a licensee whose principal business is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of recreational activities, including, but not limited to, nationally franchised fast food outlets, family-oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores, discount stores, grocery stores and convenience stores; provided, that such person shall not sell or deliver nonintoxicating beer. 
    Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a person who is at least 18 years of age from purchasing or possessing nonintoxicating beer when he or she is acting upon the request of or under the direction and control of any member of a state, federal or local law-enforcement agency or the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Administration while the agency is conducting an investigation or other activity relating to the enforcement of the alcohol beverage control statutes and the rules and regulations of the commissioner. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing nonintoxicating beer, shall misrepresent his or her age, or for such purpose present or offer any written evidence of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or shall illegally attempt to purchase nonintoxicating beer. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish nonintoxicating beer to anyone under the age of 21 years to whom they are not related by blood or marriage. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 11-16-19. 
521.09 - ACTS PROHIBITED BY PRIVATE CLUB LICENSEE. 
(a)  No person licensed under W. Va. Code, Art. 60-7, or his agent, employee or member thereof, on such licensee's premises shall: 
(1)  Sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquors other than from the original package or container; 
(2)  Authorize or permit any disturbance of the peace; obscene, lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice; gambling or any slot machine, multiple coin console machine, multiple coin console slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine; 
(3)  Sell, give away or permit the sale of, gift to or the procurement of any nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors for or to, or permit the consumption of nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors on the licensee's premises, by any person less than 21 years of age; 
(4)  Sell, give away, or permit the sale of, gift to or the procurement of any nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors, for or to any person known to be deemed legally incompetent, or for or to any person who is physically incapacitated due to consumption of nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquor or the use of drugs; 
(5)  Sell, give or dispense nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors in or on any licensed premises or in any rooms directly connected therewith, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. in the Wayne County portion of the City of Huntington and 10:00 a.m. in the Cabell County portion of the City of Huntington on Sunday; 
(6)  Permit the consumption by, or serve to, on the licensed premises any nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors, covered by this article, to any person who is less than 21 years of age; 
(7)  With the intent to defraud, alter, change or misrepresent the quality, quantity or brand name of any alcoholic liquor; 
(8)  Sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor to any person who is not a duly elected or approved dues paying member in good standing of the private club or a guest of such member; 
(9)  Sell, offer for sale, give away, facilitate the use of or allow the use of carbon dioxide, cyclopropane, ethylene, helium or nitrous oxide for purposes of human consumption except as authorized by the commissioner; 
(10)  A.  Employ any person who is less than 18 years of age in a position where the primary responsibility for such employment is to sell, furnish or give nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors to any person; 
B.  Employ any person who is between the ages of 18 and 21 who is not directly supervised by a person aged 21 or over in a position where the primary responsibility for such employment is to sell, furnish or give nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors to any person; or 
(11)  Violate any reasonable rule or regulation of the alcohol beverage control commissioner. 
(b)  No licensee shall advertise in any news media or other means, outside of the licensee's premises, the fact that alcoholic liquors may be purchased thereat. 
(Ord. of 12-26-17(1) ) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-7-12. 
521.10 - UNLAWFUL PURCHASE FROM PRIVATE CLUB. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt to purchase any nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors from a licensee or consume any nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors purchased from a private club licensee or possess any nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors purchased from a licensee. Provided, that nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a person who is at least 18 years of age from purchasing or possessing nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors when he or she is acting upon the request of or under the direction and control of any member of a state, federal or local law-enforcement agency or the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Administration while the agency is conducting an investigation or other activity relating to the enforcement of the alcohol beverage control statutes and the rules and regulations of the commissioner. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of purchasing nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors from a private club licensee, misrepresent his or her age, or for such purpose present or offer any written evidence of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or illegally attempt to purchase nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors from a licensee. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish to anyone under the age of 21 years any nonintoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors purchased from a licensee. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-7-12a. 
521.11 - ACTS PROHIBITED BY WINE DEALERS. 
    It shall be unlawful: 
(a)  For a supplier or distributor to sell or deliver wine purchased or acquired from any source other than a person registered under the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 60-8-6, or for a retailer to sell or deliver wine purchased or acquired from any source other than a licensed distributor or a farm winery as defined in W. Va. Code, § 60-1-5a; 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for by the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8, for a licensee under W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8 to acquire, transport, possess for sale, or sell wine other than in the original package; 
(c)  For a licensee, his or her servants, agents or employees to sell, furnish or give wine to any person less than 21 years of age or to a mental incompetent or person who is physically incapacitated due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor or the use of drugs; provided that the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 60-3A-25a shall apply to sales of wine; 
(d)  For a licensee to permit a person who is less than 18 years of age to sell, furnish or give wine to any person; 
(e)  For a supplier or distributor to sell or deliver any brand of wine purchased or acquired from any source other than the primary source of supply of the wine which granted the distributor the right to sell such brand at wholesale. For the purposes of this article, "primary source of supply" means the vintner of the wine, the importer of a foreign wine who imports the wine into the United States, the owner of a wine at the time it becomes a marketable product, the bottler of a wine, or an agent specifically authorized by any of the above enumerated persons to make a sale of the wine to a West Virginia distributor; provided, that no retailer shall sell or deliver wine purchased or acquired from any source other than a distributor or farm winery licensed as such in this state; provided, however, that nothing herein is considered to prohibit sales of convenience between distributors licensed in this state wherein one such distributor sells, transfers or delivers to another such distributor a particular brand or brands for sale at wholesale of which brand or brands such other distributor has been authorized by a licensed supplier to distribute. The alcohol beverage commissioner shall promulgate rules necessary to carry out the provision of this subsection; 
(f)  For a person to violate any reasonable rule promulgated by the alcohol beverage control commissioner under W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8; 
(g)  Nothing in this article, nor any rule or regulation of the commissioner, shall prevent or be considered to prohibit any licensee from employing any person who is at least 18 years of age to serve in any licensee's lawful employment, including the sale or delivery of wine under the provisions of this article. With the prior approval of the commissioner a licensee whose principal business is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of recreational activities, including, but not limited to, nationally franchised fast food outlets, family oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores, discount stores, grocery stores, and convenience stores, may employ persons who are less than 18 years of age but at least 16 years of age; provided, that such person's duties may not include the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer or alcoholic liquors; provided, however, that the authorization to employ such persons, under the age of 18 years shall be clearly indicated on the licensee's license. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-8-20. 
521.12 - UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF WINE. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, consume, sell, possess or serve wine or other alcoholic liquor. 
    Nothing in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the alcohol beverage control commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any person who is at least 18 years of age from serving in the lawful employment of any licensee, which may include the sale or delivery of wine. Further, nothing in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any person who is less than 18 but at least 16 years of age from being employed by a licensee whose principal business is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of recreational activities, including, but not limited to, nationally franchised fast food outlets, family-oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores, discount stores, grocery stores and convenience stores; provided, that such person shall not sell or deliver wine or alcoholic liquor. 
    Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a person who is at least 18 years of age from purchasing or possessing wine or alcoholic liquor when he or she is acting upon the request of or under the direction and control of any member of a state, federal or local law-enforcement agency or the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Administration while the agency is conducting an investigation or other activity relating to the enforcement of the alcohol beverage control statutes and the rules and regulations of the commissioner. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of purchasing wine or other alcoholic liquors from a licensee, shall misrepresent his or her age, or for such purpose present or offer any written evidence of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or illegally attempt to purchase wine or other alcoholic liquors. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish wine or other alcoholic liquors from any source to anyone under the age of 21 years to whom they are not related by blood or marriage. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-8-20a. 
521.13 - UNLAWFUL PURCHASE FROM RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSEE. 
(a)  (1)  No person who is 18 or over but under the age of 21 years shall purchase, consume, sell, serve or possess alcoholic liquor. Any person who is under 18 years who purchases, consumes, sells, serves or possesses alcoholic liquor is guilty of a status offense, as that term is defined in W. Va. Code, § 49-1-4, and, upon adjudication therefor, shall be referred to the Department of Health and Human Resources for services, as provided in W. Va. Code, § 49-5-11. 
(2)  Nothing is this section, nor any rule or regulation of the alcohol beverage control commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any person who is at least 18 years of age from serving in the lawful employment of a licensee which includes the sale and serving of alcoholic liquor. 
(3)  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a person who is at least 18 years of age from purchasing or possessing alcoholic liquor when he or she is acting upon the request of or under the direction and control of any member of a state, federal or local law-enforcement agency or the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Administration while the agency is conducting an investigation or other activity relating to the enforcement of the alcohol beverage control statutes and the rules and regulations of the commissioner. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years shall, for the purpose of purchasing liquor from a retail licensee, misrepresent his or her age, or for such purpose present or offer any written evidence of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or illegally attempt to purchase liquor from a retail licensee. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish to anyone under the age of 21 to whom he or she is not related by blood or marriage any liquor from whatever source. 
(d)  No person while on the premises of a retail outlet shall consume liquor or break the seal on any package or bottle of liquor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 60-3A-24. 
521.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates section 521.05(a), 521.08(b), 521.12(b) or 521.13(b) shall be fined not more than $50, or imprisoned for not more than 72 hours, or both, or, in lieu of such fine and imprisonment, may, for the first offense, be placed on probation for not more than one year. 
(b)  Whoever violates section 521.05(b), 521.08(c), 521.12(c) or 521.13(d) shall be fined not more than $100, or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of section 521.06 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Violators shall be barred from holding a permit under this article for a period of three years. 
(d)  Whoever violates section 521.08(a), 521.12(a) or 521.13(a) shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 72 hours, or both, or in lieu thereof, may, for the first offense, be placed on probation for a period not to exceed one year. 
(e)  Whoever violates section 521.09 shall be fined not less than $500 or more than $1,000, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(f)  Whoever violates section 521.10(a) or (b) shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition may, for the first offense be placed on probation for a period not to exceed one year. 
(g)  Whoever violates section 521.10(c) shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than ten days, or both. 
(Ord. 6-25-90) 
Editor's note- See section 501.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 11-16-19, 60-3-22a, 60-3A-24, 60-7-12, 60-7-12a, 60-8-20a. 
ARTICLE 525 - MINORS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; delinquent child defined, W. Va. Code, § 49-1-4; jurisdiction of municipal court, W. Va. Code, § 49-5-1(b); contributing to delinquency of minor, W. Va. Code, § 49-7-7 et seq. 

525.01 - CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OR NEGLECT OF MINOR. 
    No person shall by any act or omission contribute to, encourage or tend to cause the delinquency or neglect of any child, including, but not limited to, aiding or encouraging any such child to habitually or continually refuse to respond, without just cause, to the lawful supervision of such child's parent, guardian or custodian or to be habitually absent from school without just cause. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 49-7-7. 
525.02 - CRUELTY TO CHILDREN. 
    No person shall cruelly ill treat, abuse or inflict unnecessary cruel punishment upon, any infant or minor child, and no person, having the care, custody or control of any minor child, shall willfully abandon or neglect the minor child. 
    In addition to any penalty provided under this section and any restitution which may be ordered by the court, the court may order any person convicted under the provisions of this section to pay all or any portion of the cost of medical, psychological or psychiatric treatment of the victim, the need for which results from the act or acts for which the person is convicted, whether or not the victim is considered to have sustained bodily injury. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-24. 
525.03 - PARENTAL LIABILITY FOR ACTS OF CHILDREN. 
    The custodial parent or parents of any minor child shall be personally liable in an amount not to exceed that specified in W. Va. Code, § 55-7A-2 for damages which are the proximate result of any one or a combination of the following acts of the minor child: 
(a)  The malicious and willful injury to the person of another; or 
(b)  The malicious and willful injury or damage to the property of another, whether the property be real, personal, or mixed; or 
(c)  The malicious and willful setting fire to a forest or wooded area belonging to another; or 
(d)  The willful taking, stealing and carrying away of the property of another, with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of possession. 
    For purposes of this section, "custodial parent or parents" means the parent or parents with whom the minor child is living, or a divorced or separated parent who does not have legal custody but who is exercising supervisory control over the minor child at the time of the minor child's act. 
    Persons entitled to recover damages under this section shall include, but are not limited to, the state, any municipal corporation, county commission and board of education, or other political subdivision of this state or any person or organization of any kind or character. The action may be brought in magistrate or another court of competent jurisdiction. Recovery hereunder shall be limited to the actual damages, based upon direct out-of-pocket loss, taxable court costs, and interest from date of judgment. The right of action and remedy granted herein shall be in addition to and not exclusive of any rights of action and remedies therefor against a parent or parents for the tortious acts of his or their children heretofore existing under the provisions of any law, statutory or otherwise, or now so existing independently of the provisions of this section. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 55-7A-2. 
525.04 - ABANDONED AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS. 
    No person shall discard, abandon, store or leave, or cause to be discarded, abandoned, stored or left, any icebox, refrigerator or other similar container in any place, whether in or outside a building, which is accessible to children, without first completely removing, disconnecting, disabling or causing the removal, disconnection or disabling of all airtight doors, snap-locks, and other devices which prevent any such icebox, refrigerator or container from being opened, operated or released from the inside thereof; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any such icebox, refrigerator or container which is possessed, stored or kept in a reasonably safe place and manner for purposes of commerce or other use thereof. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-39) 
525.05 - MINORS' CURFEW. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect juveniles from victimization and exposure to criminal activity by establishing a curfew for juveniles under the age of 18 years in the city. This section is intended to reinforce and promote the role of the parent in raising and guiding children and promote the health, safety and welfare of both juveniles and adults by creating an environment offering better protection and security for all concerned. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Direct route" means the shortest reasonable path of travel or a commonly used route to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
(2)  "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or death. This term also shall include any action that is reasonably necessary in order to respond to the medical needs of a family member of the juvenile regardless of whether the juvenile's action is taken in order to prevent death or serious bodily injury. 
(3)  "Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public has access or is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(4)  "Guardian" means a person who is court-appointed to be the guardian of a juvenile, 
(5)  "Juvenile" means any person under the age of 18 years of age. 
(6)  "Owner/operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment, including the employees, members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
(7)  "Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent or stepparent of another person, or a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order. 
(8)  "Permit" means to knowingly fail to prevent, due to lack of reasonable efforts, to supervise and control. 
(9)  "Public place" means any place that is generally open to and used by the public or a substantial group of the public, whether it is publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, highways, alley's rights-of-way, public vehicular areas and parking lots, transportation facilities, theaters, restaurants, shops, bowling alleys, schools and school grounds, places of business and amusement, playgrounds, parks, and similar areas that are open to or accessible to the public. 
(10)  "Remain" means to linger or stay in a public place, or to fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer, or to fail to leave the premises of an establishment when requested to do so by the owner/operator or an employee of the premises. 
(11)  "Restricted hours" means the time of night referred to in this section is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, generally observed by the public in the city. The term shall mean: 
A.  11:01 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
B.  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
(c)  Offenses. Except as provided by subsection (d) of this section, the following offenses constitute a violation of this section: 
(1)  A juvenile commits an offense by being present in or remaining in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during the restricted hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a juvenile commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by insufficient control, allows the juvenile to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during restricted hours. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that a parent or guardian should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in his legal custody. This requirement is intended to hold a neglectful or careless parent or guardian up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent or guardian was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile. 
(3)  The owner, operator or an employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of an establishment during the restricted hours. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that an operator or employer should reasonably be expected to have concerning the patrons of an establishment. The standard for "knowingly" shall be applied through an objective test: whether a reasonable person in the operator's or employee's position should have known that the patron was a juvenile in violation of this section. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person 18 years or older to aid and abet a juvenile in the violation of subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(5)  It shall be a violation of this section for a parent or guardian to refuse to take custody during the restricted hours of a juvenile for whom the parent or guardian is responsible. 
(d)  Exceptions. A juvenile who in a public place or establishment during the restricted hours shall not be in violation of this section if the juvenile is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(2)  Accompanied by an adult 18 years of age or older authorized by the parent or guardian of such juvenile to take the parent's or guardian's place in accompanying the juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within the specified area. 
(3)  On an errand, using a direct route, at the direction of the juvenile's parent or guardian until the hour of 12:30 a.m. 
(4)  In a motor vehicle with parental consent engaged in the interstate travel through the city or originating or terminating in the city. 
(5)  Traveling in a motor vehicle with a parent or guardian, or traveling in a motor vehicle with an adult 18 years of age or older authorized by the parent or guardian of such juvenile to take the parent's or guardian's place in accompanying the juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(6)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity or using a direct route to or from a place of employment. 
(7)  Reacting or responding to an emergency. 
(8)  Attending or traveling to or from, by direct route, an official school, religious or recreational activity that is supervised by adults and sponsored by a public or private school, the city or other governmental entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity that accepts responsibilities for the juvenile. 
(9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. 
(10)  Married or emancipated. 
(e)  Defense. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (c)(3) of this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during the restricted hours and refused to leave. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or establishment during the restricted hours. 
(2)  The officer shall not prepare a juvenile arrest report, issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no exceptions or defense in subsection (d) or (e) of this section is present. 
(g)  Penalties. 
(1)  A juvenile who violates any provision of this section is subject to being adjudicated delinquent. The municipal court may in its discretion impose any dispositional alternatives that are provided by W. Va. Code § 49-5-2. 
(2)  Any person other than a juvenile who is found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable of a fine no more than $100 and/or up to 48 hours in jail. 
(Ord. 9-26-05) 
525.06 - TOBACCO USAGE RESTRICTIONS. 
(a)  Sale or gift of tobacco to persons under 18. No person or business entity may sell, give or furnish; or cause to be sold, given or furnished, to any person under the age of 18 years: 
(1)  Any cigarette, cigarette paper or any other paper prepared, manufactured or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco or tobacco product; or 
(2)  Any cigar, pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product in any form. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with section 525.99 and the Municipal Court shall have concurrent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Possession of tobacco or tobacco products by persons under the age of eighteen years; penalty. No person under the age of 18 years shall have on or about his or her person or premises for use, any cigarette, cigarette paper or any other paper prepared, manufactured or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco products, in any form; or, any pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall incur any penalty deemed appropriate by the municipal court as outlined in section 525.99. 
(Ord. 6-11-01) 
525.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates section 525.04 shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(b)  Any custodian who violates the provisions of section 525.05 shall be fined not less than $25 and not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(c)  Alternative punishment. The municipal judge, upon his or her discretion, may require a minor to participate in supervised alternative punishment which may include but is not limited to any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service with an appropriate non-profit organization, state, county or city department, school board, etc.; 
(2)  Restriction to home; 
(3)  Essays or research papers; 
(4)  Participate in a wellness program; 
(5)  Attend counseling; 
(6)  Participate in community related events. 
    The municipal judge shall appoint a body specific to supervise the minor while he or she is on alternative punishment. Alternative punishment shall be referred to as days, hours or words required for completion and may require labor. If an essay or research paper is required by the municipal judge, he shall have sole discretion as to its adequacy in length, content and quintessential use of language and may require as many re-writes as he deems necessary to help the minor understand proper behavior. 
(Ord. 6-11-01) 
Editor's note- See section 501.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
ARTICLE 527 - NOISE CONTROL[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Disturbing the peace, Art. 509. 

527.01 - DECLARATION OF POLICY. 
    The City of Huntington finding that excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social well being of the citizens of the City of Huntington as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety, hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater and more effective regulation of excessive sounds through the adoption of article 527, noise control. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "City" means the City of Huntington. 
(b)  "Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition, or similar action. 
(c)  "Continuous sound" means and denotes a sound the intensity of which remains essentially constant during a given period of time. Continuous sound shall be measured by the slow response setting of sound level meter. 
(d)  "DBA (Decible-A-Weighted)" means sound pressure level as measured on the "A" scale of sound level meter manufactured in accordance with the specifications of the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI), Type 2, ANSI-S1.4 (1971), calibrated within two hours of being used for measurement. Unless otherwise noted, measurements shall be made in the slow response mode of the meter. 
(e)  "A-weighted sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
(f)  "Decibel (dB)" means a unit of sound pressure, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base of 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
(g)  "Daytime" denotes the local time of day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and local legal holidays. 
(h)  "Emergency" means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
(i)  "Emergency signal device" means any audible warning device, such as a gong, whistle or siren or any air horn or any similar device. 
(j)  "Emergency work" means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
(k)  "Impulsive sound" means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms. 
(l)  "Mobile source" means any moving sound source on a public right-of-way. 
(m)  "Motor vehicle" means as defined in the Traffic Regulation Code of the State of West Virginia, or any vehicles which are propelled or drawn by mechanical equipment, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, mopeds, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles or racing vehicles. 
(n)  "Motorcycle" means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a trailer. 
(o)  "All-terrain vehicle (ATV)" means any motor vehicle designed for off highway use and designed for operator use only with no passengers, having a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and handlebars for steering control. 
(p)  "Nighttime" means those hours excluded from the definition of "daytime." 
(q)  "Noise" means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological effect on humans. 
(r)  "Noise disturbance" means any sound which: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property; or 
(4)  Exceeds the applicable maximum permissible sound levels as they appear in the table in section 527.05 of this article. 
(s)  "Noise sensitive zone" means any area designed for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet and shall include schools and churches while the same are in use, any hospital and any nursing home; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed on the exterior realty of any such school, church, hospital or nursing home which clearly notifies a member of the general public of its use. 
(t)  "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or any legal successor, representative or agent of the foregoing. 
(u)  "Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley, sidewalk or public space which has been dedicated for use by the general public and the dedication of which has been accepted by the appropriate governmental entity. 
(v)  "Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but it does not include intra-building real property division. 
(w)  "Small power equipment" means any motorized or engine powered device, including but not limited to lawn mowers, lawn and garden tools, riding lawn tractors and power saws, excluding other motor vehicles. 
(x)  "Sound" means vibratory disturbance (including an oscillation) in the pressure and/or density of a liquid or gas in the particular displacement of a solid or liquid. Such disturbance takes place at a rate between approximately 20 and 20,000 hertz (cycles per second); and the physiological perception of such vibration of displacement. 
(y)  "Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Sound amplifying equipment as used herein shall not be construed as including standard automobile radio when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(z)  "Sound levels" means that which is measured with the "A" weighting network on a sound level meter unless otherwise specified. 
(aa)  "Sound level meter" means the instrument, meeting the requirements of ANSI sl 4-1971 Type II rating, used for making sound level measurements. 
(bb)  "Sound pressure" means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
(cc)  "Sound pressure level" means the intensity in decibels (dB) of a sound. 
(dd)  "Stationary source" means any sound source operating or occurring on any public or private property, not including a public right-of-way. 
(ee)  "Weekday" means any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday. 
(ff)  "Zoning district" means and refers to the scheme of land use classification contained in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.03 - LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.04 - CERTAIN LOUD AND DISTURBING NOISES ENUMERATED. 
    The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of section 527.03, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(a)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(b)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(c)  Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snowblower, small power equipment, or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(d)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(e)  Engine-repair and testing. It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, rebuild or test any engine so as to create a noise disturbance. 
(f)  Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of any exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(g)  Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(h)  Loudspeaker/public address system. Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device (i) such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residentially zoned area or within a noise sensitive zone; or (ii) on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(i)  Radios, musical instruments and similar devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound. 
(1)  Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across the residentially zoned area or within a noise sensitive zone; 
(2)  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance at 50 feet from such device when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space, or in a boat on public waters; or 
(3)  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated by any passenger on a common carrier. 
(j)  Yelling and shouting. Yelling, shouting, whistling, hooting or generally creating a racket on public right-of-ways or public spaces between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. the following day so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any business or residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.05 - MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL OF NOISE. 
(a)  Noise prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise in excess of the noise levels set forth herein unless such noise be reasonably necessary to the preservation of life, health, safety or property. 
(b)  Measurement and control. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a sound from a stationary source which exceeds any sound level as set forth in the applicable column in the following table titled "Maximum Permissible Sound Levels" when measured at any point within any other property affected by the sound. Measurement shall be made by a duly authorized individual who is knowledgeable in the proper use of the measurement equipment. Measurement shall be made in slow response. A-weighting, except in the case of impulsive sound which shall be measured with an impulsive sound level meter, ANSI SI. 4-1971. Octave band measurements, where noted, shall be made with an octave band analyzer. 
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS FROM STATIONARY SOURCES 
ZONING DISTRICT TIME OF DAY CONTINUOUS SOUND (DBA) IMPULSIVE SOUND (DBA) ALL RESIDENTIAL ALL 60 80 ALL BUSINESS ALL 65 90 ALL INDUSTRIAL ALL See Article 1333 See Article 1333  
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.06 - APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply in using any of the sound equipment mentioned and described herein where such equipment is being used for civil defense or in the event of disaster or other emergency, or is being used by any governmental agency at any public meeting. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.07 - EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL WAIVERS. 
(a)  Exceptions. The following uses of any activity shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
(1)  Noise of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized vehicle, when responding to an emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from the provisions of municipal services. 
(4)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and/or for which a waiver has been granted by the city. 
(5)  The unamplified human voice (except as specified in section 527.04(j)). 
(6)  Parades and public gatherings for which a special waiver has been issued. 
(7)  Bells, chimes, carillons which being used for religious purposes or in conjunction with religious services, or for the national celebrations or public holidays, and those bells, chimes, carillons that are presently installed, and in use, for any purpose. 
(b)  Exemptions for time to comply. Upon good cause shown by the owner or responsible party for any noise source, the mayor shall have the power to grant an exemption from the requirement of this ordinance in order to allow sufficient time for installation of needed control equipment, facilities, or modification to achieve compliance not to exceed ten days, provided that such exemption may be renewed as necessary, but be filed in writing with the mayor. 
(c)  Use exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
(1)  Lawn maintenance equipment when it is functional within manufacturers specifications and with all mufflers and noise reducing equipment in use and in properly operating condition between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from the activities such as those planned by day care centers, schools, governmental or community groups. 
(3)  Amplified announcements, electronically amplified announcements at athletic or special events from 8:00 a.m. to 12:01 a.m. 
(d)  Special waivers. 
(1)  The mayor shall have the authority, consistent with this ordinance, to grant special waivers, provided that no live bands shall be allowed in single family residential areas. 
(2)  Any person seeking a special waiver pursuant to this ordinance shall file a written application with the mayor. The written application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the special waiver is sought into compliance with the ordinance would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or for another purpose. 
(3)  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the mayor shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community and other person of not granting the special waiver against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact of granting the special waiver. 
(4)  Special waivers shall be granted by notice to the applicant and may include all necessary conditions, including time limits on the permitted activity. The special waiver shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicants. Noncompliance with any condition of the special waiver shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this ordinance regulating the source of sounds or activity for which the special waiver was granted. 
(5)  The mayor may issue guidelines defining the procedures to be followed in applying for special waivers and the criteria in declaring whether to grant a special waiver. 
(e)  Social gatherings, parties and other public events. 
(1)  Any person who is planning a social gathering, party or other public event at which it is anticipated that the noise levels will exceed those set forth in section 527.05 herein may file a written application with the mayor for a special waiver from said noise levels. 
(2)  Any person seeking such special waiver shall indicate in his or her application to the mayor the specific reason why he or she will not be able to meet the established noise levels. The applicant shall also include a written statement that he or she has personally contacted all residents of properties within 400 feet of the property in question and none oppose the special waiver being requested. The applicant will also be required to notify and receive permission from applicant's landlord, if the property in question is a rental property. 
(3)  Should the applicant be granted a special waiver pursuant to this subsection, it will be subject to the condition that any such special waiver will expire at 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday evenings and midnight on Friday and Saturday evenings. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.08 - CONFLICTS. 
    In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with any other provision of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, as revised, existing on the effective date of this article, the provision which establishes the more stringent standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail; and such other provisions are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this article. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.09 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Should any of the articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid, at the valid judgment or decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the article in its entirety or any of the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
527.10 - LIMITATIONS ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC HAULERS CONDUCTING DUMPSTER EMPTYING OPERATIONS. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the article, it is recognized that the emptying of dumpsters by private and/or public haulers within the city limits is a necessary and vital operation to maintaining the public health as well as sanitary conditions in the city. Such operations should and must be permitted despite the fact that they clearly violate the noise ordinance and standards for noise control. Nevertheless, it is also recognized that it is unreasonable for these operations to be conducted in residential areas at times when there is an expectation of quiet and minimal disturbance. Therefore, it is appropriate to enact legislation limiting the time periods that such operations may be permitted. 
(b)  The prohibitions set forth in this ordinance apply to all areas of the city except those zoned "C-2 Highway Commercial District" and "I-1 General Industrial District". 
(c)  The operations regulated herein shall include any operation by any private or public hauler which shall consist of emptying garbage, trash and rubbish dumpsters or other container larger than 100 gallons by mechanical means and the use of a compactor that creates noise that would otherwise violate the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The operations described herein shall not be conducted during the time period of 9:00 p.m. on any day through the next day at 7:00 a.m. 
(e)  There shall be no exceptions or exemption to this prohibition unless such exception or exemption is granted by the director of public works upon a clear and convincing showing of necessity. Such exception or exemption shall be limited temporally, with the length of said exception or exemption being limited solely to the period that the director finds it to be clearly necessary. 
(Ord. of 5- 8-17(1) ) 
527.99 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES; VIOLATIONS DEEMED NUISANCES. 
(a)  Any person who violates any portion of this article shall receive a verbal order to cease or abate the noise immediately or within a reasonable time period, except that after 8:00 p.m and until 8:00 a.m. any person designated to enforce this ordinance need not issue a verbal order to cease or abate the noise before charging any person with a violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  If the order to cease or abate the noise is not complied with, or is complied with and then violated again within 60 days, the person or persons responsible for the noise under section 527.03 shall be charged with a violation of this ordinance and be subject to a fine of not more than $500. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(d)  As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this article, which operation or maintenance cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 12-27-99) 
ARTICLE 529 - OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Harassing telephone calls, § 517.06; intoxication or drinking in public places, § 521.05. 
State Law reference- Uniform Controlled Substances Act, W. Va. Code, Ch. 60A; state law provisions, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-2. 

529.01 - ASSAULT AND BATTERY. 
(a)  Assault. No person shall unlawfully attempt to commit a violent injury to the person of another or unlawfully commit an act which places another in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
(b)  Battery. No person shall unlawfully or intentionally make physical contact of an insulting, or provoking, offensive or harmful nature with the person of another or unlawfully and intentionally cause physical harm to another person. A person so acting is guilty of battery even though the actor may not have caused physical harm or intended to cause physical harm if the contact was unwanted and without the permission of the victim. In order for physical contact to rise to the level of battery, there must be a showing that there was a reasonable apprehension on the part of the victim of physical harm. 
(c)  Every weapon of whatever kind or description used in violation of this section and which is lawfully seized by police officers shall be brought before the municipal court and held for use as evidence and after being used as evidence shall be thereafter disposed of in accordance with the order of the municipal court. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall become effective upon adoption by council and approval by the mayor, and shall remain in full force and effect until further ordinance of council. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-7; 8-9-82; Ord. of 5-11-15(1) ) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-2-9. 
529.02 - ASSAULT AND BATTERY ON SCHOOL EMPLOYEES. 
(a)  No person shall commit an assault: 
(1)  By unlawfully attempting to commit a violent injury to the person of a school employee while he or she is engaged in the performance of his or her duties, is commuting to or from his or her place of employment or if the motive for the assault is retaliation for some action taken by the employee to supervise or discipline one or more pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 18A-5-1 or 18A-5-1a; or 
(2)  By unlawfully committing an act which places a school employee in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury while the employee is engaged in the performance of his or her duties, is commuting to or from his or her place of employment or if the motive for the assault is retaliation for some action taken by the employee to supervise or discipline one or more pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 18A-5-1 or 18A-5-1a. 
(b)  No person shall commit a battery: 
(1)  By unlawfully and intentionally making physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with the person of a school employee while he or she is engaged in the performance of his or her duties, is commuting to or from his or her place of employment or if the motive for the battery is retaliation for some action taken by the employee to supervise or discipline one or more pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 18A-5-1 or 18A-5-1a; or 
(2)  By unlawfully and intentionally causing physical harm to a school employee while he or she is engaged in the performance of his or her duties, is commuting to or from his or her place of employment or if the motive for the battery is retaliation for some action taken by the employee to supervise or discipline one or more pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 18A-5-1 or 18A-5-1a. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "school employee" means a person employed by a county board of education whether employed on a regular full-time basis, an hourly basis or otherwise. For the purposes of this section, a "school employee" includes a student teacher. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-2-15. 
529.03 - INTOXICATING SUBSTANCES; PROHIBITED ACTS. 
I.  Illegal possession of controlled substances; prohibited acts. 
(a)  Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess a controlled substance, specifically a drug, substance, or immediate precursor in schedules I through V as set forth in W. Va. Code, §§ 60A-2-204, 60A-2-206, 60A-2-208, 60A-2-210 and 60A-2-212 (W. Va. Code § 60A-2-204 et seq.), unless the substances was obtained directly from or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of his professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined up to $500 and/or sentenced to 30 days in jail; however, notwithstanding any other provision of this division to the contrary, any first offense for possession of 15 grams or less of marijuana shall be disposed of under section II, subsection (e) below. 
Further, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly inhale, inject or ingest in any fashion any natural, artificial or pharmaceutical substance, including model glue, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, the fumes of which when inhaled by a human being cause a condition of, induce or produce symptoms of intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction or dullness of the senses of the nervous system, or a distortion or disturbance of the audio, visual or mental process. 
(b)  Conditional discharge for first offense of possession. 
(1)  Whenever any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense under this Code or under any state statute of the United State relating to narcotic drugs, marijuana, or stimulants, depressant or hallucinogenic drugs pleads guilty to or is found guilty of possession of a controlled substance under this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place such persons on probation upon terms and conditions. Upon violation of a term or condition, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, and proceed as otherwise provided. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against him. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for the purpose of this section of for purpose of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime, including the additional penalties imposed for second or subsequent convictions. The effect of such dismissal and discharge shall be to restore such person in contemplation of law to the status he occupied prior to such arrest and trial. No person as to whom such dismissal and discharge have been effected shall be thereafter held to be guilty of perjury, false swearing or otherwise giving a false statement by reason of his failure to disclose or acknowledge such arrest or trial in response to any inquiry made of him for any purpose. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any person. 
(2)  After a period of not less then six months which shall begin to run immediately upon the expiration of a term of probation imposed upon any person under this division, such person may apply to the court for an order to expunge from all official records all recordings of his arrest, trial and conviction pursuant to this section. 
II.  Conditional discharge for first offense possession; possession of 15 grams or less of marijuana; expungement of records; subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Whenever any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense under this chapter or under any statute of the United States or of any state relating to narcotic drugs, marijuana, or stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic drugs, pleads guilty to or is found guilty under this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place him or her on probation upon terms and conditions which may include, but is not limited to, participation in a substance abuse treatment program. Upon violation of a term or condition, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against him or her. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. The effect of the dismissal and discharge shall be to restore the person in contemplation of law to the status he or she occupied prior to arrest and trial. No person as to whom a dismissal and discharge have been effected shall be thereafter held to be guilty of perjury, false swearing, or otherwise giving a false statement by reason of his or her failure to disclose or acknowledge his or her arrest or trial in response to any inquiry made of him or her for any purpose. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any person. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, any first offense for possession of marijuana shall be disposed of as described in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  After a period of not less than six months which shall begin to run immediately upon the expiration of a term of probation imposed upon any person under this chapter, the person may apply to the court for an order to expunge from all official records all recordations of his or her arrest, trial, and conviction, pursuant to this section. If the court determines after a hearing that the person during the period of his or probation and during the period of time prior to his or her application to the court under this section has not been guilty of any serious or repeated violation of the conditions of his or her probation, it shall order the expungement. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, any person prosecuted pursuant to the provisions of this article whose case is disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be liable for any court costs assessable against a person convicted of a violation of this section. Payment of such costs may be made a condition of probation. 
(e)  Any person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under this section may be fined up to $500 and/or sentenced to 30 days in jail. For purposes of this section an offense is considered a second or subsequent offense if, prior to his conviction of the offense, the offender has at any time been convicted under this Code or under any state statute or statute of the United States or of any state relating to narcotic drugs, marijuana, depressant, stimulant or hallucinogenic drugs. 
III.  Purporting to sell controlled substances. No person shall at any time sell any substance which that persons purports to be a controlled substances, as defined under schedules I through V of article II of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act (W. Va. Code, § 60A-2-201 et seq.) when in actuality the substance sold contains no controlled substances. 
(1964 Code Sec. 3-1(e); Ord. of 8-27-12(3); Ord. of 4-25-16(1) ) 
529.04 - LOOKOUTS FOR ILLEGAL ACTS. 
    No person shall act as a lookout for any building, premises or establishment used for gambling, prostitution or any other form of vice or illegal act, or where intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating beer are illegally kept, sold or purchased, or for any person soliciting, offering or engaging in prostitution, gambling or any other form of vice or illegal act. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-16) 
529.05 - EXPECTORATION. 
    No person shall spit, expectorate, or deposit any sputum, phlegm, tobacco juice or wads of tobacco upon the floor or stairway of any part of any theater, public hall or building or upon the floor of any part of any railway car, or any other public conveyance in the city, or upon any sidewalk abutting on any public street, lot or lane. 
    The owner, occupant, tenant or other person in charge of any such theater, public hall, building or public conveyance in the city shall, when required to do so by the health officer by notice in writing, provide such premises with sufficient spittoons or cuspidors as required or prescribed by order of the health officer, and to thoroughly cleanse and disinfect daily such spittoons or cuspidors with some disinfectant solution to be approved by the health officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-26) 
529.06 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted August 27, 2012, repealed § 529.06, which pertained to possession of marihuana. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
529.07 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted August 27, 2012, repealed § 529.07, which pertained to purporting to sell controlled substances. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
529.08 - DANGEROUS SPORTS PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall engage in any play, sport or exercise which might produce any bodily injury to anyone or endanger the life or property of any person on any street, sidewalk, landing, alley or public square of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-34) 
529.09 - FORTUNE-TELLING PROHIBITED. 
    No clairvoyant, fortune-teller, palmist, phrenologist or person of similar pretentions or profession shall ply or practice his trade or profession in the city for gain. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-47) 
529.10 - PUBLIC URINATION, DEFECATION, EXCRETION AND DEPOSIT OF HUMAN WASTE OR ANY OTHER WASTE WITHIN CITY PROHIBITED; PENALTIES. 
(a)  No person shall urinate, defecate, excrete or in any manner deposit any human waste or any other waste in or upon any street, avenue, road, plaza, alley, curb, way, lot, lane, sidewalk or any other public place located within the city that is not specifically designated for such purposes. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a) hereof shall be fined not more than $500, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. 3-25-96) 
529.11 - BREATHING, INHALING, OR DRINKING CERTAIN INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally breathe, inhale, drink, inject or ingest in any fashion any compound, liquid, or chemical containing acetone, amylacetate, benzol or benzene, butyl acetate, butyl alcohol, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, cyclohexanone, ethanol or ethyl alcohol, ethyl acetate, hexane, isopropanol or isopropyl alcohol, isopropyl acetate, methyl "cellosolve" acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, methyl isobutyl ketone, toluol or toluene, trichloroethylene, tricresyl phosphate, xylol or xylene, or any other solvent, material substance, chemical, or combination thereof, having the property or releasing toxic vapors for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis, or irrational behavior or in any manner changing, distorting, or disturbing the auditory, visual or mental processes. For the purposes of this section, any condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who commits any act described herein pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to so direct or prescribe, including the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes; or 
(2)  To any alcoholic liquor or nonintoxicating beer as defined in W. Va. Code, § 60-1-5. 
( Ord. of 4-25-16(1) ) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-8-11. 
529.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates section 529.01(a) or 529.02(a) shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(b)  Whoever violates section 529.03 III. shall be fined not more than $100 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Subsequent violations shall be punishable by a mandatory $100 fine, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-30; Ord. of 8-27-12(3)) 
Editor's note- See section 501.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
ARTICLE 530 - SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS 

530.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  "Policing agency" is any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction within the City of Huntington, including but not limited to, the Cabell County Sheriffs Department, the Wayne County Sheriffs Department, the City of Huntington Police Department, Marshall University Police Department and the West Virginia State Police Department. 
(b)  "Retail establishment" is any person, business, corporation, or other entity holding or operating under a state retail merchant's license or city business license. 
(c)  "Synthetic equivalents" includes any of the following herbal or chemical based substances containing any of the following: 
(1)  Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A: All parts of the plants presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts. 
(2)  (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethy1)-6, 6dimethyl1-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol some trade or other names: HU-210. 
(3)  1-Pentyl-3-(I-naphthoyl)indole-some trade or other names: JWH-018/spice. 
(4)  1-Butyl-3-(Inaphthoy)indole-some trade or other names: JWH-073. 
(5)  1-(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine-some trade or other names: TFMPP. 
(6)  Cannabicyclohexanol, a substance also known as 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl)phenol. 
(7)  JWH-250, a substance also known as 2-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1-(1-pentylindo1-3-y1)ethanone. 
(8)  Any other similar structural analogs. 
(d)  "Synthetic marijuana" includes any herb or incense marketed under any name, including but not limited to K2, Spice, Acapulco Spices, Serenity Now, Spice Gold, Shokotsu, Afghan Incense, Baked, Black Magic, Buss, Cherry Charm, Fire Bird, Fire "N" Ice, Pulse, Solitude or Voodoo, all regardless of the flavor. 
(Ord. of 12-13-10(1)) 
530.02 - PROHIBITION. 
    It is hereby prohibited within the City of Huntington for any retail establishment to possess, sell, to publicly display for sale, or attempt to sell, give or barter or for any person to possess synthetic marijuana or any synthetic equivalents of the substances contained in the plant Cannabis, or in the resinous extractives of Cannabis and/or synthetic substances, derivatives, or their isomers with similar chemical structure and pharmacological activity, or any substance with claims such properties even if in actuality it does not. Since nomenclature or these substances is not internationally standardized, synthetic marijuana and synthetic equivalent compounds of these structures, regardless of numerical designation of atomic positions, are similarly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-13-10(1); Ord. of 1-24-11(1)) 
530.03 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    This ordinance may be enforced by any policing agency. Further, upon discovery of a violation, any policing agency is authorized to confiscate any product that is hereby prohibited by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-13-10(1)) 
530.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person found in violation of article 530 shall be fined up to $500 and/or imprisoned 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. of 12-13-10(1)) 
ARTICLE 531 - SYNTHETIC COCAINE 

531.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  "Policing agency" is any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction within the City of Huntington, including but not limited to, the Cabell County Sheriff's Department, the Wayne County Sheriffs Department, the City of Huntington Police Department, Marshall University Police Department and the West Virginia State Police Department. 
(b)  "Retail establishment" is any person, business, corporation, or other entity holding or operating under a state retail merchant's license or city business license. 
(c)  "Synthetic equivalents" includes any salt, compound, isomer, derivative, or preparation thereof that, is chemically equivalent or identical with illegal cocaine; or, has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system to that of cocaine. 
(d)  "Synthetic cocaine" includes any substance which has a chemical composition equivalent, similar or identical to that of natural cocaine under any name, including but not limited to "Charge", "Ivory", "Vanilla Sky", or "bath salts", regardless of packaging, flavor or, any disclaimer that might suggest product is not intended for human consumption. 
(Ord. of 12-27-10(1)) 
531.02 - PROHIBITION. 
    It is hereby prohibited within the City of Huntington for any retail establishment to sell, to publicly display for sale, or attempt to sell, give or barter, or for any person to possess synthetic cocaine or any substance containing coca leaves (DEA Drug Code No. 9040), and any salt, compound, isomer, salt of an isomer, derivative, or preparation of coca leaves including cocaine (DEA Drug Code No. 9041) or ecgonine (DEA Drug Code No. 9180), and any salt, compound, isomer, derivative, or preparation thereof which is chemically equivalent or identical with any of these substances, but not including decocainized coca leaves or extractions of coca leaves which do not contain cocaine or ecgonine (for the purpose of this paragraph, the term "isomer" includes optical, positional and geometric isomers). Since nomenclature or these substances is not internationally standardized, synthetic cocaine and synthetic equivalent compounds of these structures, regardless of numerical designation of atomic positions, are similarly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-27-10(1)) 
531.03 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    This ordinance may be enforced by any policing agency. Further, upon discovery of a violation, any policing agency is authorized to confiscate any product that is hereby prohibited by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-27-10(1)) 
531.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person found in violation of article 531 shall be fined up to $500 and/or imprisoned 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. of 12-27-10(1)) 
ARTICLE 533 - OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to regulate advertising, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(31); state law provisions, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-3. 

533.01 - SHOPLIFTING. 
(a)  General definitions. 
(1)  "Card-not-present credit or debit transaction" means a credit or debit sale of merchandise by telephone, mail order, internet or other means that does not require the cardholder's signature or physical presentation of the credit or debit card to the merchant. 
(2)  "Conceal" means to hide, hold or carry merchandise so that, although there may be some notice of its presence, it is not visible through ordinary observation. 
(3)  "Merchant" means an owner or operator of any mercantile establishment, and includes the merchant's employees, servants, security agents or other agents. 
(4)  "Mercantile establishment" means any place where merchandise is displayed, held or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale. "Mercantile establishment" does not include adjoining parking lots or adjoining areas of common use with other establishments. 
(5)  "Merchandise" means any goods, foodstuffs, wares or personal property or any part or portion thereof of any type or description displayed, held or offered for sale, or a shopping cart. 
(6)  "Value of the merchandise" means the merchant's stated price of the merchandise, or in the event of altering, transferring or removing a price marking or causing a cash register or other sales device to reflect less than the retail value of the merchandise, as defined in subsection (b) hereof, the difference between the merchant's stated price of the merchandise and the altered price. 
(b)  Shoplifting defined. 
(1)  A person commits the offense of shoplifting if, with intent to appropriate merchandise without paying the merchant's stated price for the merchandise, such person, alone or in concert with another person, knowingly: 
A.  Conceals the merchandise upon his or her person or in another manner; or 
B.  Removes or causes the removal of merchandise from the mercantile establishment or beyond the last station for payment; or 
C.  Alters, transfers or removes any price marking affixed to the merchandise; or 
D.  Transfers the merchandise from one container to another; or 
E.  Causes cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise; or 
F.  Removes a shopping cart from the premises of the mercantile establishment; or 
G.  Repudiates a card-not-present credit or debit transaction after having taken delivery of merchandise ordered from the merchant and does not return the merchandise or attempt to make other arrangements with the vendor. 
(2)  A person also commits the offense of shoplifting if such person, alone or in concert with another person, knowingly and with intent obtains an exchange or refund or attempts to obtain an exchange or refund for merchandise which has not been purchased from the mercantile establishment. 
(c)  Breach of peace; detention. An act of shoplifting as defined herein, is hereby declared to constitute a breach of peace and any owner of merchandise, his agent or employee, or any law enforcement officer who has reasonable ground to believe that a person has committed shoplifting, may detain such person in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time not to exceed 30 minutes, for the purpose of investigating whether or not such person has committed or attempted to commit shoplifting. Such reasonable detention shall not constitute an arrest nor shall it render the owner of merchandise, his agent or employee, liable to the person detained. 
(d)  Evidence. 
(1)  Evidence of stated price or ownership of merchandise may include, but is not limited to: 
A.  The actual merchandise alleged to have been shoplifted; or 
B.  The unaltered content of the price tag or marking from such merchandise; or 
C.  Properly identified photographs of such merchandise. 
(2)  Any merchant may testify at a trial as to the stated price or ownership of merchandise, as well as to other matters pertaining to the case. 
(e)  Civil liability. 
(1)  General rule. Any person who commits any of the acts described in this section shall be civilly liable: 
A.  To restore the merchandise to the mercantile establishment; and 
B.  If such merchandise is not recoverable or is damaged, for actual damages, including the value of the merchandise involved in the shoplifting; and 
C.  For other actual damages arising from the incident, not including the loss of time or loss of wages incurred by the mercantile establishment or any merchant in connection with the apprehension and processing of the suspect; and 
D.  In all cases, for a penalty to be paid to the mercantile establishment in the amount of $50 or double the value of the merchandise whichever is higher. 
(2)  Costs and attorneys' fees. A merchant who is a prevailing party under this section is entitled to costs. 
(3)  Effect of conviction. A conviction for the offense of theft by shoplifting is not a prerequisite to the maintenance of a civil action authorized by this section. However, a merchant who has recovered the penalty prescribed by subsection (f) hereof is not entitled to recover the penalty imposed by this section. 
(4)  Right to demand payment. The fact that a mercantile establishment may bring an action against an individual as provided in this section does not limit the right of such establishment to demand, orally or in writing, that a person who is liable for damages or a penalty under this section remit such damages or penalty prior to the commencement of any legal action. 
(f)  Penalty. A person convicted of shoplifting shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense conviction. Upon a first shoplifting conviction: 
A.  When the value of the merchandise is less than or equal to $500 the defendant shall be fined not more than $250. 
B.  When the value of the merchandise exceeds $500, the defendant shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 and such fine shall not be suspended; or the defendant shall be confined in jail not more than 30 days, or both. 
(2)  Second offense conviction. Upon a second shoplifting conviction: 
A.  When the value of the merchandise is less than or equal to $500 the defendant shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500 and such fine shall not be suspended; or the defendant shall be confined in jail not more than 30 days, or both. 
B.  When the value of the merchandise exceeds $500, the defendant shall be fined not less than $500 and shall be confined in jail not more than 30 days. 
(3)  Mandatory penalty. In addition to the fines and imprisonment imposed by this section, in all cases of conviction for the offense of shoplifting, the court shall order the defendant to pay a penalty to the mercantile establishment involved in the amount of $50, or double the value of the merchandise involved, whichever is higher. The mercantile establishment shall be entitled to collect such mandatory penalty as in the case of a civil judgment. This penalty shall be in addition to the mercantile establishment's rights to recover the stolen merchandise. 
(4)  Prior convictions. In determining the number of prior shoplifting convictions for purposes of imposing punishment under this section, the court shall disregard all such convictions occurring more than seven years prior to the shoplifting offense in question. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 61-3A-1-61-3A-6. 
533.02 - TRESPASS. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  "Structure" means any building of any kind either temporary or permanent, which has a roof over it, together with the curtilage thereof. 
(2)  "Conveyance" means any motor vehicle, vessel, railroad car, railroad engine, trailer, aircraft or sleeping car, and "to enter a conveyance" includes taking apart any portion of the conveyance. 
(3)  An act is committed "in the course of committing" if it occurs in an attempt to commit the offense or in flight after the attempt or commission. 
(4)  "Posted land" means that land upon which reasonably maintained signs are placed not more than 500 feet apart along and at each corner of the boundaries of the land upon which signs there appears prominently in letters of not less than two inches in height the words "no trespassing" and in addition thereto the name of the owner, lessee or occupant of the land. The signs shall be placed along the boundary line of posted land in a manner and in a position as to be clearly noticeable from outside of the boundary line. It shall not be necessary to give notice by posting on any enclosed land or place not exceeding five acres in area on which there is a dwelling house or property that by its nature and use is obviously private in order to obtain the benefits of this section pertaining to trespass on enclosed lands. 
(5)  "Cultivated land" means that land which has been cleared of its natural vegetation and is presently planted with a crop, orchard, grove, pasture or trees or is fallow land as part of a crop rotation. 
(6)  "Fenced land" means that land which has been enclosed by a fence of substantial construction, whether with rails, logs, post and railing, iron, steel, barbed wire, other wire or other material, which stands at least three feet in height. For the purpose of this section it shall not be necessary to fence any boundary or part of a boundary of any land which is formed by water and is posted with signs pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(7)  Where lands are posted, cultivated or fenced as described herein, then such lands, for the purpose of this section, shall be considered as enclosed and posted. 
(8)  "Trespass" means the willful unauthorized entry upon, in or under the property of another, but shall not include the following: 
A.  Entry by the state, its political subdivisions or by the officers, agencies or instrumentalities thereof as authorized and provided by law. 
B.  The exercise of rights in, under or upon property by virtue of rights-of-way or easements by a public utility or other person owning such right-of-way or easement whether by written or prescriptive right. 
C.  Permissive entry, whether written or oral, and entry from a public road by the established private ways to reach a residence for the purpose of seeking permission shall not be trespass unless signs are posted prohibiting such entry. 
D.  Entry performed in the exercise of a property right under ownership of an interest in, under or upon such property. 
E.  Entry where no physical damage is done to property in the performance of surveying to ascertain property boundaries, and in the performance of necessary work of construction, maintenance and repair of a common property line fence, or buildings or appurtenances which are immediately adjacent to the property line and maintenance of which necessitates entry upon the adjoining owner's property. 
(b)  Trespass in structure or conveyance. Any person who knowingly enters in, upon or under a structure or conveyance without being authorized, licensed or invited, or having been authorized, licensed or invited is requested to depart by the owner, tenant or the agent of such owner or tenant, and refuses to do so, shall be fined not more than $100. If the offender is armed with a firearm or other dangerous weapon while in the structure or conveyance, with the unlawful and felonious intent to do bodily injury to a human being in such structure or conveyance at the time the offender knowingly trespasses, such offender shall, notwithstanding the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 61-7-1, be subject to the penalty provided in section 501.99(a). 
(c)  Trespass on property other than structure or conveyance. 
(1)  Whoever knowingly and without being authorized, licensed or invited, enters or remains on any property, other than a structure or conveyance, as to which notice against entering or remaining is either given by actual communication to such person or by posting, fencing or cultivation, shall be fined not more than $100. 
(2)  If the offender defies an order to leave, personally communicated to him by the owner, tenant or agent of such owner or tenant, or if the offender opens any door, fence or gate, and thereby exposes animals, crops or other property to waste, destruction or freedom, or causes any damage to property by such trespassing on property other than a structure or conveyance, he shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 501.99(a). 
(3)  If the offender is armed with a firearm or other dangerous weapon with the unlawful and felonious intent to do bodily injury to a human being during his commission of the offense of trespass on property other than a structure or conveyance, such offender shall, notwithstanding the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 61-7-1, be imprisoned not more than 30 days, or fined not more than $100, or both. 
(4)  Notwithstanding and in addition to any other penalties provided by law, any person who performs or causes damage to property in the course of a willful trespass shall be liable to the property owner in the amount of twice the amount of such damage, provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in a labor dispute. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 61-3B-1-61-3B-3. 
533.03 - PETIT LARCENY. 
    No person shall commit petit larceny as defined in W. Va. Code, § 61-3-13 within the city. 
533.04 - DEALING WITH STOLEN GOODS. 
    If any person buys or receives from another person, or aids in concealing, or transfers to a person other than the owner thereof, any stolen goods or other thing of value which he knows or has reason to believe has been stolen, he shall be deemed guilty of the larceny thereof, and may be prosecuted although the principal offender is not convicted. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-3-18. 
533.05 - INJURY OR DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY OR MONUMENTS. 
(a)  No person shall unlawfully, but not feloniously, take and carry away or destroy, tamper with, injure or deface any property, real or personal, not his own. 
(b)  No person shall break down, destroy, injure, deface or remove any monument erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of the municipality, tract or lot of land, or any tree marked for that purpose. 
(c)  No person shall break, deface, injure or destroy any property belonging to the city. Whoever violates this subsection shall be liable to the city in a civil action for the cost of replacing the property or repairing the damage. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-19) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-3-30. 
533.06 - TAMPERING WITH AND THEFT OF UTILITIES. 
    No person with intent to injure or defraud shall procure, make or cause to be made, any pipe, tube, wire or other conductor of gas, water or electric energy, and connect the same, or cause it to be connected, with any main, service pipe or other pipe for conducting or supplying gas, or water or any wires or other conductor of electric energy, in such manner as to supply gas, water or electric energy to any lamp, motor, burner, orifice or any other device, by or at which gas, water or electric energy is consumed, around or without passing through the meter provided for measuring and registering the quantity of gas, water or electric energy consumed, or in any other manner so as to evade payment therefor, and no person, with like intent, shall injure or alter any gas, water or electric meter, or obstruct its action. 
    No person with intent to injure or defraud shall connect, or cause to be connected, any pipe, tube, wire, electrical conductor or other instrument with any main, service pipe or other pipe or conduit or flume for conducting water, or with any main, service pipe or other pipe or conduit for conducting gas, or with any main, service wire or other electric conductor used for the purpose of conducting electric energy for light, heat or motive services, or the purpose of taking therefrom water, gas or electric energy, without the knowledge of the owner thereof and with intent to evade payment therefor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 61-3-44, 61-3-45. 
533.07 - POSSESSION OF CONTRABAND; DISPOSITION. 
(a)  No person in the city shall possess any item of contraband. 
(b)  Whenever any item of contraband has been seized by police officers pursuant to proper process of law, it shall be brought before the municipal court and held for use as evidence and shall be destroyed thereafter. Whenever any item of potential contraband has been in like manner seized and later declared by the municipal court to be contraband, such item shall be destroyed thereafter. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-17) 
533.08 - PLACING ADVERTISEMENTS ON VEHICLES. 
    No person shall stick, print, attach, stamp, hang, suspend upon or place in any vehicle not their own, any printed, written, painted or other advertisement, bill, notice, sticker, sign or poster. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-22) 
533.09 - ALARM SYSTEMS; PLACING WIRES NEAR; INTERFERING WITH; INJURING. 
    No person shall: 
(a)  Place any wire, whether the same be used as a telephone, telegraph, electric light, wireless or radio wire, or for any other purpose, parallel to or across and within two feet of any wire belonging to or used in connection with the fire alarm or police alarm systems of the city. 
(b)  Displace, remove or injure any wires belonging to or used in connection with either the fire alarm system, police alarm system or radio broadcasting system of the city, absent permission of council. 
(c)  Injure, displace or destroy any pole, support or insulator used in connection with such alarm or broadcasting system or to which any such wires may be designated to be attached. 
(d)  Remove, displace, injure or destroy any alarm box or other contrivance or any part thereof, belonging to or in any manner connected with such alarm or broadcasting systems. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-31) 
533.10 - TIME CAPSULES; REMOVAL, OPENING. 
    No person shall excavate, remove, open, tamper with or otherwise disturb the time capsules established and buried at the Centennial Fire Station and to be opened A.D. 2071, and at the entrance to Ritter Park to be opened A.D. 2076, or any other time capsule or capsules which may hereafter be established by the City. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-48) 
533.11 - BOAT RAMPS; SWIMMING, FISHING, LOITERING, SUNBATHING OR PARKING PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall swim, fish, sunbathe, or loiter on or about any established boat launching ramp or the abutments or areas connected therewith, or shall in any manner interfere with the utilization of such ramps and areas for the purpose of launching, operating and removing boats therefrom. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle on such ramps, abutments or designated parking areas; provided, however, persons utilizing such facilities for boating purposes shall be entitled to park in the designated parking areas during the time that they are actually engaged in such activities. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-49) 
533.12 - TICKET SCALPING. 
    No person shall resell or offer for resale within the city any ticket, token or other evidence of the right of admission or entry to any place of amusement or entertainment, where public exhibitions, games, contests or performances of any kind are given, held or conducted, or are to be given, held or conducted, which place is owned by the city, or any other municipal, county or state body or agency, at a price in excess of the price printed or otherwise appearing on the face of such ticket, token or other evidence of the right of admission or entry. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-50) 
533.13 - ACTS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC CARRIERS. 
    No person while aboard a public passenger vehicle, operated on regular route service within the city, having a seating capacity of 12 or more persons, shall do any of the following acts while such public passenger vehicle is transporting passengers within the corporate limits of the city: 
(a)  Smoke or carry any lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar or cigarette in or upon any such public passenger vehicle. 
(b)  Spit in or upon any such public passenger vehicle. 
(c)  Carry, possess or allow to be kept any flammable or combustible liquids, unless in unopened original containers; explosives, acids, or any item inherently dangerous or offensive; or any dogs, cats, or other animals, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to seeing eye dogs. 
(d)  Stand in front of any white line marked on the forward end of the floor of any such passenger vehicle or otherwise obstruct the vision of the operator thereof. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-51) 
533.14 - POLLUTION OF FOUNTAINS AND POOLS. 
    No person shall throw, place or deposit any trash, refuse, dye, detergent or other foreign materials, of any kind or character in, or otherwise contaminate, any of the fountains or pools situated at the Huntington Civic Center, the Huntington Center Plaza or elsewhere within the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-52) 
533.15 - RECORD KEEPING FOR PURCHASES OF NONFERROUS METAL BY SALVAGE YARDS, RECYCLING CENTERS AND JUNK DEALERS. 
(a)  Any junk dealer or person in a similar business of purchasing scrap metal, any salvage yard owner or operator, or any public or commercial recycling facility owner or operator, or any agent or employee thereof, who purchases any form of copper, aluminum, brass, lead or other nonferrous metal of any kind or, any motor vehicle batteries, shall everyday before the hour of 12:00 noon, or by written agreement with the chief of police of the city or his designee, electronically submit and upload a true and correct report of all purchases from the previous day to a law enforcement web site designated by the chief of police. 
(b)  No junk dealer or person in a similar business shall purchase any of the items hereinbefore mentioned without securing from the seller a receipt or other proof of lawful ownership, which shall be retained by the dealer, and such dealer shall list in a record book the full name and address of the seller, a complete description of the kind and character of the junk or material purchased, the hour and day purchased, the license number of any automobile or truck which may have been used in making delivery or such junk or materials, and the operator's license number of any such seller, which record shall be open to inspection of all law enforcement officers and preserved for a period of not less than one year. 
(c)  Every nonresident junk dealer or person in a similar business, before transporting from the city any of the items hereinbefore mentioned, shall file with the chief of police of the city a complete description of the property he proposes to transport from the city, showing the date of purchase, the names of the buyers and seller, the party to whom consigned and the license number of any automobile or truck which may be employed in transporting such junk or materials hereinbefore mentioned. 
(d)  The required information shall be provided to the web site by the proprietor or his designee and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Date and time when property was received; 
(2)  Description of the property, to include: the type of metal, the weight of the metal and a detailed description of the metal (explaining whether it be piping, wiring, cans, etc.); 
(3)  Description of the individual from whom the property was received from a valid state I.D., school picture I.D., federal I.D. or other picture I.D. shall be viewed and verified as to picture the individual by the proprietor or clerk receiving the item(s). The individual's description is to include: Name, address, phone number, date of birth, race, sex, height, weight, hair and eye color, and photo I.D. number. 
(4)  Description of vehicle used to transport the metal, to include: make, model, color, year and license plate number; 
(5)  Whether the item was purchased, taken as collateral for a loan or taken on consignment. 
(e)  In the event the City of Huntington does not select a law enforcement web site, or if a selected law enforcement web site is dissolved or, if the chief of police elects to discontinue utilizing the law enforcement web site, all persons engaged in the business of purchasing scrap metal shall continue to submit said information to the police department by providing a written sales transaction card. This sales transaction card shall contain the identical information provided in the electronic uploads. The time frame for submission of scrap metal purchase information will remain the same. 
(f)  A law enforcement officer may at any time during an investigation require a junk dealer or their personnel representative to present items for inspection upon demand and if the officer has reasonable belief that said items were misappropriated, stolen, or taken under false pretense may confiscate the items, but must also show within 30 days to the appropriate judicial authority that there is a reasonable nexus to the item as evidence of a crime even though the perpetrator may not be ascertained. Further, upon such determination by the judicial officer as to the rightful property owner and only by order of the judicial officer shall the chief of police or his designee insure that confiscated items are returned per said judicial order. 
(g)  The provisions of this section do not apply to purchases made at wholesale under contract or as a result of a bidding process. 
(h)  Nothing in this section applies to scrap purchases by manufacturing facilities that melt, or otherwise later the form of scrap metal and transform it into a new product or to purchase or to the purchase or transportation of food and beverage containers or other nonindustrial materials having marginal value per individual unit. 
(i)  Failure to comply with any section hereinabove set forth, may result in either a citation or an arrest of the proprietor or his designee and can subject them to a fine in municipal court of up to $500 and/or loss of license. Each individual occurrence shall be treated as a separate offense and may be fined and sentenced as either concurrent or consecutive by the judicial officer. 
(Ord. 12-11-06) 
533.16 - INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLES. 
    No person shall, either individually or in association with one or more persons, willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle, or break or remove any part from a vehicle without the consent of the owner. 
    No person shall, with intent to commit any malicious mischief, injury or other crime, climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest, or with like intent attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of a vehicle while the same is at rest and unattended. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-90) 
533.17 - JOYRIDING. 
(a)  Any person who drives a vehicle, not his or her own, without consent of the owner thereof, and with intent temporarily to deprive said owner of his or her possession of such vehicle, without intent to steal the same, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The consent of the owner of a vehicle to taking or driving shall not in any case be presumed or implied because of such owner's consent on a previous occasion to the taking or driving of such vehicle by the same or a different person. Any person who assists in, or is a party or accessory to or an accomplice in any such unauthorized taking or driving, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section is, for the first offense, guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 or confined in the county or regional jail not more than 30 days, or both; for the second offense, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $1,000, or confined in the county or regional jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned; for third or subsequent offenses, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $2,000, or confined in the county or regional jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(Ord. 6-27-05) 
533.18 - PARAPHERNALIA. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, produce or market for sale any items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with "controlled substances" as the same is defined in W. Va. Code, Ch. 60A. 
(b)  As used in this section, "paraphernalia" shall be defined as any legitimate equipment, product, or material that is modified for making, using, or concealing illegal drugs such as cocaine, cocaine based derivative, heroin, marijuana, and methamphetamine and includes certain pipes, smoking masks, bongs, cocaine freebase kits, marijuana grow kits, roach clips, and items such as hollowed out cosmetic cases or fake pagers used to conceal illegal drugs and dealer-specific products used for preparing illegal drugs for distribution at the street level such as scales, vials, and baggies but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
(2)  Water pipes; 
(3)  Carburetor tubes and devices; 
(4)  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
(5)  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
(6)  Chamber pipes; 
(7)  Carburetor pipes; 
(8)  Electric pipes; 
(9)  Air-driven pipes; 
(10)  Chillums; 
(11)  Bongs; 
(12)  Ice pipes or chillers; and 
(13)  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials. 
    Drug paraphernalia does not include any items traditionally used with tobacco such as pipes and rolling papers. 
(c)  If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article, and to this end the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section is, for the first offense, guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500, or confined in the county or regional jail not more than 30 days, or both; for the second offense, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $1,000, or confined in the county or regional jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned; for third or subsequent offenses, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $2,000, or confined in the county or regional jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(Ord. 7-11-05) 
533.19 - BURGLAR'S TOOLS 
(a)  A person is guilty of possession of burglar's tools when he or she possesses any tool, instrument or other thing adapted, designed or commonly used for committing or facilitating the commission of an offense involving forcible entry into premises or theft by a physical taking under circumstances which leave no reasonable doubt as to the following: 
(1)  Intention to use tool or tools in the commission of an offense involving forcible entry; 
(2)  Knowledge that some other person intends to use the same in the commission of an offense involving forcible entry. 
(b)  Any person in possession of burglar's tools is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500, or confined in the county or regional jail for not more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned. 
(Ord. of 7-22-13(1)) 
533.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates section 533.05(b) shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. (A.O.) 
(b)  Whoever violates section 533.14 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-52) 
Editor's note- See section 501.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
ARTICLE 534 - JUNK STORAGE 

534.01 - AUTHORITY. 
    This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the City of Huntington in W. Va. Code, §§ 8-12-5(13), 8-12-5(15), 8-12-5(23), and 8-12-5(44). 
(Ord. of 3-25-13(1)) 
534.02 - PURPOSE. 
(a)  The City of Huntington hereby declares that a clean, wholesome and attractive environment is of vital importance to the continued general welfare of its citizens, and that regulation of the outdoor storage of junk, rubbish, clutter, litter or debris, regardless of quantity, is hereby prohibited within the sight of persons lawfully traveling the public roads or within sight of one or more neighboring properties anywhere within the City of Huntington and declares the same to be a nuisance and a fire hazard. 
(b)  By adoption of this ordinance, the City of Huntington declares its intent to preserve and promote a reasonable quality of environment and aesthetics and to prohibit actions and conduct that tend to depreciate not only the property on which it is located but also the property of other persons in the neighborhood and community generally. 
(Ord. of 3-25-13(1)) 
534.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
(1)  Enclosed porch or balcony shall mean a platform located at and attached to or abutting against the entrance to a building, completely covered by a roof and completely enclosed by fully intact glass and/or fully intact screens. Screens are framed wire mesh or framed plastic mesh used to keep out insects and permit airflow. 
(2)  Enforcement officer shall mean employees of the inspections and compliance division as well as members of the Huntington Police Department and any persons appointed by the mayor to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  Front yard shall mean that part of the property whereby the front of the house faces the public street and encompasses that open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(4)  Open storage shall mean such storage or accumulation which is visible from any public street or sidewalk or from any adjoining property. 
(5)  Owner shall mean the actual owner, agent or custodian of the property, whether individual or partnership association, corporation or other entity of any other kind. 
(6)  Person shall mean an individual, partnership, association, corporation, or entity of any other kind. 
(7)  Yard shall mean any open, unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, on a lot on which a building is situated. 
(Ord. of 3-25-13(1)) 
534.04 - PROHIBITED ACTS. 
    No person in any residentially zoned district shall store, open store, collect, park, leave, deposit, maintain, reserve, put aside for future use, permit, allow, or suffer to remain on any porch, balcony, roof, or in a yard or front yard except in a completely enclosed building or structure, any: 
(1)  Lumber or other building materials except those related to projects for which a valid building permit has been issued. Building materials shall include but shall not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used for construction. Exception to this subsection is firewood for the personal use of the resident; 
(2)  Equipment or materials used in the construction trade; 
(3)  Upholstered furniture, mattresses, materials and other similar products not designed, built and manufactured for outdoor use unless such is in an enclosed porch or balcony. Items intended for outdoor usage may be allowed to occupy the front yard if they are located entirely upon porches, decks, patios, and patios. Items intended for outdoor usage that are not located upon porches, decks, patios, and decks within the front yard will be allowed only if accompanied by the user but may not remain in such front yard overnight with the exception of items intended and designed for outdoor decorative purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-25-13(1)) 
534.05 - EXCLUSIONS. 
    Article 534 shall not apply to the storage or placement on the premises of the following material(s): 
(1)  Wood intended for consumption in a wood-burning stove, furnace or fireplace located in a building on the premises; 
(2)  Lawn or yard or garden ornaments and implements; 
(3)  Lawn and patio furniture; 
(4)  Standing fences; 
(5)  Hoses and sprinklers used for watering lawns or gardens; 
(6)  Storage or placement and accumulation of materials in connection with a commercial operation duly conducted on the premises where such storage, placement and accumulation are expressly permitted by the City of Huntington; and 
(7)  Construction materials and equipment used for the construction or renovation of a building on the premises for which a building permit has been issued. 
(Ord. of 3-25-13(1)) 
534.06 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Enforcement officer. This law may be enforced by an individual duly appointed by the City of Huntington. Said persons shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to inspect premises within the municipality as necessary for said enforcement. The enforcement officer shall make periodic inspections of the City of Huntington to ensure that the requirements of this law are met. 
(b)  Complaints. Any person may file a complaint with inspections and compliance division that a violation of this ordinance may have taken place. The complaint shall be forwarded to an enforcement officer who shall properly investigate any such complaint. The enforcement officer may also investigate any alleged violation that he or she has reason to believe has occurred or is occurring. If a violation of the said ordinance is found to exist by the enforcement officer, a notice to comply shall be issued to said violator, giving the violator ten days in which to comply with said ordinance. 
(c)  Notice to comply. The written notice to comply shall contain the following information and shall be served in accordance with the laws of the State of West Virginia concerning service of process: 
(1)  The name of the owner or occupant to whom the notice shall be addressed; 
(2)  The location of the premises involved in the violation; 
(3)  A statement of the facts which alleged violates the ordinance; 
(4)  A demand that the junk be removed or placed so as to be in compliance with the law within ten days after the service of the notice; 
(5)  A statement that a failure to comply shall result in a fine and/or prosecution; and 
(6)  A copy of the ordinance that has been violated. 
(d)  If the violation continues beyond the ten-day period, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to issue a citation to any person whom the enforcement officer has reason to believe has violated this ordinance, and shall cause such person to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Huntington for a hearing on the charges. 
(Ord. of 3-25-13(1)) 
534.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person found to be guilty violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-25-13(1)) 
ARTICLE 535 - TELEVISED MEETINGS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted July 28, 2014, amended article 535 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 535, §§ 535.01-535.05, pertained to similar subject matter. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 

535.01 - STATEMENT OF POLICY AND FINDINGS. 
    Council recognizes the importance of citizen involvement in all aspects of local government. As noted in the Policy Findings of the State Open Meetings Law, "public agencies in this state exist for the singular purpose of representing citizens of this state in governmental affairs, and it is, therefore, in the best interests of the people of this state for the proceedings of public agencies be conducted openly." Further, the citizens of this city do not yield their sovereignty to the governmental agencies that serve them. The people in delegating authority do not give their public servants the right to decide what is good for them to know and what is not good for them to know. The people insist on remaining informed so that they may retain control over the instruments of government created by them. 
    To this end council believes it necessary to provide additional measures of accountability, openness and transparency to the governmental process. Council realizes that many people who would like to attend public meetings of the various governing bodies of the City of Huntington are unable for a variety of reasons. These reasons may involve physical infirmities or other health concerns, lack of transportation, work and/or familial obligations, or other unknown reasons. Further, some residents may have no desire to attend public meetings but would view public meetings if broadcast on local government access channels. Council believes that these individuals also have a right to participate in local government even if that participation be merely viewing a meeting on television. It is for these reasons that city council enacts this article requiring that all meetings of the governing bodies be broadcast on local government access channels as long as a government access channel is provided to the City of Huntington by a local cable provider. This council recognizes that the current franchise agreement provides a government access channel. The City of Huntington will do everything in its power to negotiate for free government access channels in all future cable franchise agreements. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  "Broadcast" means a communication that is publicly distributed by a television station, radio station, cable television system, internet streaming or satellite system. 
(b)  "Governing body" or "governing bodies" means any organization, board, authority or commission enacted under the Official Charter of the City of Huntington or by action of the Council of the City of Huntington or the Huntington Municipal Development Authority, Huntington Urban Renewal Authority and the Huntington Sanitary Board. 
(c)  "Government access channel" means any television channel supplied by the local cable provider to be used for the express purpose of providing content related to local government activities. 
(d)  "Meeting" means the convening of a governing body of a public agency for which a quorum is required in order to make a decision or to deliberate toward a decision of any matter which will result in official action. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.03 - DUTIES OF CITY CLERK. 
    The city clerk shall maintain a schedule for all organizations that are required to televise its meetings. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.04 - GOVERNING BODIES. 
    All governing bodies subject to this article shall ensure the availability of the council chambers for its meeting and shall designate a person to coordinate with the city clerk for scheduling. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.05 - PUBLIC MEETINGS TO BE TELEVISED. 
    All regularly scheduled meetings of a governing body, as the same is defined herein, shall be broadcast to the public on a local government access channel. This provision shall not be interpreted to violate any provisions of the West Virginia Open Meetings Act or, require broadcast of meetings, discussions or consultations that would otherwise be required to be had in executive session. Nothing herein should be interpreted to violate any provision related to an individual's right to privacy. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.06 - EXEMPTIONS. 
    The City of Huntington Policemen's and Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund Boards shall not be subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.07 - EXCEPTIONS. 
    The following circumstances shall be excepted from the enforcement of these provisions: 
(1)  Technical or mechanical difficulties beyond the control of the governing body; 
(2)  Meetings held at a location other than council chambers when such location is necessary to allow for increased capacity and such location does not have broadcasting capabilities; 
(3)  Executive sessions; 
(4)  Otherwise required by state law; 
(5)  Emergency meetings if the broadcasting would merely serve to further delay a necessary emergency action; and 
(6)  Ad hoc committees formed by the mayor's office. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.08 - OFFICIAL ACTIONS NOT VOID. 
    Any failure to comply with this article shall not operate to void the actions taken by the governing body. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
535.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person who willfully violates any section of this article shall be punishable by up to a $500 fine and/or 30 days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. of 7-28-14(3)) 
ARTICLE 536 - GRAFFITI[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Property destruction, § 533.05. 

536.01 - DECLARATION OF GRAFFITI AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
    The City of Huntington hereby finds and declares that maintenance of graffiti on public and private properties within public view is obnoxious and constitutes a public nuisance, the abatement of which shall be provided as set forth herein. 
(Ord. 1-26-04) 
536.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this section, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this section are defined as follows: 
(a)  "Defacement" means the intentional altering of the physical shape or physical appearance of property. 
(b)  "Graffiti" means any painting, marling, symbol, design, inscription or other defacement which is written, sprayed, pointed scratched, etched, engraved, placed with an indelible marker or otherwise applied to the real or personal property of another without prior consent of person in possession thereof. 
(c)  "Indelible marker" means any marker, pen or similar implement which contains a fluid which is not soluble in water and has a flat, pointed or angled writing surface of a width of one-half inch or greater. 
(Ord. 1-26-04) 
536.03 - GRAFFITI PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall permit any graffiti which is within public view to remain on any building, structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk or curb owned or possessed by such person. 
(b)  No person shall cause any graffiti to be placed upon any public or private property, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, trees, shrubs, sidewalks, curbs, streets, signs, mailboxes, lamp posts, fences, viaducts and train trestles. 
(c)  No person shall cause the defacement of public or private property, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, trees, shrubs, sidewalks, curbs, streets, signs, mailboxes, lamp posts, fences, viaducts and train trestles. 
(Ord. 1-26-04) 
536.04 - NOTICE TO OWNER OR POSSESSOR OF PROPERTY. 
    Whenever the mayor, or his designee, determines that graffiti is being maintained upon any building or structure within the City of Huntington which has been unoccupied for a period of more than 30 days in violation of this ordinance, the mayor or his designee shall send written notice and order to the owner or possessor of the premises of such condition and shall require that the graffiti be removed. The notice and order shall state that the owner must remove the graffiti or consent to its removal by the city within 30 days from the date the notice was mailed; provided, the owner or possessor of premises may within ten days of being served with such notice and order, apply to the mayor for a public hearing on the matter, in which case the terms of such notice and order shall be stayed pending the resolution of the public hearing. 
(Ord. 3-8-04) 
536.05 - REMOVAL. 
    If the property owner and possessor fail to remove the graffiti as ordered by the mayor, he or she or his/her designee shall have the following authority to cause its removal. 
(a)  Property owners' consent to remove. Whenever the mayor or his designee determines that graffiti on property which is within public view the mayor or his designee is authorized to provide for and use public funds, if necessary, to remove graffiti upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Public property. Whenever the mayor or his designee determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the city, it shall be removed as soon as possible. When the property is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of graffiti is authorized after securing written consent of the public agency having jurisdiction over the property. 
(2)  Private property. Where the subject property is privately owned, the removal of graffiti is authorized after the mayor or his designee secures the written consent of the owner of the property and the owner executes a release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney. The city will assess the cost of abatement of the property owner, which if ignored will become a lien against the property. 
(3)  The graffiti shall be removed as authorized herein, but the removal shall not involve the painting or repair of a more extensive area than is necessary for such removal. 
(b)  Removal by city without consent of property owner. The mayor may abate any graffiti without the consent of the property owner, maintained contrary to the provisions of this section only after the following has occurred: 
(1)  The mayor has determined that graffiti within public view exists on particular premises within the city. 
(2)  A notice of such condition has been sent to the property owner. 
(3)  The property owner has failed to either remove the graffiti, request a public hearing, request a review of order pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 17-9-1 or consent to its removal by the city within the time period specified in the notice. 
(c)  Remedies. The remedies provided in this section and chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under the laws of the city, the State of West Virginia, and the United States. 
(Ord. 1-26-04) 
536.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person who is found guilty of violating any section of article 536 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington may be fined up to $500 per day of occurrence. 
(Ord. 1-25-04) 
ARTICLE 539 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND BURNT STRUCTURES[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference- Unsafe buildings, Art. 1739. 

539.01 - NUISANCE. 
    It is hereby declared that unsafe buildings and burnt structures located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Huntington are a nuisance and a hazard to the welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 2-9-04) 
539.02 - DEMOLITION AGREEMENT. 
    The mayor or his designee may enter into a "Property Demolition Agreement" to demolish any structure within the City of Huntington in an expedited manner, with any property owner. 
(a)  The agreement shall provide that the city pay the costs of demolition to include asbestos abatement. 
(b)  It shall provide for reimbursement terms and that a lien be placed on the property until such time as the costs are reimbursed. 
(Ord. 2-9-04) 
539.03 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS COMMISSION. 
    The provisions of this article shall stand alone and shall not affect the Unsafe Buildings Commission (article 1739) procedures and/or responsibilities. 
(Ord. 2-9-04) 
539.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Any owner of property located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Huntington that is reimbursed through insurance to either rehabilitate a structure or demolish the same and fails to begin the process within 60 days of settlement or fails to complete the process within the period of one year from payment shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(b)  Failure to remedy the situation within 30 days of the initial citation shall result in a new violation under this article. 
(Ord. 2-9-04) 
ARTICLE 541 - RAILROADS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping at grade crossing, § 343.01 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to eliminate grade crossings, W. Va. Code, § 17-10-7; grant of right-of-way, W. Va. Code, § 31-2-13. 

541.01 - OBSTRUCTING RAILROAD CROSSINGS. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  "Carrier," "railroad" or "railroad company" means a common carrier by railroad. 
(2)  "Train" or "trains" means engines, cars and any type of railroad equipment or rolling stock, or any part thereof, capable of blocking any crossing of a railroad track or tracks and any public street, road or highway. 
(b)  Blocking of crossing prohibited; time limit. 
(1)  No railroad company, except in an emergency, shall order, allow or permit the operation of or operate its system so that a train blocks the passage of vehicular traffic over the railroad crossing of any public street, road or highway for a period longer than ten minutes. This subsection does not apply to an obstruction of any such street, road or highway caused by a continuously moving train or caused by circumstances wholly beyond the control of the railroad, but does apply to all other obstructions as aforesaid, including, but not limited to, those caused by a stopped train or a train engaged in switching, loading or unloading operations. 
(2)  Upon receiving notification from a law-enforcement officer, member of a fire department, operator of an emergency medical vehicle, or a member of an emergency services provider that emergency circumstances require the immediate clearing of a public highway railroad grade crossing, the members of the train crew of the train, railroad car or equipment, or engine blocking such crossing shall immediately notify the appropriate railroad dispatcher of the pending emergency situation. Upon receipt of notice of such emergency circumstances by the train crew or dispatcher, the railroad shall immediately clear the crossing, consistent with the safe operation of the train. 
(c)  Responsibility of railroad company. The railroad company shall be solely responsible for the acts of its agents and employees in violating any provision of this section. 
(d)  Presumption. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a train is operated by the carrier whose marks, numbers, signs and symbols of identification appear on the engine or caboose of such train. 
(e)  Service of process. Process issuing for a violation of this section may be served upon the engineer or conductor of the train causing a violation of the provisions of this section or any other officer, agent or attorney-in-fact of the railroad company authorized by law to receive service of summons or other process issuing against such railroad company. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, Art. 31-2A. 
541.02 - TRESPASSING ON RAILROAD TRACKS. 
(a)  No person shall go upon any railroad track without first obtaining permission of the railroad company or persons operating such tracks except that such persons may: 
(1)  Go upon the railroad track for the purpose of passing over such track at a marked and identified public crossing; 
(2)  Ride, drive or otherwise cause any moped, motorcycle, automobile, truck or other motor vehicle to go upon any railroad track for the purpose of passing over such track at a marked and identified public crossing in conformity with sections 343.01, 343.02, 343.03 or 343.04 of the Traffic Code; 
(3)  Willfully lead or contrive any animal to go upon any railroad track at a marked and identified public crossing; and 
(b)  No person shall throw or cause to be thrown onto any railroad track any wastepaper, ashes, sweepings, household waste, glass, metal, tires, refuse or rubbish, or any dangerous substance. 
(Ord. 12-28-98) 
541.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    "Track" as used in this section shall mean, encompass and include the rail, ties, ballast and entire railroad right-of-way. 
(Ord. 11-23-98) 
541.04 - TRESPASSING ON RAILROAD TRAINS. 
    No person who is not a railroad employee or passenger, or who has not obtained the express permission of the railroad company or person operating such trains, shall be permitted on or in any railroad car or train, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. 11-23-98) 
541.05 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    This section shall be enforced by the Huntington City Police Department, the Marshall University Police Department and any and all railroad law enforcement agencies duly authorized under applicable federal or state laws to make arrests on or pertaining to railroad property. 
(Ord. 11-23-98) 
541.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a first violation of section 541.02(a)(1), (2) or (3) shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. For each subsequent offense, such person shall be subject to a fine not less than $250 nor more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. The minimum fines established herein shall not be subject to suspension or reduction. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a first violation of section 541.02(b) shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300. For each subsequent offense, such person shall be subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $500. The minimum fines established herein shall not be subject to suspension or reduction. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a first violation of section 541.04 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. For each subsequent offense, such person shall be subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. The minimum fines established herein shall not be subject to suspension or reduction. 
(d)  Whoever violates any provision of article 541, railroads for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not more than $500. 
(Ord. 11-23-98) 
ARTICLE 543 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

543.01 - DEFINED. 
    Hazardous materials shall be defined as the CFR and in the regulations listed by the CFR. 
(Ord. 12-27-04) 
543.02 - LOADING AND UNLOADING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. 
    It shall be unlawful to improperly load or unload any hazardous materials within 1,000 feet of any residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. 12-27-04) 
543.03 - PENALTIES. 
    Anyone who violates this ordinance or conspires to violate this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail or both. 
(Ord. 12-27-04) 
543.04 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Any code official, fire marshal, deputy fire marshal or police officer may enforce this ordinance. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the safe operation of any lawful enterprise. 
(b)  When a law enforcement official recognizes a violation of law or a particularly hazardous situation, they may contact the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. 
(Ord. 12-27-04) 
ARTICLE 545 - WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference- See sectional histories for similar state law; authority to prohibit carrying weapons, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(16); limitations on power to restrict ownership, W. Va. Code, § 8-2-5a; dangerous weapons, W. Va. Code, Art. 61-7. 

545.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(a)  "Blackjack" means a short bludgeon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or some other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact when a person or object is struck. "Blackjack" includes, but is not limited to, a billy, billy club, sand club, sandbag or slapjack. 
(b)  "Gravity knife" means any knife that has a blade released from the handle by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force, and when so released is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other locking or catching device. 
(c)  "Knife" means an instrument, intended to be used or readily adaptable to be used as a weapon, consisting of a sharp-edged or sharp-pointed blade, usually made of steel, attached to a handle, which is capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds. "Knife" includes, but is not limited to, any dagger, dirk, poniard or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half inches in length, any switchblade knife or gravity knife, and any other instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds. A pocket knife with a blade three and one-half inches or less in length, a hunting or fishing knife carried for hunting, fishing, sports or other recreational uses, or a knife designed for use as a tool or household implement shall not be included within the term "knife" as defined herein, unless such knife is knowingly used or intended to be used to produce serious bodily injury or death. 
(d)  "Switchblade knife" means any knife having a spring-operated blade which opens automatically upon pressure being applied to a button, catch or other releasing device in its handle. 
(e)  "Nunchuka" means a flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts, connected by a chain, cable, rope or other nonrigid, flexible or springy material, constructed in such a manner as to allow the rigid parts to swing freely, so that one rigid part may be used as a handle and the other rigid part may be used as the striking end. 
(f)  "Metallic or false knuckles" means a set of finger rings attached to a transverse piece, to be worn over the front of the hand for use as a weapon, and constructed in such a manner that, when striking another person with the fist or closed hand, considerable physical damage may be inflicted upon the person struck. The term "metallic or false knuckles" includes any such instrument, without reference to the metal or other substance or substances from which the metallic or false knuckles are made. 
(g)  "Pistol" means a short firearm having a chamber which is integral with the barrel, designed to be aimed and fired by the use of a single hand. 
(h)  "Revolver" means a short firearm having a cylinder of several chambers that are brought successively into line with the barrel to be discharged, designed to be aimed and fired by the use of a single hand. 
(i)  "Deadly weapon" means an instrument which is designed to be used to produce serious bodily injury or death, or is readily adaptable to such use. The term "deadly weapon" includes, but is not limited to, the instruments defined in subsections (a) to (h) hereof inclusive, or other deadly weapons of like kind or character which may be easily concealed on or about the person. For the purposes of W. Va. Code, §§ 18-3-1a and 61-7-11a, in addition to the definition of "knife" set forth in subsection (c) hereof, "deadly weapon" also includes any instrument included within the definition of "knife" with a blade of three and one-half inches or less in length. Additionally, for the purposes of W. Va. Code, §§ 18-3-1a and 61-7-11a, "deadly weapon" includes explosives, chemical, biological and radiological materials. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the term "deadly weapon" does not include any item or material owned by the school or county board, intended for curricular use, and used by the student at the time of the alleged offense solely for curricular purposes. 
(j)  "Concealed" means hidden from ordinary observation so as to prevent disclosure or recognition. A deadly weapon is concealed when it is carried on or about the person in such a manner that another person in the ordinary course of events would not be placed on notice that the deadly weapon was being carried. 
(k)  "Firearm" means any weapon which will expel a projectile by action of an explosion. 
(l)  "Controlled substance" has the same meaning as is ascribed to that term in W. Va. Code, § 61A-1-101(d). 
(m)  "Drug" has the same meaning as is ascribed to that term in W. Va. Code, § 61A-1-101(l). 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-2. 
545.02 - CARRYING CONCEALED DEADLY WEAPONS WITHOUT LICENSE. 
(a)  No person shall carry a concealed deadly weapon, without a state license or other lawful authorization established under the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 61-7-4 et seq. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-3. 
545.03 - EXCEPTIONS AS TO PROHIBITIONS AGAINST CARRYING CONCEALED DEADLY WEAPONS. 
    The licensure provisions set forth in W. Va. Code, Art. 61-7 shall not apply to: 
(a)  Any person carrying a deadly weapon upon his own premises; nor shall anything herein prevent a person from carrying any firearm, unloaded, from the place of purchase to his or her home, residence or place of business or to a place of repair and back to his or her home, residence or place of business, nor shall anything herein prohibit a person from possessing a firearm while hunting in a lawful manner or while traveling from his or her home, residence or place of business to a hunting site, and returning to his or her home, residence or place of business; 
(b)  Any person who is a member of a properly organized target-shooting club authorized by law to obtain firearms by purchase or requisition from the state, or from the United States for the purpose of target practice, from carrying any pistol, as defined in section 545.01(g), unloaded, from his home, residence or place of business to a place of target practice, and from any such place of target practice back to his home, residence or place of business, for using any such weapon at such place of target practice in training and improving his skill in the use of such weapons; 
(c)  Any law-enforcement officer or law-enforcement official as such are defined in W. Va. Code, § 30-29-1; 
(d)  Any employee of the West Virginia Department of Corrections duly appointed pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 28-5-5 while such employee is on duty; 
(e)  Any member of the armed forces of the United States or the militia of the state while such member is on duty; 
(f)  Any circuit judge, including any retired circuit judge designated senior status by the supreme court of appeals of West Virginia, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney or a duly appointed investigator employed by a prosecuting attorney; 
(g)  Any resident of another state who holds a valid license to carry a concealed weapon by a state or a political subdivision which has entered into a reciprocity agreement with this state, subject to the provisions and limitations set forth in W. Va. Code, § 61-7-6a. 
(h)  Any federal law-enforcement officer or federal police officer authorized to carry a weapon in the performance of the officer's duty. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-6. 
545.04 - PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPONS. 
(a)  Except as provided for in this section, no person shall possess a firearm such as is defined in section 545.01 who: 
(1)  Has been convicted in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year; 
(2)  Is addicted to alcohol; 
(3)  Is an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance; 
(4)  Has been adjudicated as a mental defective or who has been involuntarily committed to a mental institution; 
(5)  Being an alien is illegally or unlawfully in the United States; 
(6)  Has been discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable conditions; 
(7)  Is subject to a domestic violence protective order that: 
A.  Was issued after a hearing of which such person received actual notice and at which such person had an opportunity to participate; 
B.  Restrains such person from harassing, stalking or threatening an intimate partner of such person or child of such intimate partner or person, or engaging in other conduct that would place an intimate partner in reasonable fear of bodily injury to the partner or child; and 
C.  1.  Includes a finding that such person represents a credible threat to the physical safety of such intimate partner or child; or 
2.  By its terms explicitly prohibits the use, attempted use or threatened use of physical force against such intimate partner or child that would reasonably be expected to cause bodily injury; or 
(8)  Has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence. 
(b)  Any person prohibited from possessing a firearm by the provisions of subsection (a) of this section may petition the circuit court of the county in which he or she resides to regain the ability to possess a firearm and if the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that the person is competent and capable of exercising the responsibility concomitant with the possession of a firearm, the court may enter an order allowing the person to possess a firearm if such possession would not violate any federal law. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-7. 
545.05 - POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPONS BY MINORS PROHIBITED. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, a person under the age of 18 years who is not married or otherwise emancipated shall not possess or carry concealed or openly any deadly weapon; provided, that a minor may possess a firearm upon premises owned by such minor or his family or on the premises of another with the permission of his or her parent or guardian and in the case of property other than his or her own or that of his family, with the permission of the owner or lessee of such property. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a minor from possessing a firearm while hunting in a lawful manner or while traveling from a place where he or she may lawfully possess a deadly weapon, to a hunting site, and returning to a place where he or she may lawfully possess such weapon. 
(b)  A violation of this section by a person under the age of 18 years shall subject the child to the jurisdiction of the circuit court under the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 49-5-1 et seq., and such minor may be proceeded against in the same manner as if he or she had committed an act which if committed by an adult would be a crime, and may be adjudicated delinquent. 
(c)  No minor shall carry or have in his possession on any of the streets, alleys, landings or public squares of the city, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, any airgun or rifle, air pistol, spring gun, rubber sling or blank cartridge pistol or any other rifle, gun or other weapon, mechanical device or toy of like character, capable of shooting bullets, shots, pebbles or other dangerous substances. 
    Any police officer apprehending any minor violating this section shall take possession of the airgun, air pistol, air rifle, or other weapon, toy or device found on the person of such minor when apprehended; and such gun, toy or device shall be delivered to the police judge of the city and held by him until claim is established thereto by the proper guardian or parent. 
(1964 Code Sec. 23-42) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-8. 
545.06 - POSSESSION OF MACHINE GUNS. 
    No person shall carry, transport or have in his possession, any machine gun, submachine gun or any other fully automatic weapon unless he or she has fully complied with applicable Federal statutes and all applicable rules and regulations of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States relating to such firearms. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-9. 
545.07 - DISPLAY OR SALE OF DEADLY WEAPONS. 
    No person shall publicly display and offer for rent or sale, or, where the person is other than a natural person, knowingly permit an employee thereof to publicly display and offer for rent or sale, to any passersby on any street, road or alley, any deadly weapon, machine gun, submachine gun or other fully automatic weapon, any rifle, shotgun or ammunition for same. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-10. 
545.08 - BRANDISHING DEADLY WEAPONS. 
    No person armed with a firearm or other deadly weapon, whether licensed to carry the same or not, shall carry, brandish or use such weapon in a way or manner to cause, or threaten, a breach of the peace. 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, § 61-7-11. 
545.09 - SHOOTING ACROSS ROAD OR NEAR BUILDING OR CROWD. 
(a)  No person shall shoot or discharge any firearm across or in any public road in the municipality, at any time, or within 400 feet of any schoolhouse or church, or within 500 feet of any dwelling house by any person other than the owner and his or her family or guests, or on or near any park or other place where persons gather for purposes of pleasure. 
(b)  Any person operating a gun repair shop, licensed to do business in the state and duly licensed under applicable federal statutes, is exempt from the prohibition established by this section and W. Va. Code, § 20-2-58 for the purpose of testing firearms. 
(c)  This section does not apply when firearms are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty, at a licensed indoor shooting range, or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
( Ord. of 1-11-16(1) ) 
545.10 - FIREWORKS SALE, POSSESSION AND DISCHARGE. 
(a)  "Fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of unmanned balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include: 
    Model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable acro models and shall not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance with the United States Department of Transportation regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper or plastic caps are used and toy paper or plastic caps manufactured as provided therein, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. Each package containing toy paper or plastic caps offered for retail sale shall be labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
    The following sparklers and novelties shall not be considered fireworks and require a business registration fee be paid to be authorized to sell, as provided in W. Va. Code, § 11-12-86: 
(1)  Explosive caps designed to be fired in toy pistols, provided that the explosive mixture of the caps shall not exceed twenty-five hundredths of a grain for each cap. 
(2)  Snake and glow worms composed of pressed pellets of a pyrotechnic mixture that produce a large snake-like ash when burning. 
(3)  Smoke devices consisting of a tube or sphere containing a pyrotechnic mixture that produces white or colored smoke. 
(4)  Trick noisemakers which produce a small report designed to surprise the user and which include: 
A.  A party popper, which is a small plastic or paper item containing not in excess of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive mixture. A string protruding from the device is pulled to activate the device, expelling paper streamers and producing a small report. 
B.  A string popper which is a small tube containing not in excess of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive mixture with string protruding from both ends. The strings are pulled to activate the friction-sensitive mixture, producing a small report. 
C.  A snapper or drop pop, which is a small paper wrapped item containing no more than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive mixture coated on small bits of sand. When dropped, the device produces a small report. 
(5)  Wire sparklers consisting of wire or stick coated with nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. These items must not exceed one hundred grams of mixture per item. 
(6)  Other sparkling devices which emit showers of sparks and sometimes a whistling or crackling effect when burning, do not detonate or explode, are hand-held or ground-based, cannot propel themselves through the air and contain not more than 75 grams of chemical compound per tube or not more than a total of 200 grams if multiple tubes are used; provided, that sparklers and sparkler devices as provided for herein shall not be sold to anyone below the age of 16 years old. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm, copartnership or corporation shall offer for sale, possess, expose for sale, sell at retail, keep with intent to sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks, provided, permits for the supervised display of fireworks may be granted upon application to the State Fire Marshal and after approval of the police and fire chiefs, and the filing of a bond by the applicant as provided hereinafter. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator licensed or certified as to competency by the State Fire Marshal and shall be of such composition, character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the fire chief, after proper inspection, and of the police chief shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. After such privilege shall have been granted, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. 
    The mayor shall require a bond from the licensee in a sum not less than $1,000 conditioned on compliance with the provisions of this section and W. Va. Code, Art. 29-3 and the regulations of the state fire commission; provided, that the municipality shall not be required to file such bond. 
    Before any permit for a pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the person, firm or corporation making application therefor shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of such person, firm or corporation or any agent or employee thereof, in such amount, character and form as the State Fire Marshal determines to be necessary for the protection of the public. 
(c)  The regulations contained within this subsection are hereby adopted with respect to the display of Class C fireworks and novelties, as defined in W. Va. Code, § 29-3-23, being sold inside new mercantile occupancies. As used in this subsection, "mercantile occupancies" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stores, markets and other rooms, buildings or structures for the display and sale of merchandise; and 
(2)  New buildings or portions thereof used as mercantile occupancies; and 
(3)  Additions made to, or used as, mercantile occupancies; and 
(4)  Alterations, modernizations, repairs or renovations of existing mercantile occupancies; and 
(5)  Existing buildings or portions thereof upon change of occupancy to mercantile occupancies. 
    Class C fireworks and novelties being sold inside of a mercantile occupancy shall be displayed in a glass or transparent showcase which shall be locked at all times. 
    The sale of such fireworks and novelties shall be under the direct supervision and control of a competent person at least 21 years of age and duly qualified and responsible for enforcing all safety regulations, standards and measures. 
    Smoking, matches, open flames and any and all other spark-producing devices and firearms, except those firearms within the legal possession of duly authorized law enforcement officials, shall not be permitted within 25 feet of a showcase. Signs shall be posted in conspicuous places in, on and around all indoor displays with the words "FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING" in letters of not less than four inches in height. Not less than two exits shall be maintained upon the premises and shall remain unobstructed at all times with no exceptions. 
    Extinguishing equipment shall be kept and maintained upon the premises and shall include, but not be limited to, a sprinkler system installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. Standard 13 of the National Fire Code, and a ten-pound A.B.C. fire extinguisher shall be kept and maintained a distance of not more than six feet from each showcase. 
    Emergency lighting and illuminated exit signs shall be installed and maintained upon the premises. 
    All electrical fixtures contained upon the premises shall be dust-ignition proof. All electrical wiring shall comply with Articles 500 and 502 of the National Electrical Code and N.F.P.A. Standard 70 of the National Fire Code. Electrical receptacles or unguarded light fixtures shall not be permitted within 25 feet of any fireworks or pyrotechnic composition. Light fixtures located within 25 feet of any fireworks or novelties shall be properly secured. Electrical disconnect devices shall be located outside each storage area and shall be arranged and engineered to de-energize all electrical power to the building, room, trailer, semitrailer, mobile facility or other structure constituting a new mercantile occupancy. 
(d)  The regulations contained within this subsection are hereby adopted with respect to the display of Class C fireworks and novelties being sold inside existing buildings and structures. 
    Class C fireworks and novelties being sold inside of an existing building or structure shall be displayed in a glass or transparent showcase which shall be locked at all times. 
    The sale of such fireworks and novelties shall be under the direct supervision and control of a competent person at least 21 years of age and duly qualified and responsible for enforcing all safety regulations, standards and measures. 
    Smoking, matches, open flames and any and all other spark-producing devices and firearms shall not be permitted within 25 feet of a showcase. Signs shall be posted in conspicuous places in, on and around all indoor displays with the words "FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING" in letters of not less than four inches in height. Not less than two exits shall be maintained upon the premises and shall remain unobstructed at all times with no exceptions. 
    Extinguishing equipment shall be kept and maintained upon the premises and shall include, but not be limited to, a ten-pound A.B.C. fire extinguisher to be kept and maintained a distance of not more than six feet from each showcase. 
    Emergency lighting and illuminated exit signs shall be kept and maintained upon the premises. 
    All electrical fixtures contained upon the premises shall be dust-ignition proof. All electrical wiring shall comply with Articles 500 and 502 of the National Electrical Code and N.F.P.A. Standard 70 of the National Fire Code. Electrical receptacles or unguarded light fixtures shall not be permitted within 25 feet of any fireworks or pyrotechnic composition. Light fixtures located within 25 feet of any fireworks or novelties shall be properly secured. Electrical disconnect devices shall be located outside each storage area and shall be arranged and engineered to de-energize all electrical power to the existing building, room, trailer, semi-trailer, mobile facility or other structure. 
(e)  The regulations contained within this subsection are hereby adopted with respect to the display of Class C fireworks and novelties being sold outdoors. 
    No Class C fireworks or novelties shall be offered for sale within 300 feet of the property line of any church, hospital or school, or shall be offered for sale within 50 feet of the property line upon which any flammable liquid dispensers or flammable liquid storage areas are located. 
    Any vendor offering such fireworks or novelties for sale shall maintain his or her property free of all weeds, dried grass and other combustible materials for a distance of not less than 25 feet in any direction from the outer edge of any building or structure within which such items are offered for sale. 
    Every outdoor display shall be located not less than 25 feet from all rights-of-way including, but not limited to, highways, streets, avenues, roads, plazas, alleys, curbs, ways, lots, lanes, sidewalks or any other building or structure located on the same property. 
    Every outdoor display shall be presented in the form of empty boxes or containers bearing the brand name of the Class C fireworks and novelties being displayed for sale and shall be situated on a table or in a booth. All samples of Class C fireworks and novelties displayed for sale shall be kept in a locked glass or transparent showcase. 
    The sale of such fireworks and novelties shall be under the direct supervision and control of a competent person at least 21 years of age and duly qualified and responsible for enforcing all safety regulations, standards and measures. 
    Fireworks or other unauthorized open flames are prohibited in any tent or other temporary membrane structure. 
    Smoking, matches, open flames and any and all other spark-producing devices and firearms, except those firearms within the legal possession of duly authorized law enforcement officials, shall not be permitted inside any outdoor display or within 25 feet thereof. Signs shall be posted in conspicuous places in, on and around all outdoor displays with the words "FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING" in letters of not less than four inches in height. A ten-pound A.B.C. fire extinguisher shall be kept and maintained not less than a distance of six feet from the outdoor display. 
(f)  The regulations contained within this subsection are hereby adopted with respect to the storage of Class C fireworks and novelties. 
    Class C fireworks and novelties shall be stored and maintained in a building or a room located inside a building, trailer, semi-trailer or other mobile facility. Such building, trailer, semi-trailer or other mobile facility shall be constructed in such a manner so as to resist fire from any external or internal source, and shall be weather-resistant and theft-resistant in accordance with the standards governing a two hour fire rating. All openings shall be equipped with appropriate means for locking. All doors shall open outward. All exits shall be clearly marked. All aisles and exit doors shall be kept and maintained unobstructed at all times with no exceptions. 
    All electrical fixtures contained upon the premises shall be dust-ignition proof. All electrical wiring shall comply with Articles 500 and 502 of the National Electrical Code and N.F.P.A. Standard 70 of the National Fire Code. Electrical receptacles or unguarded light fixtures shall not be permitted within 25 feet of any fireworks or pyrotechnic composition. Light fixtures located within 25 feet of any fireworks or novelties shall be properly secured. Electrical disconnect devices shall be located outside each storage area and shall be arranged and engineered to de-energize all electrical power to the building, room, trailer, semi-trailer, or mobile facility. 
    All storage areas shall be under the direct supervision and control of a competent person at least 21 years of age and duly qualified and responsible for enforcing all safety regulations, standards and measures. All doors in such storage areas shall be kept locked at all times. 
    Class C fireworks and novelties shall be stored in their original packages in unopened containers, cases and cartons. All containers shall be organized and placed neatly and in a stable and properly secure manner. 
    All tools used for opening containers, cases and cartons shall be spark-proof. 
    All storage areas shall be kept and maintained in a clean and dry manner, free and clear of all grit, paper, empty used packages, boxes, containers, cases, cartons and all other garbage, rubbish and litter. 
    All garbage, rubbish and solid waste from storage areas shall be disposed of properly and as specified in article 951 of these ordinances. 
    All fireworks of any kind, type or nature shall be removed from the interior of the storage area prior to the performance of any repairs to be made thereto. In addition, such exterior shall be cleaned prior to the making of any such repairs. 
    All fireworks of any kind, type or nature shall be removed from the exterior of the storage area prior to the performance of any repairs to be made thereto. In addition, such exterior shall be cleared of all dead vegetation, garbage, rubbish and other solid waste prior to the making of any such repairs. 
    Smoking, matches, open flames and any and all other spark-producing devices and firearms, except those firearms within the legal possession of duly authorized law enforcement officials, shall not be permitted inside of any storage area or within 25 feet thereof. Signs shall be posted in conspicuous places in, on and around all outdoor displays with the words "FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING" in letters of not less than four inches in height. A ten-pound A.B.C. fire extinguisher shall be kept and maintained not less than a distance of six feet from all storage areas. 
(g)  As used in this article, the term "novelties", as defined in W. Va. Code, § 29-3-23 and in N.F.P.A. Standard 1123 of the National Fire Code, shall mean any device containing small amounts of pyrotechnic or explosive composting, or both, but not described as consumer fireworks, and which produce limited visible or audible effects. 
(h)  As used in this article, the term "Class C fireworks", as defined in N.F.P.A. Standard 1123 of the National Fire Code, shall mean any small fireworks device designed primarily to produce visible effects by combustion or deflagration that complies with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission. 
(i)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j)  The provisions of this section 545.10(a) to (h) shall be enforced by the fire marshal, or his designee, by warrant or citation in the municipal court. 
(k)  The regulations contained within this subsection are hereby adopted with respect to outdoor supervised display of fireworks and novelties, as provided in W. Va. Code, § 29-3-24. 
(1)  Applicants for a fireworks display permit must complete the application as prescribed by state law and the State Fire Marshal and the City of Huntington and submit the required fees, site diagram and other documents, including, but not limited to, a certificate of liability insurance specifically listing the City of Huntington as an additional insured, in the amounts required by the state at a minimum of 30 days prior to the proposed date of the display. 
(2)  The applicant and pyrotechnician shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Huntington and its officers, agents and employees by completing and submitting the prescribed "Hold Harmless Agreement," which shall be maintained in the city fire marshal's office along with copies of the site diagram, permit application and other pertinent documents for a period of not less than two years, which shall be a component of the City of Huntington Application for Fireworks Display. 
(3)  The city fire marshal shall conduct or cause the required inspections to be conducted and make a recommendation to the fire and police chiefs regarding approval of the permit. 
Before making a recommendation for approval, the city fire marshal shall: 
A.  Determine the area where the display is to be conducted; 
B.  Communicate with the applicant or pyrotechnician safety requirements and establish a safety zone based upon the National Fire Protection Association Standard #1123, Code for Fireworks Display, contained in the latest available edition of the National Fire Code. 
(4)  Shells exceeding 5? shall not be fired or utilized at any display. 
(5)  All applicants or pyotechnicians are responsible for securing any other permission(s) or permit(s) that may be required from other property owners, governments or regulatory agencies and that the completion of the application and obtaining of a permit is not meant to replace any of these other requirements. 
(6)  Displays at Harris Riverfront Park must be fired from the west end of the park or the designated area. Materials such as plywood that are approved by the city fire marshal must be used to protect the surfaces of the concrete and asphalt. All display racks must be safely secured. 
(7)  The applicant and pyrotechnician are responsible at their own expense for arranging and providing adequate security personnel (police officers and/or others approved by the chief of police) and barricades to isolate people for the required distances. 
(8)  Barricades shall be in place at least 30 minutes prior to the display and are to be maintained until 30 minutes after display or until an "all-clear" is given by the fire department. 
(9)  For displays at Harris Riverfront Park the applicant must coordinate with the director of public works and/or his/her designee to facilitate the closing of the west end restrooms and the picnic shelter area as deemed appropriate. Restrooms are to be searched and locked prior to the display. 
(10)  The police and/or fire department(s) may require additional safety measures as deemed appropriate. A fire engine will be detailed to stand-by at a safe area in proximity to the display site. 
(11)  No display shall commence until cleared by the fire department. 
(12)  Whoever violates any provision of this subsection (k) hereof shall be fined not more than $500. 
(13)  The city fire marshal and/or his or her designee shall have the authority to terminate any fireworks display under this section at any time if, in the opinion of the city fire marshal and/or his or her designee, the display has become unsafe or if any part of this subsection is not being complied with. 
(l)  The regulations within this subsection are hereby adopted with respect to the indoor supervised display of fireworks and novelties, as defined in W. Va. Code, § 29-3-24. 
(1)  Applicants for an indoor pyrotechnic display permit must complete the application as prescribed by state law and the State Fire Marshal and the City of Huntington and submit the required fees, site diagram and other documents, including, but not limited to, a certificate of liability insurance specifically listing the City of Huntington as an additional insured, in the amounts required by the state at a minimum of 30 days prior to the proposed date of display. 
(2)  The applicant and pyrotechnician shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Huntington and its officers, agents and employees by completing and submitting the prescribed "Hold Harmless Agreement," which shall be maintained in the city fire marshal's office along with copies of the site diagram, permit application and other pertinent documents for a period of not less than two years. This agreement shall be a component of the City of Huntington Application for Fireworks Display. 
(3)  The City Fire Marshal shall conduct or cause the required inspections to be conducted and make a recommendation to the Fire and Police Chiefs regarding approval of the permit. 
(4)  Before making a recommendation for approval, the City Fire Marshal shall: 
A.  Determine the area where the display is to be conducted; 
B.  Communicate with the applicant and pyrotechnician safety requirements and establish a safety zone based upon the National Fire Protection Association Standard #1126, Use of Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience, contained in the latest available edition of the National Fire Code. 
(5)  All applicants are responsible for securing any other permission(s) or permit(s) that may be required from other property owners, governments or regulatory agencies and that the completion of the application or obtaining a permit is not meant to replace any of these other requirements. 
(6)  The police and/or fire department(s) may require additional safety measures as deemed appropriate. A fire engine may be detailed to stand-by at such displays. 
(7)  Whoever violates any provision of this subsection (l) hereof shall be fined not more than $500. 
(8)  The city fire marshal and/or his or her designee shall have the authority to terminate any fireworks display under this section at any time if, in the opinion of the city fire marshal and/or his or her designee, the display has become unsafe or if any part of this subsection is not being complied with. 
(Ord. 1-27-97; Ord. 4-26-99) 
State Law reference- W. Va. Code, §§ 29-3-23, 29-3-24. 
545.11 - DISCHARGING FIREARMS. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
(b)  This section does not apply when firearms are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty, at a licensed indoor shooting range, or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
( Ord. of 1-11-16(1) ) 
545.12 - THROWING OR SHOOTING MISSILES. 
    No person shall throw, shoot or propel an arrow, missile, pellet, stone, metal or other similar substance capable of causing physical harm to persons or property, in or on any public place, in or on the property of another, or from any private property into or onto any public place or the property of another. This section does not apply to supervised archery ranges or instruction nor when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
545.13 - HUNTING PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of firearms, bow and arrow, air rifle or any other means within the corporate limits of the city. 
545.14 - PROHIBITED ACTS AT INDOOR SHOOTING RANGES. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any owner, manager, operator, or employee of an indoor shooting range to permit any person or persons to bring any intoxicating liquor, intoxicating substance, low point beer, controlled dangerous substance or other intoxicating compound or dangerous substance on the premises of any indoor shooting range, excepting any prescribed medications on the person to whom it is prescribed; to permit the consumption of the same on the premises; or to permit them to be left at any place on the premises. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person operating a range to permit any intoxicated or chemically impaired person to be or remain on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to discharge any firearm within an indoor shooting range in a manner that violates any provision of this article or so that the shot, projectile, bullet, or fragments avoid the backstop and other safety precautions and escape the confines of any indoor shooting range causing bodily injury to a person on the premises. An owner, manager, operator, employee, or agent of an indoor shooting range shall supervise the users of the facility and shall remove and bar from the premises any person who refuses to comply with generally accepted safety practices, within the provisions of this article or comply with the rules and regulations concerning safety imposed by the operator. 
(c)  The definition of an "indoor shooting range" may be found in section 1315.02. 
( Ord. of 2-22-16(3) ) 
545.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever violates section 545.04 shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(b)  Every person charged with violating any provision of article 545.14 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. No person convicted of violating this section shall be eligible to hold or apply for the annual indoor shooting range license. 
( Ord. of 2-22-16(3) ) 
Editor's note- See section 501.99(a) for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
ARTICLE 547 - ALARM SYSTEMS[19] 
Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- False fire alarm, § 501.03. 

FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 

547.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or leasee of an alarm system, or his or her employees or agents. 
(Ord. 6-10-08) 
547.02 - FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS. 
    Any person maintaining a fire alarm system within the City of Huntington shall be required to do the following: 
(a)  Maintain said alarm system in good working order at all times. 
(b)  Notify the fire chief or his designee immediately if the fire alarm system is operating improperly or is being repaired. 
(c)  Post in a conspicuous place on the front door of the business, home or other building from where the alarm sounds a list of a minimum of two individuals to be called when the alarm is activated, who may be employees of an alarm company, or provide the names and telephone numbers of two individuals to the fire chief who are to be contacted when the alarm is activated. 
(d)  When contacted by the fire department that the alarm has sounded, the designated call out person in paragraph (c) above shall be required to come to the business, home or other building where the alarm has sounded to provide the department with entry to the premises. Provided, nothing herein shall prevent the fire department from entering said premises where an emergency situation is ongoing and apparent. 
(e)  Take all necessary measures to prevent the alarm from sounding in excess of 15 minutes. 
(Ord. 10-27-97; Ord. 6-10-08) 
547.03 - FEES FOR FALSE ALARM ACTIVITIES. 
(a)  Every private alarm company and owner or occupier of said premises which has had one false alarm, within the preceding month, which has been responded to by the fire department shall be liable to the city for the following fees for every occurrence in the preceding month in excess of one as follows: 
(1)  1st occurrence: $100.00; 
(2)  2nd occurrence: $200.00; and 
(3)  3rd or more occurrence: $400.00 per occurrence. 
(b)  After four false alarms in any 12-month period, every private alarm company and owner or occupier of any structure shall be charged for each false alarm thereafter, notwithstanding the provisions of section 547.02(a) of this article. 
(c)  If the private alarm company or the owner or occupier of the building fail to make payment within 30 days of demand by the city for said fees there shall be a late fee of $400 imposed. 
(d)  The City of Huntington shall have the right to bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction against the private alarm company and the owner or occupier for any and all of the unpaid balance plus any and all related costs. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit or waive any criminal sanctions which may be pursued by the city, and whoever violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $500 and such criminal fines and penalties shall be in addition to the fee. 
(Ord. 3-28-05; Ord. 6-10-08) 
547.04 - PRERECORDED-AUTOMATIC-DIAL ALARM SYSTEMS PROHIBITED. 
    No person, company, or agency shall sell, install or use an automatic telephone dial alarm system which is designed to transmit a prerecorded message to the fire department. All alarms received in this manner are unlawful and the city will not assume responsibility for loss of property, life, or injury to persons which may result from the use of the prerecorded-automatic-dial alarm system. All alarm systems installed within the city shall either be reported by dedicated telephone lines to the fire dispatch or by a direct telephone conversation with a private alarm company representative. Provided, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the city from using a prerecorded-automatic-dial alarm system upon its properties which may terminate at the fire department. 
(Ord. 10-27-97; Ord. 6-10-08) 
547.05 - LIMITATION OF LIABILITY. 
    The city will not assume responsibility for loss of property, life, or injury to persons which may result from the fire department responding to an alarm whether it be false or otherwise. 
(Ord. 6-10-08) 
547.06 - RESERVED. 
    This section is reserved for future legislation. 
POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS 

547.10 - BURGLARY, ROBBERY OR MEDICAL ALARM SYSTEMS. 
    Any person maintaining a burglary, robbery or medical alarm system within the City of Huntington shall be required to do the following: 
(a)  Maintain said alarm system in good working order at all times; 
(b)  Notify the police chief or his designee immediately if the alarm system is operating improperly or is being repaired; 
(c)  Post in a conspicuous place on the front door of the business, home or other building from where the alarm sounds a list of a minimum of two individuals to be called when the alarm is activated, who may be employees of an alarm company, or provide the names and telephone numbers of two individuals or the name of a family member, in case of medical alarms, to the police chief to be called when the alarm is activated. 
(d)  When contacted by the police department that the alarm has sounded the designated call out person in paragraph (c) above shall be required to come to the business, home or other building where the alarm has sounded to provide the department with entry to the premises. Provided, nothing herein shall prevent the police department from entering said premises where an emergency situation is ongoing and apparent. 
(e)  Take all necessary measures to prevent the alarm from sounding in excess of 15 minutes. 
(Ord. 10-27-97) 
547.11 - FEES FOR FALSE ALARM ACTIVITIES. 
(a)  Every private alarm company and owner or occupier of said premises which has had one false alarm, within the preceding month, which has been responded to by the Police Department shall be liable to the city for the following fees for every occurrence in the preceding month in excess of one as follows: 
(1)  1st occurrence: $100.00; 
(2)  2nd occurrence: $200.00; and 
(3)  3rd or more occurrence: $400.00 per occurrence. 
(b)  After four false alarms in any 12-month period, every private alarm company and owner or occupier of any structure shall be charged for each false alarm thereafter, notwithstanding the provisions of section 547.11(a) of this article. 
(c)  If the private alarm company or the owner or occupier of the building fail to make payment within 30 days of demand by the city for said fees there shall be a late fee of $400 imposed. 
(d)  The City of Huntington shall have the right to bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction against the private alarm company and the owner or occupier for any and all of the unpaid balance plus any and all related costs. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit or waive any criminal sanctions which may be pursued by the city, and whoever violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $500 and such criminal fines and penalties shall be in addition to the fee. 
(Ord. 3-28-05) 
547.12 - PRERECORDED-AUTOMATIC-DIAL ALARM SYSTEMS PROHIBITED. 
    No person, company, or agency shall sell, install or use an automatic telephone dial alarm system which is designed to transmit a prerecorded message to the police department. All alarms received in this manner are unlawful and the city will not assume responsibility for loss of property, life, or injury to persons which may result from the use of the prerecorded-automatic-dial alarm system. All alarm systems installed within the city shall either be reported by dedicated telephone lines to the police dispatch or by a direct telephone conversation with a private alarm company representative. Provided nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the city from using a prerecorded-automatic-dial alarm system upon its properties which may terminate at the police department. 
(Ord. 10-27-97) 
547.13 - LIMITATIONS OF LIABILITY. 
    The city will not assume responsibility for loss of property, life, or injury to persons which may result from the police department responding to an alarm, whether it be false or otherwise. 
(Ord. 10-27-97) 
ARTICLE 548 - PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- Recreation advisory commission, Art. 157. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(37). 

548.01 - ANIMALS IN HARRIS RIVERFRONT PARK. 
    The management of Harris Riverfront Park shall have the authority in its discretion to prohibit animals in any area of the park. No person shall cause or allow any animal in his possession or under his authority and control to go into any area of Harris Riverfront Park designated by the management thereof to be a place where animals are prohibited. The foregoing notwithstanding, however, every genuinely blind or deaf person and every person who is physically disabled may be accompanied in any area of Harris Riverfront Park by a guide or support dog wearing a harness and which is specially trained to serve as a guide, leader, listener or support. 
(Ord. 10-10-89) 
548.02 - DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL WASTES. 
    Any person bringing any animal into any park or other recreation area within the limits of the city shall see that any excrement left by such animal is properly disposed of so as not to pose a hazard to other park patrons. 
(Ord. 10-10-89) 
548.03 - BICYCLES AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES IN HARRIS RIVERFRONT PARK. 
    The management of Harris Riverfront Park shall have the authority in its discretion to prohibit bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, scooters or any other vehicles propelled by human power in any area of the park. No person shall ride any bicycle, skateboard, scooter or other such vehicle into any area of Harris Riverfront Park designated by the management thereof to be a place where such vehicles are prohibited. This section shall not be construed to allow the prohibition of any wheelchair or other device used solely for the transportation or ambulation of any genuinely handicapped, disabled or injured person. 
(Ord. 10-10-89) 
548.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any section of this article shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned nor more than 15 days or both. Repeat offenders under section 548.03 may suffer the confiscation of the bicycle or other vehicle involved. 
(Ord. 10-10-89) 
ARTICLE 549 - DISORDERLY HOUSES 

549.01 - DRUG AND GANG HOUSES, HOUSES OF PROSTITUTION AND OTHER DISORDERLY HOUSES. 
(a)  Any premises used for prostitution; illegal gambling; illegal possession, storage, or delivery of or trafficking in controlled substances, or other illegal drug activity is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; provided that no public nuisance or violation of this section shall be deemed to exist unless: 
(1)  The property is used for two or more such offenses or incidents within any 12-month period; and 
(2)  The offense for which the property is used is punishable by imprisonment for one year or more. 
(b)  Any person who owns, manages or controls any premises and who: 
(1)  Encourages or permits an illegal activity described in subsection (a) to occur or continue on such premises; or 
(2)  Fails to implement reasonable and warranted abatement measures identified in the notice issued pursuant to section 549.02, or subsequently agreed to, or other abatement measures which successfully abate the nuisance within the 30-day period following the notice, or within any other agreed upon period, shall be subject to a fine according to the schedule set forth in section 549.99. 
(Ord. of 9-11-17(1) ) 
549.02 - ORDER OF ABATEMENT. 
(a)  The chief of police, mayor, or other authorized representative of the city may bring an action to abate a public nuisance described by this section in the Huntington Municipal Court. 
(b)  The chief of police, mayor, or other authorized representative of the city shall issue an order of abatement upon a finding of liability under this section. 
(c)  The order of abatement shall require the defendant to take measures reasonably calculated to prevent the recurrence of the illegal activity. 
(d)  The order of abatement may also authorize the issuance of search warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been abated or whether the order has been obeyed. 
(e)  Notice of the first violation set forth in section 549.01(a)(1) shall be provided by the police department to the property owner if the owner is different than the person accused of the crime by service of a written notice personally or by service by certified mail at the address listed on tax records for the owner. The mailing of the certified letter shall be sufficient evidence of service on an owner located outside of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-11-17(1) ) 
549.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(1)  No person shall be found in violation of section 549.01(b)(2) unless the city proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the abatement measures were reasonable and warranted, and that the defendant knowingly failed to implement them. 
(2)  A person may be found in violation of subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) of section 549.01 regardless of whether an order of abatement is issued under section 549.02 or in violation of section 549.01(b)(1) regardless of whether a notice has been given under section 552.02. A fine in accordance with subsection (b) hereof may be assessed by the Huntington Municipal Court. 
(b)  Upon a finding of liability under this article, the defendant shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $500 per offense. 
(Ord. of 9-11-17(1) ) 
PART SEVEN - BUSINESS AND TAXATION CODE 
CHAPTER ONE - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 705 - PUBLIC AUCTIONS 

705.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  As used in this article, "auctioneer" means and includes any person who sells goods or real estate at public auction for another on commission or for other compensation. "Auctioneer" does not include: 
(1)  Persons conducting sales at auctions conducted by or under the direction or to any sale required by law to be at auction; 
(2)  The owner of any real or personal property when personally sold at auction by such owner and such owner has not personally conducted an auction within the previous 12-month period; 
(3)  Persons conducting sales pursuant to a deed of trust or other security agreement; 
(4)  Fiduciaries of estates when selling real or personal property of such estate; and 
(5)  Persons conducting sales on behalf of charitable, religious, fraternal or other non-profit organizations. 
(b)  "Public auction" means any public sale of real or personal property when offers or bids are made by prospective purchasers and the property is sold to the highest bidder. 
(c)  "Director of finance" means the Director of Finance and Licensing Officer of the City of Huntington. 
(d)  "Auction house" means a place of business where goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any kind is regularly sold or disposed of for value by public auction. 
(Ord. 5-28-96) 
705.02 - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    No person shall conduct an auction as an auctioneer in the city unless he shall have first obtained from the director of finance a license as provided in section 705.03. 
(Ord. 5-28-96) 
705.03 - PROCEDURE FOR LICENSE. 
    Any person who wishes to conduct an auction as an auctioneer shall apply therefor on forms prescribed by the director of finance and containing such information as the director of finance may require. The annual license fee of $20 shall accompany each annual license application. 
    All such fees collected shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the city. 
    In the event the license is denied the applicant shall be refunded the license fee submitted with the application. 
    Licenses issued shall expire June 30 of each year but shall be renewable upon the submitting of an application and upon the payment of the annual license fee as prescribed above. A penalty of 10% of the annual license fee for each month or part thereof shall be assessed on all auctioneers not in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-28-96; Ord. of 5-13-13(6)) 
705.04 - REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE; DUTIES OF LICENSEE; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE. 
(a)  Each person seeking a license hereunder shall submit, with each application made, satisfactory evidence to the director of finance showing: 
(1)  That he has successfully completed the licensing requirements of W. Va. Code, Ch. 19-2C et seq.; 
(2)  That he has a good reputation; 
(3)  That he is of good, moral and trustworthy character; 
(4)  That he is a citizen of the United States of America; and 
(5)  That he has a general knowledge of the auctioneering profession and the principles involved in conducting an auction. 
(b)  Each licensee shall promptly produce for inspection such license at all sales conducted by or participated in by such licensee when requested to do so by any person and shall keep complete and accurate records of all transactions engaged in for a period of six months which records shall be open to inspection by the director of finance or his authorized representative. 
(c)  The director of finance may, by order, suspend or revoke any license granted hereunder for any violation of this article or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Obtaining a license through false or fraudulent representation; 
(2)  Making any substantial misrepresentation in any application for an auctioneer's license; 
(3)  Engaging in a continued and flagrant course of misrepresentation or for making false promises through an agent, advertisement or otherwise; 
(4)  Failing to account for or remit within a reasonable time any money belonging to others that comes into his or her possession; 
(5)  Being convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction of the State of West Virginia or any other state of a criminal offense involving moral turpitude or a felony or for failing to notify the City of Huntington of any such conviction within 15 days of conviction; 
(6)  Engaging in any conduct of an auctioneer which demonstrates dishonesty or incompetency; 
(7)  Engaging in any other conduct that constitutes fraudulent or dishonest dealing; 
(8)  Acting as an attorney for a client; 
(9)  Failing to satisfy all tax and other obligations imposed by this Part Seven - Business Regulation and Taxation Code; 
(10)  Upon revocation of a license granted by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of West Virginia. 
(Ord. 5-28-96) 
705.05 - ORDERS OF THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; HEARING; REVIEW. 
    Any order of the director of finance as the chief licensing officer of the city shall be served upon the licensee or his designated representative by registered mail, return receipt. Within ten days of the receipt of such order any party adversely affected thereby may, in writing, request a hearing before the municipal court judge. The effect of any order shall be suspended during the course of any hearing or subsequent appeals. Judicial review of the municipal judge's order shall be the same as all other appeals from municipal court. 
(Ord. 5-28-96) 
705.06 - ADVERTISING. 
    In advertising an auction sale by an licensed auctioneer or auction house the principal auctioneer(s) who physically conduct the sale shall be listed prominently in such advertising as used by the auctioneer(s). The individual auctioneer or auctioneers who conduct the sale shall be the person(s) who call for, accept and close bids on the majority of items offered for sale. 
    Nothing contained in the provisions of this article shall be construed to prohibit any other auctioneer, licensed pursuant to this article, from assisting with any auction, notwithstanding the failure to list the names of the other auctioneer(s) in any advertising associated with such auction. 
(Ord. 5-28-96) 
705.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $200 for the first offense, and not less than $400 for the second and subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. 5-28-96) 
ARTICLE 709 - CLOSING-OUT-SALES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Closing-out-sales, W. Va. Code, Ch. 47-11B. 

709.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, as used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed by this section: 
(a)  "Closing-out-sale" means all sales advertised, represented or held forth under the designation of "quitting business", "going out of business", "discontinuance of business", "selling out", "liquidation", "lost our lease", "must vacate", "forced out", "removal", "branch store-discontinuance sale", "building coming down", "end", "final days", "last days", "lease expires", "we give up sale", "we quit sale", "warehouse closing sale", "reorganization sale" and any other advertising or designation by any other expression or characterization similar to any of the foregoing and giving notice to the public that the sale will precede the abandonment of a business location. 
(b)  "Sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water" means all sales advertised, represented or held forth under the designation of "fire sale", "smoke damage sale", "water damage sale", "flood damage sale", "insurance sale" and any other advertising or designation by any other expression or characterization similar to any of the foregoing and giving notice to the public that the goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale have been damaged. 
(c)  "Defunct business sale" means all sales advertised, represented or held forth under the designation of "adjuster's sale", "administrator's sale", "assignee's sale", "bankrupt sale", "bankrupt stock sale", "benefit of administrator's sale", "benefit of creditor's sale", "benefit of trustee's sale", "creditor's committee sale", "creditor's sale", "executor's sale", "insolvent sale", "mortgage sale", "receiver's sale", "trustee's sale" and any other advertising or designation by any other expression or characterization similar to any of the foregoing and conveying the same meaning or giving notice to the public of any sale resulting from death, business failure or other adversity. 
(d)  "Unusual purchase or addition" means any purchase of goods, wares or merchandise during the ninety days preceding the application for a permit the total value of which is at least 10% greater than purchases made by the applicant for a like 90-day period during any one of three years next immediately preceding the year in which the application is made or his peak purchases for any ninety-day period if he has been in business for less than three years. 
(e)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, association, firm or corporation or the plural thereof. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-10) 
709.02 - PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS. 
    No person in this city shall advertise or conduct any sale of any goods, wares or merchandise which is a "closing-out-sale", "a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water" or a "defunct business sale" unless a permit is first obtained to conduct such a sale from the mayor as provided in this article. 
    This article shall, however, not be construed to apply to or affect the following persons: 
(a)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Persons who are required to file an accounting with a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers such as sheriffs, constables and marshals. 
(d)  Any publisher or employee of a newspaper, magazine or any operator or employee of a radio or television broadcasting station who publishes or broadcasts any such advertisement in good faith without knowledge of its false, deceptive and misleading character or without knowledge that the provisions of this article are not being complied with. 
(e)  Persons conducting sales by and on behalf of licensed insurers. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-11) 
709.03 - PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. 
    Any person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application under oath to the mayor. The application shall be accompanied by the approved bond specified in section 709.08. If the application is for a "closing-out-sale" or a "defunct business sale", it shall be filed at least ten days prior to the date on which such sale is to commence. If the application is for a "sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water", it may be made at any time prior to the date on which such sale is to commence. 
    All applications for a permitted sale regulated by this article shall set forth and contain the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant who must be the true owner of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold, and if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners, or if the applicant is a corporation or association, the date and place of incorporation or organization, the address of the principal office within the City and the names and addresses of all the officers of the applicant. 
(b)  The name and address of the person who will be in charge and responsible for the conduct of such sale. 
(c)  The exact address of the place at which the proposed sale is to be conducted and the length of time the applicant has been engaged in business at such location. 
(d)  The date on which it is proposed to begin the sale. 
(e)  The nature of the occupancy where such sale is to be held whether by lease or otherwise and the effective date of termination of such occupancy. 
(f)  The reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of the goods, wares or merchandise to be offered at such sale. 
(g)  A statement of the descriptive name of the sale and the reasons why the name is truthfully descriptive of the sale. 
(h)  A statement that the business is to be terminated permanently or reopened at another location, the location of the premises at which the business is to be moved, if the applicant intends to resume the operation of the business upon the termination of the sale and the name or designation under which such business is to be resumed. 
(i)  A full, complete, detailed and itemized inventory of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records which inventory shall: 
(1)  Itemize the goods to be offered for sale and contain sufficient information concerning each item including quantity, make, brand name, model and manufacturer's number, if any, to clearly identify it. 
(2)  List separately any goods to be offered for sale which were purchased and received during a 90-day period immediately prior to the date of making application for the license. 
(3)  The total retail value of the inventory of goods, wares and merchandise to be offered at such sale based on the inventory used for applicant's most recent federal income tax return adjusted for sales and purchases. 
(4)  If the application is for a permit to conduct a "sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water" and the applicant was not the owner at the time when the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered at the contemplated sale were damaged, he shall attach to the application certified copies of the bill of sale and all other documents connected with such transfer obtained by him from the previous owner of such goods, wares and merchandise. 
(5)  If the application is for a permit to conduct a "defunct business sale" and the applicant was not the owner of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered at the contemplated sale at the time of occurrence of the circumstances warranting the termination of such business, he shall attach to the application certified copies of the bill of sale and the official appraisal made by the trustee, receiver, assignee for benefit of creditor, referee in bankruptcy or the personal representative of a decedent. 
(j)  A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after the application is made. 
(k)  A statement that all goods included in such inventory have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and that such inventory comprises no goods purchased on consignment. 
(l)  A statement that no merchandise listed in the inventory has been the subject of a permitted sale conducted within one year prior to the date of the application unless such merchandise was damaged by fire, smoke or water while in the possession of the applicant. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-12) 
709.04 - INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL. 
    Upon receipt of the application, the mayor may, in his discretion, make or cause to be made an examination, or order an investigation of the applicant and all the facts contained in the application and inventory in relation to the proposed sale. A permit shall be denied or refused if any one or more of the following facts or circumstances are found by it to exist: 
(a)  That the applicant has not been the owner of the business advertised or described in the application for a permit hereunder for a period of at least three months prior to the date of the application or, if the applicant is a partnership, corporation or association, controlling interest in the corporation or association was transferred within six months prior to the date of the application for a permit hereunder except: 
(1)  Where the application is for a permit for a "sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water" or a "defunct business sale" and the inventory listed in the application contains only those goods, wares or merchandise which were on the premises at the time of the occurrence of the circumstances warranting the granting of a permit hereunder. 
(2)  Upon the death of a person doing business in this city, his heirs, distributees, devisees, legatees or their successors and assigns shall have the right to apply at any time for a permit hereunder. 
(3)  Where a business is required or compelled to be discontinued because the premises whereupon it is being conducted has been condemned, taken for purposes of urban renewal or development or because the premises must be vacated because of legal or judicial proceedings. 
(b)  That in the case of a "closing-out-sale" the applicant either as owner, partner, member of an association or principal stockholder of a corporation was granted a prior permit hereunder within one year preceding the date of the filing of the application. 
(c)  That the inventory contains goods, wares or merchandise not purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders within cancellation privileges. 
(d)  That the inventory contains goods, wares or merchandise purchased by the applicant on consignment except if the consigned goods, wares or merchandise have been damaged while in the consignee's possession. 
(e)  That the applicant except in the case of an application for a permit to conduct a "sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water" or a "defunct business sale" either as owner, partner, officer of an association or principal stockholder of a corporation was granted a prior permit hereunder within one year preceding the date of the filing of the application at the particular location for which the permit is sought or, within one year prior to the date of filing of the application, has conducted a sale in connection with which he advertised or represented that the entire business conducted at the particular location for which the permit is sought was to be closed out or terminated. 
(f)  That the applicant has within one year, prior to the filing of the application, been convicted of a violation of this article. 
(g)  That the goods, wares or merchandise as described in the inventory were transferred or assigned to the applicant prior to the date of the filing of the application and that such transfer or assignment was not made for a valuable and adequate consideration. 
(h)  That the inventory contains goods, wares or merchandise purchased by the applicant or added to his stock in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling the same at such sale. For this purpose any unusual purchase or addition to the stock of such goods, wares and merchandise made within 90 days prior to the date of the filing of such application shall be presumptive evidence that such purchase or additions were made in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling the same at such sale. 
(i)  That any representation made in the application is false. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-13) 
709.05 - DURATION OF SALE; PERMIT FEE. 
    A permit to conduct a sale issued pursuant to this article shall be good for no more than a period of 30 consecutive calendar days and may be renewed for one consecutive period not exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days upon the affidavit of the applicant that the goods listed in the inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods have been or will be added to the inventory previously filed pursuant to this article by purchase, acquisition on consignment or otherwise. The application for renewal shall be made not more than ten days prior to the time of the expiration of the permit and shall contain a new inventory of the goods remaining on hand at the time the application for renewal is made which new inventory shall be prepared and furnished in the same manner and form as the original inventory. The mayor shall receive from the applicant for such permit, upon the granting thereof, a fee of $50 and upon the renewal thereof a fee of $100. The applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of the fee paid if the application is refused, denied or revoked. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-14) 
709.06 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT; GROUNDS. 
    The mayor may, on his own initiative, or shall, upon the written and verified complaint of any resident of this city, investigate any person permitted by him under the provisions of this article to determine if such person is violating or has violated this article. The mayor shall immediately revoke such person's permit if, after such investigation, he shall determine that: 
(a)  Any sale by the application is conducted in violation of any provisions of this article. 
(b)  The applicant has made any material misstatement in his application for such permit. 
(c)  The applicant has failed to include in the inventory required by the provisions of this article the goods, wares or merchandise required to be contained in such inventory. 
(d)  The applicant has added or permitted to be added to such sale or offered or permitted to be offered at such sale any goods, wares or merchandise not described in the original application and inventory. 
(e)  The applicant made or permitted to be made any false, misleading or deceptive statements in advertising such sale, whether written or oral, or in displaying, ticketing or pricing goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-15) 
709.07 - NOTICE OF DENIAL, REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT; JUDICIAL REVIEW. 
    Whenever the mayor denies or refuses to issue a permit or revokes any permit, he shall make and enter an order to that effect and shall cause a copy of such order to be served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the applicant or person permitted by him, as the case may be. Such order shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law upon which such order was made and entered. Any person adversely affected by an order made and entered by the mayor is entitled to judicial review thereof. Such judicial review shall be in the circuit court for the county in which the sale is to be or is being conducted. The judgment of the circuit court shall be final unless reversed, vacated or modified on appeal to the Supreme Court of Appeals of the State. Legal counsel and services for the mayor in appeal proceedings in any circuit court and the Supreme Court of Appeals shall be provided by the city attorney or his assistants and in appeal proceedings in any circuit court by the city attorney as well, all without additional compensation. The mayor may employ special counsel to represent himself in a particular proceeding. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-16) 
709.08 - BOND REQUIRED FOR PERMIT. 
    No permit shall be issued unless the applicant files with the mayor a bond with corporate surety payable to the city conditioned upon the faithful observance of all the provisions of this article, the payment to the city of all taxes due and owing or which may become due and the indemnifying of any purchaser at such sale who suffers any loss by reason of misrepresentation made in connection with such sale; provided, that the aggregate liability of the surety for all breaches of the conditions of the bond shall in no event exceed the amount of such bond. The amount of such bond shall be determined as follows: 5% of the first $100,000 of the retail value of all the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered at such sale, 2% of the next $400,000 and 1% of the balance. Such bond shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by the city attorney or his assistant. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-17) 
709.09 - PERMIT NOT APPLICABLE TO BRANCH STORES AND ADDITIONAL WAREHOUSES. 
    If the applicant owns, conducts or operates more than one store or warehouse in connection with such store or warehouse specified in the application, the permit issued will apply only to the one store or warehouse for which it was issued, and no other store or warehouse may advertise or represent in any way that it is cooperating with or participating in any way in the permitted sale, nor shall the permitted store or warehouse or any person advertise or represent that any other person, store or warehouse is cooperating with or participating in the permitted sale. The permitted sale conducted by any store or warehouse of a chain or group of stores or warehouses shall be conducted solely at the location of the store or warehouses for which the permit was obtained and no goods, wares or merchandise shall be brought from any other store or warehouse and placed on sale at the store or warehouse permitted to conduct a sale hereunder. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-18) 
709.10 - SUBSTITUTION OF GOODS VOIDS PERMIT; CHANGE OF SALE PROHIBITED. 
(a)  Any substitution for or addition to goods described in an inventory filed pursuant to this article or any change in the time or place for a sale conducted pursuant to this article shall be unlawful and shall void any permit issued to conduct a sale pursuant to this article and such permit shall be revoked. 
(b)  In the case of a sale permitted under this article conducted by any person in addition to conducting a business or selling other goods, wares or merchandise not included in the inventory accompanying the application, the goods to be sold at such sale shall be clearly and distinctly segregated, marked or identified and advertised, if at all, so that both on display and in advertising, such goods may be readily ascertained. Any commingling of the goods with other stocks of such person in such a manner as to cause the goods to lose their separate identity either on display or in advertising shall be unlawful. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-19) 
709.11 - COPY OF APPLICATION, INVENTORY AND PERMIT TO BE POSTED. 
    A copy of the application for a permit to conduct a sale under this article, including a copy of the inventory filed therewith, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the sales room or place where the inventoried goods are to be sold so that the public may be informed of the facts relating to the goods before purchasing same. Any advertisement or announcement published in connection with the sale shall conspicuously show on its face the number of the permit, the date of its expiration and if applicable, the location where the business is to be resumed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-20) 
709.12 - OPENING OF SIMILAR BUSINESS WITHIN ONE YEAR OF SALE PROHIBITED. 
    Opening of a business similar to the one for which the sale permitted pursuant to this article was conducted except the permitted "sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water" by the person, partner of a partnership, officer of an association or principal stockholder of a corporation who or which conducted the sale upon the same premises within one year of the termination of the sale shall constitute a violation of this article. Every day in which business is conducted within the prohibited period of one year shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-21) 
709.13 - RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY PERMITTEE. 
(a)  Suitable books and records concerning such sale shall be kept by the permittee for the duration of the permitted sale and one year thereafter and shall be open for inspection by the mayor or his duly authorized representative. 
(b)  Upon the termination of a sale permitted hereunder, the applicant shall, within 30 days of such termination, file a statement with the mayor stating: 
(1)  The total retail value of the goods, wares or merchandise not disposed of during the sale. 
(2)  The ultimate disposition thereof and, if transferred to another, the name and address of the transferee. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-22) 
709.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $100 or be imprisoned not exceeding 30 days. Each day any sale is conducted in violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute and be a separate violation of the provisions of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 28-23) 
ARTICLE 710 - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

710.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The city finds that allowing mobile food vendors to operate, subject to practical regulations and limitations, is beneficial to persons living and working within the city. This article recognizes the unique physical and operational characteristics of mobile food vending, establishes standards for mobile food vending operations, and promotes practices that serve the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Commissary means a permitted establishment or facility in a fixed location that is used for the storage of supplies for a mobile food service vehicle, the preparation of food to be sold or served at a mobile food service vehicle, or the cleaning or servicing of a mobile food service vehicle or the equipment used in conjunction with a mobile food service vehicle. 
(2)  Edible food products means those products that are ready for immediate consumption, including prepackaged food and food cooked, prepared or assembled on-site. The term "edible food products" does not include fresh produce unless the produce has been packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared for consumption. 
(3)  Food truck means a vehicle from which edible food products are cooked, prepared or assembled with the intent to serve or sell such items to the general public, provided further that food trucks may also serve or sell other edible food products and beverages that have been prepared or assembled elsewhere. Food truck operators may market their products to the public via advertising, including social media. 
(4)  Food truck rally means a gathering of more than five food trucks that may or may not have been coordinated or advertised. A food truck rally requires a special event license. 
(5)  Ice cream truck means a vehicle from which the operator sells only pre-packaged frozen dairy or water-based food products and pre- packaged beverages. For purposes of this article, a non-motorized cart from which such products are sold shall be considered an ice cream truck. 
(6)  Location means any single property parcel, any combination of contiguous parcels that are owned or controlled by a single entity or affiliated entities, the abutting public ways of afore-described properties, or all public ways consisting of or greater than two contiguous city blocks, regardless of abutting ownership or control. 
(7)  Mobile food service vehicle means a food truck, canteen truck or ice cream truck and includes any portable unit that is attached to a motorized vehicle and intended for use in the operation of a food truck, canteen truck or ice cream truck. 
(8)  Mobile food vendor permit means a permit issued by the city for the operation of a mobile food service vehicle. 
(9)  Operate means to serve or sell food, beverages, and other permitted items from a mobile food service vehicle and includes all tenses of the word. Operator means any person operating or permitted to operate a mobile food service. 
(10)  Permit administrator means the city's planner or a person designated by the planner to oversee the issuance, suspension and revocation of mobile food vendor permits. 
(11)  Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street, including devices moved by human power. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.03 - GENERALLY. 
(a)  It is a violation to operate a mobile food service vehicle at any location except in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Mobile food service vehicle operators must comply with all federal, state and local licensing and permitting regulations and all business tax, sales tax and other tax requirements. 
(c)  All mobile food service vehicle must comply with the zoning ordinance and all zoning requirements set forth in this Code. If a use to which a mobile food service vehicle is to be put is disallowed by zoning law in a designated zone or district, it shall not otherwise be permitted under this article. 
(d)  The permit administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations supplemental to the provisions herein for the purpose of carrying out the administration and enforcement of such provisions. 
(e)  The sole activity that may be exempted from zoning ordinance compliance set forth in subsection (c) herein shall be for vendors whose business is itinerant in nature and where the vendor stops solely for the purpose of making a sale or sales and remains in one area, hereby designated as one city block, for less than ten minutes. Further, door to door sales of food items not intended for immediate consumption, as well as the home delivery of prepared food, shall be exempted from subsection (c). 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.04 - LOCATIONS AND HOURS OF OPERATION. 
(a)  Food trucks. 
(1)  Right-of-way/public property. Food trucks may not operate within the public right-of-way or on any city property except as may be specifically allowed by the city. When allowed in the public right-of-way, a food truck must be positioned so as to comply with the requirements of section 710.05(b) herein. Operation of food trucks within any park shall be subject to rules and regulations established by the Greater Huntington Parks and Recreation Board. Operation of food trucks on city streets adjacent to any park shall be governed by this article. Food trucks may not operate on property owned by a public entity other than the city unless specifically allowed by such public entity. No unattended food truck shall be left at any time in the right-of-way or parked on any other public property overnight. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this article, no food truck may operate on the public right-of-way, on any other public property or on any private property directly fronting, partially fronting or abutting an existing restaurant, concession stand or any other entity serving prepared meals or food during business hours. 
(2)  Private property. A food truck with a current mobile food vendor permit may operate on private property if allowed as a permitted use under the zoning ordinances of this Code, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Permission. Food trucks selling to the public from private property shall have the written permission of the property owner, which shall be made available to the city immediately upon request. 
B.  Maximum number of food trucks. No more than ten food trucks may operate at any location unless a special event license has been issued. 
C.  Placement on lot. Food truck operations, including any canopies, signage, equipment, and seating areas, may not occupy more than three parking spaces per food truck. Food trucks not parked within designated parking spaces shall not block fire lanes, designated traffic lanes or ingress or egress to or from a building or street. 
(3)  Hours of operation. Food trucks may operate beginning at 6:00 a.m. and ending at 3:00 a.m. in the downtown business district or any other district not identified as a residential district in the zoning ordinance. The city may place other restrictions on an operator's mobile food vendor permit, or the hours of operation may be more restrictive in accordance with a property owner's directive when private property is used. The city may permit extended hours of operation for a licensed special event. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.05 - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Vehicle requirements. 
(1)  Design and construction. Mobile food service vehicles must be designed and constructed for the purpose of preparation and sale of the specific type of food being sold, or they must be so modified to comply with this Article and all applicable public health and safety laws. 
(2)  Licensing. Mobile food service vehicles must be licensed and equipped in accordance with the rules and regulations of all local, state and federal agencies having jurisdiction over such vehicles. The preparation and sale of food from mobile food service vehicles must comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  Right-of-way. 
(1)  Mobile food service vehicles other than ice cream trucks may not operate, stop, stand or park in any area of the right-of-way that is intended for use by vehicular travel, except in the event of a street closure for a special event. Mobile food service vehicles, including ice cream trucks, may not operate, stop, stand or park that in any way violates the provisions of the traffic control ordinances of this Code, impedes the flow of traffic, interferes with ingress or egress to or from any property or presents an unsafe condition for patrons, pedestrians or other vehicles. 
(2)  Mobile food service vehicles shall park facing the same direction as traffic, at a distance of no more than 12 inches between the curb face or edge of pavement and with the service window of the vehicle facing the curb or edge or pavement. 
(3)  When a mobile food service vehicle is allowed to operate in the public right-of way, no seating area shall be provided, except as permitted in conjunction with a street closure for a special event or if there is an area provided on a paved sidewalk that permits compliance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Business access. No mobile food service vehicle may operate in a location that: 
(1)  Impedes the ingress to or egress from another business or otherwise causes undue interference with access to another business; 
(2)  Blocks the lawfully placed signage of another business; or 
(3)  Prevents access to another business by emergency vehicles. 
(d)  Pedestrians. If on or adjacent to a sidewalk, the components of a mobile food service vehicle's operations, including signage, seating areas and patron queue may not reduce the clear pedestrian path of travel on the sidewalk to less than four feet. All awnings or canopies of the vehicle shall be at least six feet, eight inches above the sidewalk. 
(e)  Safety and fire prevention. All mobile food service vehicles must be equipped with fire extinguishers. No power cord, cable or equipment shall be extended across any public street, sidewalk or other public property. 
(f)  Noise. No sounds that are otherwise prohibited by this Code may be produced by a mobile food service vehicle's operations. All generators used by food trucks must comply with all applicable noise ordinances. The permit administrator may request a demonstration of the generator at any time. If, in the opinion of the permitting authority the generator either violates any noise ordinance, or if it would cause undue annoyance or inconvenience to the public or to residences, the permit may be refused or revoked until a satisfactory alternative is provided. 
(g)  Support methods. No mobile food service vehicle may use stakes, rods or any other method of support that must be drilled, driven or otherwise fixed into or onto asphalt, pavement, curbs, sidewalks or buildings. 
(h)  Spills. To prevent discharges into waterways, drainage systems or public sewer systems, each food truck shall comply with all stormwater regulations of the city and all regulations regarding prohibited discharges to public sewers. In addition, each vehicle shall have a spill response plan to contain and remediate any discharge from the vehicle which shall be provided in the vehicle for inspection when requested by the city fire marshal. 
(i)  Waste collection. The area of a mobile food service vehicle operation must be kept neat and orderly at all times. Operation of a mobile food service vehicle in an area is deemed acceptance by the operator of the responsibility for cleanliness of the area surrounding the operations regardless of the occurrence or source of any waste in the area. During each period of operation at a location, the operator must provide proper trash receptacles for public use that are sufficient and suitable to contain all trash generated by the mobile food service vehicle. All trash receptacles must be emptied when full, and all waste must be removed prior to departure of a mobile food service vehicle from a location. 
(j)  Pedestrian service only. Mobile food service vehicles shall serve pedestrians only. Drive-through or drive-in service is prohibited. 
(k)  Signage. Signage for each mobile food service vehicle shall be limited to signs on the exterior or interior of the vehicle and one sandwich board sign. All signs on the exterior of the vehicle shall be secured and shall not project more than six inches from the vehicle. One sandwich board sign may be placed outside the mobile food service vehicle, provided that the base of a sandwich board sign must be placed no further than two feet beyond the mobile food service vehicle. Sandwich board signs shall not exceed eight square feet per side or 48 inches in height and shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(l)  Alcohol Sales. Food trucks may not sell alcoholic beverages, except as may be specifically allowed by applicable state law and city ordinance. Ice cream trucks are prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages. 
(m)  Insurance. 
(1)  Mobile food service vehicles must maintain all motor vehicle insurance coverage required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(2)  Mobile food service vehicles operating on city property other than the right-of-way shall at all times maintain such further insurance coverage as may be required by the regulations promulgated by the mayor with respect to the protection of the municipality. In the event the required coverage is not properly maintained, permission to operate on city property will be immediately revoked. 
(n)  Exterior cooking equipment. Any food preparation equipment outside of the mobile food service vehicle shall not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and the use and operation of such equipment shall not create safety hazards for the public. Food shall not be served to customers directly from any outside food preparation equipment. Any smoker or other exterior equipment that generates heat shall be surrounded with at least three traffic safety cones. 
(o)  Commissary. A commissary, as defined in this article, shall not be located in any residential zoning district unless permitted as a home occupation in compliance with the zoning ordinance and applicable Health Department requirements. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.06 - MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PERMITS. 
(a)  Required. The designated permit administrator shall oversee the issuance, suspension and revocation of mobile food vendor permits. No mobile food service vehicle may operate within the city without a mobile food vendor permit issued by the city. A mobile food vendor permit authorizes the holder only to engage in the vending of products from a mobile food service vehicle in compliance with this Code and as specified on the permit. The mobile food vendor permit must be prominently displayed when the mobile food service vehicle is in operation. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to contractual arrangements between a mobile food service vehicle operator and any individual, group or entity for pre-arranged catering at a specific location for a period of not more than four hours, provided that the mobile food service vehicle is not open to or serving the general public. 
(c)  Application. 
(1)  In order to obtain a mobile food vendor permit, a mobile food service vehicle operator must complete an application form provided by the city. The application shall include the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the owner of the vehicle. 
B.  Name and address of the business owner and the vehicle identification number (VIN) of the vehicle used as a mobile food service vehicle. 
C.  A certificate of insurance coverage, including required motor vehicle insurance coverage. 
D.  A signed acknowledgement that the operator has read this article and will comply with all applicable requirements herein. 
E.  Any additional information required by the permit administrator. 
(2)  Submittal of an application for a mobile food vendor permit must be accompanied by payment of an application fee in the amount of $50, provided that for any mobile food service vehicle previously found to be operating within the city without a current permit, the application fee shall be $100. 
(3)  Any mobile food truck operator must comply with the requirements of the Home Occupation Ordinance section 1341.22 in addition to the Mobile Food Vendor Permit requirements, if business activity is conducted within a residential unit in Huntington city limits. 
(4)  Each mobile food vendor permit holder shall have an ongoing duty to provide the city with notice of any change to any of the information submitted with its permit application. 
(d)  Issuance. A mobile food vendor permit shall be issued upon verification that an application has been completed in accordance with the requirements of this section, except that no such permit will be issued to an operator whose permit is currently suspended or has been revoked within the preceding 12 months, or to any person who intends to operate the same mobile food service vehicle for which the operator's permit is currently suspended or has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. If the permit administrator denies the application, such denial shall be in writing and provided to the applicant within 15 days of receipt of the application. 
(e)  Expiration and transferability. A mobile food vendor permit expires at change of ownership, remodeling of the mobile food truck or substantial revision of the home occupation use. A mobile food vendor permit may not be transferred. The operator of the mobile food service vehicle shall notify the city within ten days of any such sale, remodeling or substantial revision to the home occupation use and shall update any information that has been changed since the submittal of the application for the mobile food vendor permit. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.07 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Citation. Each of the following circumstances constitute a violation of this article, for which a citation may be issued by a code enforcement officer or police officer of the city: 
(1)  Operation of a mobile food service vehicle without a current, valid permit, provided further that each day and each separate location at which a mobile food service vehicle is operated without a current, valid permit shall be considered a separate violation. 
(2)  Holding a food truck rally without a special event license or failing to comply with the conditions of approval for a special event license. 
(3)  Failure to comply with any other provision of this article. 
(b)  Suspension of permit. A mobile food vendor permit shall be suspended by the permit administrator if: 
(1)  The applicant for the permit knowingly provided false information on the application. 
(2)  Two violations of this article have occurred within a six-month period in conjunction with the mobile food service vehicle for which the permit has been issued. 
(3)  The operator of a mobile food service vehicle fails to maintain a current, valid vehicle registration, health department permit, business license or proof of required motor vehicle insurance coverage. 
(4)  The permittee has failed to pay taxes or licenses as they become due. 
(c)  Revocation of permit. A mobile food vendor permit shall be revoked by the permit administrator if: 
(1)  Four violations of this article have occurred within a 12-month period. 
(2)  A mobile food service vehicle is operated in an unlawful manner so as to constitute a breach of the peace or otherwise threaten the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(d)  Reinstatement. 
(1)  Suspended permit. An operator may reinstate a suspended mobile food vendor permit by taking such actions as may be necessary to correct a mobile food service vehicle's noncompliance and paying a reinstatement fee of $500 to offset the city' cost of enforcement measures, inspections and compliance verifications. 
(2)  Revoked permit. An operator whose mobile food vendor permit has been revoked may apply for a new permit after 12 months from the date of revocation, provided the operator has taken such actions as may be necessary to correct a mobile food service vehicle's noncompliance. The operator shall pay a permit reinstatement fee of $500 to offset the city's cost of enforcement measures, inspections and compliance verifications. 
(3)  No permit will be issued to any person who intends to operate the same mobile food service vehicle for which the operator's permit is currently suspended or has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(e)  Notice. Notice of the suspension or revocation of a mobile food vendor permit shall be issued to the operator in writing by the permit administrator. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.08 - APPEALS. 
(a)  Filing. The denial, suspension or revocation of a mobile food vendor permit by the permit administrator may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal, establishing the grounds for the appeal, with the mayor or designee no later than ten business days following receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(b)  Mayor's review. When an appeal is filed with the mayor as set forth herein, the mayor or his designee may request such additional information from the operator and the permit administrator as may be deemed necessary. At the mayor or designee's discretion, the appeal may be decided based on the written information and documentation submitted, or a hearing may be scheduled with the operator and the permit administrator. The mayor's decision shall be issued in writing, based on a written summation of the pertinent facts, and shall be final. The mayor may reverse the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, or may reduce the waiting period required for reinstatement of a revoked permit if it is determined that the operator has taken reasonable steps to mitigate the violations leading to the revocation and to prevent future violations. 
(c)  Refunds. There shall be no refund of an application fee for a mobile food vendor permit that has been denied. There shall be no refund of a reinstatement fee for a suspended or revoked permit unless the mayor or his designee determines on appeal that the permit administrator acted in error in suspending or revoking the permit. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
710.09 - MISCELLANEOUS. 
(a)  In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part hereof, and the whole or part of any existing ordinance of the city, the provision that establishes the higher standard shall prevail. 
(b)  If any section, subsection, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, subsection, clause, provision or portion of this article. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(2) ) 
ARTICLE 713 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Trespass, § 533.02. 
State Law reference- Solicitation of charitable funds, W. Va. Code, Art. 29-19; obtaining money by false premises, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-24 et seq. 

713.01 - CREATION; NUMBER, QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM. 
    For the purpose of authorizing, regulating, restricting and controlling the public begging or soliciting of moneys or other form of financial assistance, or the sale or offer for sale of anything of value for or in behalf of any charitable, religious, patriotic, social, benevolent, fraternal or philanthropic organization or purpose in the city, there is hereby created a public solicitations commission, consisting of three members, who shall be over the age of 21 years, residents of the city and who shall be selected in the manner provided in this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-1) 
713.02 - MEMBERSHIP. 
    The mayor shall select three members having the qualifications set forth in section 713.01 to serve on the public solicitations commission as members thereof. Each member shall be subject to the approval of council. At the expiration of the term of any such member by death, resignation or removal, the mayor shall designate his successor in office. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-2) 
713.03 - COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS. 
    Members of the public solicitations commission shall serve without compensation. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-3) 
713.04 - MEETINGS. 
    The public solicitations commission shall meet in regular session at least once each month, and shall meet more often, if necessary, to carry out and to perform the duties imposed upon the commission by this article and other city ordinances. The secretary of the commission shall give notice to each member of the commission, by United States mail or verbally, of the time and place of each meeting of the commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-4) 
713.05 - QUORUM. 
    Two members of the public solicitations commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-5) 
713.06 - CHAIRMAN; SECRETARY. 
    The chairman of the public solicitations commission shall be elected by and from the membership of the commission. The city clerk shall act as secretary of the commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-6) 
713.07 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The public solicitations commission shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations for the carrying out of purposes of the commission expressed in section 713.01. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-7) 
713.08 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    No person shall solicit money or any other form of financial assistance, or shall sell or offer for sale anything of value, for or in behalf of any charitable, religious, patriotic, social, benevolent, fraternal or philanthropic organization or purpose in the city unless such person shall first obtain a permit to solicit or sell such thing of value for such purpose, which permit shall be issued under the terms and regulations stated in this article. 
(Ord. 8-31-81) 
713.09 - SECRETARY TO RECEIVE PERMIT APPLICATIONS. 
    The mayor shall take and receive applications for permits required by section 713.08. When an applicant files with the commission an application on a form approved by the commission, the applicant shall therein answer, under oath, all of the questions contained in the form and shall furnish to the commission all such information as may be of assistance to the commission in determining whether a permit is granted to such person. The failure or refusal to file an application and furnish the information shall constitute sufficient grounds for the commission to deny the applicant such permit. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-9) 
713.10 - APPLICATION TO BE SWORN TO; INFORMATION TO BE CONTAINED IN APPLICATION. 
    Applications for permits required by this article shall be sworn to and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name of the organization applying for a permit and the address of its headquarters. 
(b)  The names and addresses of its principal officers and managers. 
(c)  The purposes for which the permit is desired and the use to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(d)  The names and addresses of the persons by whom the receipts are to be disbursed. 
(e)  The names and addresses of the persons who will be in direct charge of such sale or solicitation. 
(f)  An outline of the method to be used in such solicitation or sale. 
(g)  The amount of moneys expected to be realized from the solicitation or sale. 
(h)  The amount of wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid in connection with such solicitation or sale, together with the manner in which the wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments are to be expended and to whom they are to be paid. 
(i)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable, religious, patriotic, social, benevolent, fraternal or philanthropic work now being done by the applicant organizations. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-10) 
713.11 - GRANT OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT; FEE; TERM AND RENEWAL. 
    The public solicitations commission shall determine from the application provided for in section 713.10 and from such facts as may be developed in connection with the application, whether or not a permit is granted the applicant, and its decision shall be noted in the minutes of the commission. If the decision of the commission is that a permit is granted, the director of the division of finance, upon receipt of a fee of $1, shall issue to the applicant a permit for the period designated in the minutes, which shall be for a period not longer than three months; provided, that the commission may renew and extend such permit for a period not to exceed three months. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-11) 
713.12 - PERMIT CONDITIONS. 
    The public solicitations commission may impose such conditions and terms to a permit issued under this article as to it may deem reasonable. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-12) 
713.13 - PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE; USE OF SOLICITORS AND REPRESENTATIVES BY PERMITTEE. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be nontransferable; provided, that this shall not prevent any permittee from using any number of solicitors and representatives as is reported to and approved by the public solicitations commission. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-13) 
713.14 - PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the public solicitations commission upon noncompliance on the part of the holder with the terms of the permit or evidence of fraud or misrepresentation committed by the licensee or his agents in and about the solicitation, sale or offer for sale for purposes set forth in section 713.01 or if, in the opinion of the commission, any practice pursued or any act committed in the solicitation or disposition of the proceeds is unfair, unjust or inequitable. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-14) 
713.15 - CARDS FOR INDIVIDUAL SOLICITORS AND REPRESENTATIVES. 
    The director of the division of finance shall furnish any permittee with cards for the use of individual solicitors or representatives in such quantity as directed by the public solicitations commission in its minutes, upon payment by the permittee of $0.15 for each card. Such cards shall state that the bearer is licensed by the city to make the solicitation or sale described thereon. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-15) 
713.16 - DISPOSITION OF FEES; PAYMENT OF EXPENSES. 
    All fees paid to the director of the division of finance by virtue of this article shall be deposited in the general fund. The operating expenses required in the administration of this article shall be paid by the director of the division of finance from the general fund of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-16) 
713.17 - APPEAL FROM ACTION OF SOLICITATIONS COMMISSION. 
    An applicant for a permit under the provisions of this article may appeal from any action of the public solicitations commission to council, provided, that notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 14 days of the date of the action appealed from. No formal method of procedure shall be necessary for making such appeal. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-17) 
713.18 - EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN SOLICITATIONS. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent or forbid any pastor, priest, rabbi, rector, minister of the gospel or the governing body of any church, or the members or officers of any established society, association or corporation that is organized exclusively for charitable, religious, patriotic, social, benevolent, fraternal or philanthropic purposes, not operated for profit in which none of the net earnings of such organization inure to the pecuniary benefit of any person, shareholder or individual, from conducting a private solicitation among the members thereof, and nothing contained in this article shall grant the public solicitations commission the right to prevent or prohibit any pastor, priest, rabbi, rector, minister of the gospel or the governing body of any church from making a public solicitation. 
(1964 Code Sec. 8-18) 
713.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 717 - COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS AT RESIDENCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Trespass, § 533.02; charitable solicitations, Art. 713; license taxes, § 739.11. 
State Law reference- Solicitation of charitable funds, W. Va. Code, Art. 29-19; obtaining money by false premises, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-24 et seq. 

717.01 - RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION A NUISANCE. 
    Except as provided by section 713.08, the practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. 8-31-81) 
717.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever perpetrates a nuisance as described and prohibited in section 717.01 shall be fined not less than $75, or more than $200. 
(Ord. 7-13-81) 
ARTICLE 721 - SECURITY DEVICES 

721.01 - SECURITY REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS. 
    Except as hereinafter specifically exempted, all existing and future buildings in the city used by any person for the purpose of conducting, managing or carrying on any business, when not occupied by a watchman, maintenance personnel or other authorized persons during the period that such building is closed to business, shall be so secured as to prevent unauthorized entry in accordance with specifications for physical security of exterior accessible openings as provided in sections 721.05 and 721.06. Provided, that existing buildings used for residential purposes shall not be subject to this article; however, any multiunit building constructed for this purpose after July 9, 1979 shall be subject to the terms, modifications, requirements and penalties of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-77) 
721.02 - ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article; and upon presentation of proper credentials, the chief of police or his duly authorized representative may, with the consent of the occupant or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, enter at reasonable times any building or premises used for business purposes for the purpose of inspecting the physical security of exterior accessible openings of such building or premises. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-78) 
721.03 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE. 
    Responsibility for compliance with the specifications set forth in sections 721.05 and 721.06 shall be as follows: 
(a)  As to buildings occupied by a business establishment which does not share the exterior openings of such building with any other business establishment, the person operating such business shall be responsible. 
(b)  As to buildings occupied by two or more business establishments which share the same exterior openings of such building, the owner of such building or his agent having charge, care or control of such building shall be responsible. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-79) 
721.04 - INSPECTION; NOTICE. 
    The chief of police shall inspect or cause to be inspected the accessible exterior openings of every building subject to the provisions of this article and if he shall find accessible exterior openings in any such building which do not comply with the specifications set forth in sections 721.05 and 721.06 hereof, he shall give notice in writing to the person responsible, as designated in section 721.03 hereof, setting forth the deficiencies which are to be corrected and the period of time within which such corrections shall be completed. Failure to comply with such notice within the period of time specified shall be a violation of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-80) 
721.05 - SECURITY MEASURES; LOCKING DEVICES. 
    All exterior openings of any building used for business purposes and subject to the provisions of this article and not otherwise protected by photoelectric, ultrasonic or other intrusion-detection devices approved by the chief of police, shall be secured as provided in this section. 
(a)  Front doors. All front doors of any such building or premises shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Tempered glass doors, wood or metal doors with tempered glass panels and solid wood or metal doors shall be secured as follows: 
A.  A single door shall be equipped with a double cylinder dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by key; with a cylinder dead lock that unlocks from the outside by key and the inside by turnpiece, handle or knob; or with a dead locking latch having a guarded bolt that unlocks from the outside by key and the inside by turnpiece, handle or knob. 
B.  On double doors, the active leaf shall be equipped with a type of lock as prescribed for single doors above and the inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at the head and foot. 
(2)  Doors with glass panels not of tempered glass and doors that have nontempered glass panels adjacent to the door frame shall be secured as follows: 
A.  A single door shall be equipped with a cylinder dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and the inside by a key. 
B.  On double doors, the active leaf shall be equipped with a cylinder dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and the inside by a key and the inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at the head and foot. 
(3)  Rolling overhead doors that are not controlled or locked by electric power operation shall be equipped on the inside with the following protective devices: 
A.  Manually operated doors shall be provided with slide bolts on the bottom bar. 
B.  Chain operated doors shall be provided with a cast iron keeper and pin for securing the hand chain. 
C.  Crank operated doors shall be provided with a means for securing the operating shaft. 
(4)  A solid overhead, swinging, sliding or accordion garage-type door shall be secured with a cylinder lock, padlock and/or metal slide bar, bolt or crossbar on the inside when not otherwise controlled or locked by electric power operation. If a padlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel shackle, with a minimum four-pin tumbler operation. In the event that this type of door provides the only entrance to the front of the building, a cylinder lock or padlock may be used on the outside. 
(5)  Metal accordion grate or grill-type doors shall be equipped with a metal guide track at the top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle and a minimum four-pin tumbler operation. 
(6)  Outside hinges on all front doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(b)  Rear, side and basement doors. All accessible rear, side and basement doors of any building or premises shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All doors of the types listed below shall comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section for front doors: 
A.  Tempered glass doors or wood or metal doors with tempered glass panels. 
B.  Metal doors. 
C.  Rolling overhead doors. 
D.  Solid overhead, swinging, sliding or accordion garage-type doors. 
E.  Metal accordion grate or grill-type doors. 
(2)  Doors with glass panels and doors that have glass panels adjacent to the door frame shall be secured as follows: 
A.  The glass panel shall be covered with iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material spaced not more than five inches apart; 
B.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material of two-inch mesh; 
C.  If the door or glass panel barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside; or 
D.  If the remaining portion of a door panel exceeds eight inches by twelve inches, excluding door frame, is of wood but not of solid core construction, or is less than one and three-eighths inches thick, such portion shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel attached with screws. 
(3)  Wood doors not of solid core construction or with panels therein less than one and three-eighths inches thick shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel attached with screws. 
(4)  Locking devices. 
A.  A single door shall be equipped with either a double cylider dead lock that unlocks from both the outside and inside by key; with a cylinder dead lock that unlocks from the outside by key and the inside by turnpiece, handle or knob; with a dead locking latch having a guarded bolt that unlocks from the outside by key and the inside by turnpiece, handle or knob; or with an approved slide bar bolt, crossbar and/or padlock. If a padlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel shackle with a minimum four-pin tumbler operation. 
B.  On double doors, the active leaf shall be equipped with a type of lock as prescribed for single doors above and the inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts at the head and foot. 
(5)  Outside hinges on all rear, side and basement doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(c)  Roof doors. All doors that exit onto the roof of any such building or premises shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Doors with glass panels and any glass panels that are adjacent to the door frame shall be protected as follows: 
A.  The glass portion shall be covered with iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material of no more than two-inch mesh securely fastened. 
B.  If the door or glass panel barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
C.  If the remaining portion of a door panel exceeds eight inches by twelve inches, excluding the door frame, and is of wood but not of solid core construction or is less than one and three-eighths inches thick, such portion shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel attached with screws. 
(2)  Wood doors not of solid core construction or with panels therein less than one and three-eighths inches thick shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel attached with screws. 
(3)  All roof doors shall be provided with a lock that will permit the door to be opened from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. 
(4)  Outside hinges on all roof doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(d)  Glass windows. The chief of police, with the advice and assistance of the chief of the fire department, shall determine the extent of protection, if any, that will be required for accessible glass windows at the side or rear of such building. Glass windows shall be deemed accessible if they are less than 18 feet above ground. In making his determination, he shall consider whether the side of the building fronts on a street; the area, the location and the contents thereof; and whether such openings are protected by intrusion detection devices. 
(1)  The chief of police may require side and rear glass windows with panes exceeding 96 square inches in area with the smallest dimension exceeding six inches to be protected in the following manner: 
A.  Inside or outside iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one-inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material spaced not more than five inches apart securely fastened; or 
B.  Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material of two-inch mesh securely fastened. If such barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
(2)  If the side or rear window is of the type that can be opened, it shall, where applicable, be secured on the inside with either a glide bar, bolt, crossbar and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle and a minimum four-pin tumbler operation. 
(3)  Outside hinges on all side and rear glass windows shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(e)  Accessible transoms. All exterior transoms exceeding eight inches by twelve inches on the side and rear of any such building or premises shall be protected by either of the following: 
(1)  Outside iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one-inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material spaced no more than five inches apart; or 
(2)  Outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material, but not more than two-inch mesh. Such barrier shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
(f)  Roof openings. All exterior openings on the roof of any such building or premises shall be protected as follows: 
(1)  Glass skylights shall be provided with: 
A.  Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one-inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or 
B.  A steel grill of at least one-eighth inch material of two-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened. 
(2)  Hatchway openings shall be secured as follows: 
A.  If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel attached with screws. 
B.  The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts. The use of a crossbar or padlock is unauthorized unless approved by the chief of the fire department. 
C.  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with nonremovable pins. Such hinge pins may be either welded, flanged or secured by a screw. 
(3)  Air duct or air vent openings exceeding eight inches by twelve inches shall be secured by covering the same with either of the following: 
A.  Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one-inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or 
B.  A steel grill of at least one-eighth inch material of two-inch mesh and securely fastened. If the barrier is on the outside it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-81) 
721.06 - SECURITY MEASURES; INTRUSION-DETECTION DEVICES. 
    If it is determined by the chief of police that the security measures and locking devices prescribed in section 721.05 do not adequately secure the building, he may require the installation and maintenance of photoelectric, ultrasonic or other intrusion-detection devices. In making such determination, he shall consider whether: 
(a)  The business establishment has experienced a high incidence of burglary in the past; or 
(b)  The type of merchandise and its inventory value require added security protection. 
    If he determines that such installation is required, notice in writing shall be given to the responsible person designated in section 721.03 specifying the installation to be made and the period of time within which such installation shall be completed. Unless an appeal is filed in accordance with section 721.07, failure to comply with such notice within the time specified shall be a violation of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-82) 
721.07 - APPEAL FROM INTRUSION-DETECTION DEVICE REQUIREMENTS. 
    Within ten days after receipt of written notice from the chief of police requiring the installation and maintenance of photoelectric, ultrasonic or other instrusion-detection devices, the person responsible for compliance therewith may appeal in writing to the mayor. In filing the appeal, the appellant shall set forth the specific grounds wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the chief of police or wherein the issuance of such written notice was not supported by proper evidence. Upon receipt of such appeal, the mayor shall, in his discretion, hear both sides of the contested issue and any evidence of the dispute. The mayor may then affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the chief of police. If such decision is affirmed or modified by the mayor, the appellant shall be given written notice thereof by the chief of police setting forth the installation to be made and the period of time within which the same shall be completed. In no event shall the period be less than that originally granted the appellant. Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified shall be a violation of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-83) 
721.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $500 or be imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-84) 
ARTICLE 725 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Business and occupation tax, § 765.03. 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, W. Va. Code, Ch. 22B. 

725.01 - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DRILLING OR SHOOTING. 
    No person shall drill any well for oil or gas, shoot or torpedo any well or use any explosives in connection with the drilling or operation of any well within the city without first obtaining the permission of council, as provided by this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 24-1) 
725.02 - FILING OF APPLICATION; FEE; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION. 
    Any person desiring to obtain permission to drill for oil or gas shall, before actual drilling is begun, file a written application, accompanied by a filing and inspection fee of $100 with the director of the division of finance at least ten days before the application shall be acted upon by council. Such application shall state the following: 
(a)  The name of the applicant, the person for whom the well is to be drilled, the name of the driller of the well, the owner of the land upon which the well is to be drilled and the name of the lessee, if any. 
(b)  The location of the well and its proximity to any street, alley, dwelling house or other building, as shown upon a blueprint attached to the application. 
(c)  The names of all the owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the well location, as shown on the blueprint. 
(d)  The nature and character of the machinery and equipment to be used in the drilling of the well. 
(e)  The streets and alleys, if any, necessary to be crossed, traversed or used in laying pipelines for transporting and marketing the oil or gas. 
(f)  Any additional information that the director of public works may require. 
(1964 Code Sec. 24-2) 
725.03 - REFERENCE TO COMMITTEE OF APPLICATION TO DRILL WELL; REPORT OF FINDINGS. 
    Upon the filing of the application provided for in section 725.02, it shall be immediately referred to a committee composed of the director of public works, the chief of the fire department and the health officer, who shall make a complete and thorough investigation and report their findings to council. 
(1964 Code Sec. 24-3) 
725.04 - SEPARATE APPLICATION REQUIRED FOR PERMIT TO SHOOT WELL; CONTENTS; INVESTIGATION. 
    Any person desiring to torpedo or shoot any oil or gas well, or use explosives of any kind or character in connection with the drilling or operation of such well, shall first make a separate application to council for permission to so use such explosives. The application shall set forth the kind, character and amount of the explosives, the location where the same is to be used, the date and time that the explosives are to be used and the name of the person using the same. Council, upon receiving the application, shall forthwith determine whether the torpedoing or shooting of the well or the use of explosives, set out in the application, will be safe to persons or property, and may grant the applicant a permit to use explosives as requested in the application. 
    All explosives used pursuant to such permit shall be under the direct supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 24-4) 
725.05 - CONSIDERATION BY COUNCIL. 
    Council, in acting upon an application for the drilling, shooting or torpedoing of any well within the city, shall, before the permit is granted, take into consideration the location of the well, the probable danger of drilling in such location, the danger to inhabitants and property nearby and the use of explosives in and around the well and may, in its discretion, reject the permit for the drilling or shooting of such well if the same would probably become a menace to the safety and health of the inhabitants and property in the vicinity of the operation. 
(1964 Code Sec. 24-5) 
725.06 - BOND. 
    No permit to drill, shoot or torpedo any oil or gas well shall be issued until the applicant has filed with council a bond in a sum deemed sufficient by council, with the surety thereon from an approved surety company licensed to do business in the city, which bond shall be conditioned that the applicant and surety thereon shall save harmless the city and any and all persons from damage of every kind and character occasioned by the drilling or shooting of the well or the use of explosives in connection therewith. 
(1964 Code Sec. 24-6) 
725.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 726 - BUSINESS REGISTRATION 

726.01 - BUSINESS REGISTRATION REQUIRED. 
(a)  No person, corporation, partnership or firm engaging in business shall engage in that business within the city without first registering with the finance director of the city and providing the following information: 
(1)  The name, business address and mailing address of the company, individual, partnership or firm; 
(2)  The telephone number of the company or individual; 
(3)  The type of business in which such person is engaged; 
(4)  Such other information as the finance director may require; and 
(5)  The name and position of the person providing the information. 
(b)  The provisions of section 101.99 of the Administrative Code providing a fine and imprisonment for violations of ordinances shall be applicable to any violations hereof. 
(c)  A renewal registration shall be required as of July 1 of each year beginning with the year next succeeding the date of initial registration by a business enterprise. 
(Ord. 4-27-87) 
726.02 - PAST DUE B&O TAXES. 
(a)  Current and/or full payment of any previous B & O tax owed is a condition precedent to the issuance of a business renewal license. 
(b)  The finance director shall have the authority to enter into an agreement with any individual, corporation, partnership, or firm engaging in business within the City of Huntington to remedy past due B & O taxes and issue upon said agreement a business license. If such monthly payments become delinquent for a period of 60 days, such license may be automatically revoked. Interest on the outstanding B & O taxes shall be in accordance with article 787 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02; Ord. of 11-12-13(1)) 
726.03 - DEFINITIONS OF OCCURRENCE AND FINES. 
(a)  Any business operating without a valid business registration shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 per occurrence. 
(b)  Operating at any time during a specified date shall be considered an occurrence and as such operating on different dates shall be considered separate offenses. 
(Ord. 3-25-02) 
726.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 727 - RUMMAGE SALES 

727.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  "Occupant" or "occupants" means any person or persons living or residing in a specific residence. The owner of a residence shall be considered its occupant if such residence is vacant. 
(b)  "Residence" means any building or structure used or designed to be used as a place for normal living activities. 
(c)  "Residential area" means any area within the corporate limits of the city that is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5. 
(d)  "Rummage sale" means any sale of household goods, junk, clothing or similar matter held outdoors or partially outdoors on a noncommercial premises. 
(Ord. 10-13-87) 
727.02 - RUMMAGE SALES PROHIBITED. 
    Subject to the provisions of section 727.03, rummage sales are hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. 10-13-87) 
727.03 - EXCEPTIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    Any occupant may apply for a permit to hold a rummage sale in his or her residence in a residential area. The application for the rummage sale shall be submitted on a form provided by the office of the mayor. If the application is found not to be contrary to the public interest, the mayor or his designee shall provide the applicant with a permit. The permit shall not be denied without good cause. 
    The permit shall state with particularity the location and duration of the sale. A permit may be denied if the mayor determines that a sale in a particular area would be a public nuisance or would impede traffic flow on any street. 
    Under no circumstances shall a rummage sale held within the city limits extend for more than 48 consecutive hours. No more than one sale shall be allowed at any one location during any one calendar month. 
(Ord. 10-13-87) 
727.99 - PENALTY. 
    The occupant of a residence holding an illegal rummage sale shall be fined not more than $150 or imprisoned not more than three days, or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. 10-13-87) 
CHAPTER THREE - TAXATION AND SERVICE CHARGES 
ARTICLE 735 - LICENSE TAX ADMINISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 13, 2013, repealed the former Art. 735, §§ 735.01-735.15, 735.99X, and enacted a new Art. 735 as set out herein. The former Art. 735 pertained to similar subject matter. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
Charter reference- Taxing powers preserved, § 6.1; finance director to collect taxes, § 9.5. 

735.01 - LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; PURPOSE. 
    Council hereby finds that in order to provide essential municipal services, city revenue needs require the imposition of the following license tax upon the businesses and commercial ventures listed in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Except where otherwise defined in this article, businesses, occupations, trades, commercial ventures and terms of art used herein have those meanings given them in the West Virginia Code, as amended and in force on January 1, 1970. 
(b)  Except as otherwise defined in this article, terms, phrases, occupations, trades, commercial ventures and terms of art used in sections of this article other than those referred to in subsection (a) hereof shall have the meaning given to them in the West Virginia Code, as amended and currently in force and, when there is more than one such meaning, they shall have the meaning given in the sections of the West Virginia Code imposing any West Virginia State Tax Department Business Registration Certificate correlative to the city's license tax. 
(c)  "Person" includes, wherever the context will permit, not only natural persons, but all other legal entities such as partnerships, corporations, business trusts and the like. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.03 - PAYMENT AND TERM OF LICENSE. 
    Except as otherwise specified in this article, the entirety of any license tax designated as an annual tax shall be billed on or about June 1 in each year, and shall be paid on or before July of the same year. All annual licenses provided for by this article shall be issued for a term of one year beginning on July 1 and ending on the next succeeding June 30. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.04 - TAX TO CONSTITUTE DEBTS DUE THE CITY. 
    The tax provided for in this article shall constitute debts due to the city and may be collected by the finance director by an appropriate action in either the Circuit Courts or Magistrate Courts of West Virginia, and the penalties imposed by article 735.99 hereof. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.05 - APPLICABILITY; NONTRANSFERABILITY. 
    Except where otherwise expressly provided herein, the tax provided for herein apply to any person undertaking the herein described activities, trades or professions for any part, no matter how small, of a given time period in which the tax is imposed. Except where otherwise expressly provided herein, the licenses provided for in this article are not transferable; that is, the payment by one person of a license tax provided for in this article shall not exempt or excuse a purchaser from, a successor to, or assignee of, any such person for the payment of the prescribed tax for the maintenance or possession of a particular licenses for the conducts of a particular activity. The licenses provided for herein are nontransferable personal privileges. The tax provided for in this article apply only to persons engaging in the specified acts, having the specified ownership, or carrying on the specified operation or conduct of a trade or business where the foregoing are located within the geographic limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.06 - IMPOSITION OF ANNUAL MUNICIPAL BUSINESS LICENSE AND TAX THEREON. 
(a)  No person required to obtain a business registration certificate from the West Virginia State Tax Commissioner pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 11-12-1, et seq. shall engage in or prosecute any business activity in the City of Huntington without first obtaining a Huntington Annual Municipal Business License and paying the tax thereon. 
(b)  The Huntington Municipal Business License Tax hereby levied shall be $20 for each Huntington Municipal Business License. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.07 - ACTS PROHIBITED. 
    Whenever a license tax is imposed by this article, no person shall engage in the activity or occupation upon which the tax is levied, without first paying the tax and acquiring the license provided for under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.08 - EFFECT OF LICENSE. 
    In any case in which a license is required by this article, the issuance of the license shall be deemed a prerequisite to the lawful conduct of the activity for which the license is required. Issuance of any license under this article shall not, however, make valid or legal any act not otherwise valid or legal or not otherwise authorized by other provisions of law. Nothing in this article shall authorize any act, activity or ownership not otherwise lawful. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.09 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF FINANCE DIRECTOR. 
(a)  The finance director shall have the power to promulgate such rules, regulations, procedures, applications and forms not inconsistent with the provisions hereof and to administer and issue business licenses, collect taxes and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The application may contain questions on or blanks for any information reasonably deemed necessary by the finance director. The finance director is expressly authorized to require applicants to have, and to provide evidence of, a valid and existing West Virginia State Tax Department Business Franchise Registration Certificate. Proper completion of an application is a condition precedent to the finance director having any duty to issue a license. Upon proper completion of a license application and payment of the tax, the finance director shall issue the requested license to the applicant. The form of the license and information thereon shall be such as the finance director may reasonably prescribe. The finance director, or his designated agent, shall have the power to examine activities and locations of each business to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  The finance director shall further have the power to deny the renewal of any license issued hereunder to any person who is delinquent in the payment of business and occupation taxes pursuant to article 787 of the Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.10 - CHANGE IN NAME OR PARTNERS. 
    A change in the name under which a person does business shall not require the person to seek any new license for any activity licensed under a prior name; nor shall the withdrawal or addition of partners to a partnership require the partnership to obtain a new license, provided that the partnership always retains at least one partner who was a member of the firm at the time the license was granted. Provided that a written notification of the change in partnership or change in business name be provided to the director of finance. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.11 - APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE 726. 
    The provisions of article 726 (business registration), where inconsistent with this article or with general law, shall have no applicability to this article or the licenses provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.12 - DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE. 
    The licenses provided for in this article shall be evidenced by license certificates. The holder of a license shall display the license certificate in a prominent place at or near the location of the licensed activity or device, and shall make the license certificate available for inspection by city police, compliance inspector, codes enforcement officer, the finance director or his/her designated agent. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.13 - CONSTRUCTION; SEVERABILITY. 
    The provisions of this article shall be construed so as to make them consistent with state law and consistent with the correlative statutes providing for state licensing tax. If any section or sections of this article shall, even when so construed, be found to be in violation of the laws or constitutions of the State or the United States, or shall be found to be an attempted exercise of power not granted to the city, the resulting invalidity of that section or those sections shall not mean the remaining sections of this article shall not be enforced. It is the intent of council that each license tax imposed herein should be imposed, even if other license taxes provided for herein could not have been imposed. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.14 - FALSE STATEMENTS PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall knowingly make any false statement in any application for a city license provided for in this article, or in any report or other statement relating to any activity licensed by the city and which is required to be made to any city officer or agency. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.15 - PROSECUTION; INJUNCTIONS. 
    If any person engages in or prosecutes any business, activity, trade or employment contrary to any of the provisions of this Code, whether without first obtaining a license therefor or by continuing the same after the termination of the effective period of such license, or by any violation of the terms and conditions of such license, he shall be subject to immediate prosecution in the municipal court and in, addition, the city attorney may, in the name of the city, seek such injunctive relief as may be appropriate in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.16 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    The provisions of this article shall be in full force and effect beginning July 1, 2013. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
735.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Whoever engages in any activity contrary to the provisions of this article, whether without obtaining a license required therefor before commencing the same or by continuing the same after the termination of the effective period of any such license, may, in addition to paying the license tax, be liable for a penalty of $50 for each month or fraction thereof during which he has been in default of the license tax. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to collect the full amount of the license tax and penalty imposed and he shall not issue any license until the license tax and the penalty have been paid in full. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing and except as may herein be otherwise expressly provided, whoever violates any provision under this article shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 and each day or part thereof that any violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a distinct and separate offense and be punishable accordingly. 
(c)  Whoever knowingly makes a false statement in any license tax application shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $500. Each false statement, whether made with or without other false statements on any one application shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2013(8)) 
ARTICLE 739 - GENERAL LICENSE TAXES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 13, 2013, amended article 739 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 739, §§ 739.01-739.25, pertained to similar subject matter. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
State Law reference- Authority to tax, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-13-4, 11-12-4. 

739.01 - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS. 
    The annual license fee to act as a hawker or peddler, if the person licensed travels without a motor vehicle, shall be $20; if he travels with a motor vehicle of not more than one-half ton capacity, $20; if he travels with a motor vehicle of not more than one ton capacity, $20; if he travels with a motor vehicle of not more than two tons' capacity, $20; and if he travels with a motor vehicle of more than two tons' capacity, $20, plus $20 for each additional ton or fraction thereof over two tons' capacity. The person licensed shall pay at the same rate for each motor vehicle so used. Such person shall carry his license in some conspicuous place in his vehicle or about his pack; and in addition thereto he shall cause to be painted or stenciled in a conspicuous place on the left-hand side of his vehicle the number of such license and the words "City of Huntington" and the license year for which such license is issued, which information shall be in black letters on a white background, and the whole thereof shall be at least eight by 20 inches in size. 
    When used in this section, "sale" means and includes both sales for money payment or for barter, and offers to make any such sale and offers to render service or the rendering thereof. 
    Any person who shall carry goods, wares or merchandise from place to place, either in person or by agent or employee, and sell, for delivery at the same time, any such goods, wares or merchandise to any purchaser, at wholesale or retail, and any person who shall solicit for the purpose of rendering any service, shall be deemed a hawker or peddler under this section. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.02 - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS; EXEMPT PERSONS. 
    The provisions of section 739.01 shall not apply to any person who sells any goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered in the future or to any of the following who offer immediate delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise being sold: 
(a)  Any person engaged within the city in the business or calling of agriculture, horticulture or grazing, who sells, individually or collectively, one or more for the other, the products derived from his business or calling. 
(b)  Any person engaged in the maintenance or operation of a retail merchandise store to exchange goods, wares or merchandise from such store for agriculture, horticultural or grazing products or to resell any such products received in due course of such business; nor to any other retail business concern, established and operating continuously for one year or more within this city in the sale of any product or products over regular routes. 
(c)  Any wholesaler or jobber selling soft drinks or nonintoxicating beer for which he is duly licensed under other provisions of this chapter three. 
(d)  Any person who sells petroleum products, ice, wood, meat, milk, ice cream, bread, cakes, pies and other bakery products, butter and eggs, manufactured, grown or produced by any such person and not purchased by him for resale. 
(e)  Any sales by societies, groups or organizations acting for charitable, religious or benevolent purposes. 
(f)  Any agent or salesman selling manufactured products, except green groceries and canned or bottled fruit products, produced by his employer, who sells the same to retail dealers for the purpose of resale. Any items sold by said person at retail, or directly to the consumer, shall not be exempt from this section. 
(g)  Any person having a stock of goods or merchandise or a manufacturing or processing plant kept or operating at a fixed situs in the city, and declared for taxation in the city, and using a vehicle over a fixed route for the purpose of selling or distributing, at wholesale, his merchandise, stock of goods or plant products. 
    Any person exempt from license as above provided, shall obtain from the director of the division of finance a license receipt, without cost, showing that he is so exempt, which shall be effective for the period as provided for annual licenses in this chapter three and shall be coextensive with the entire city; but to obtain such license receipt, he shall make an affidavit and produce such other evidence as to the fact entitling him to such exemption as the director, in his discretion, may require, which shall be on a form to be prescribed by the director. 
(h)  Any person selling products other than food or drink from a vehicle, trailer or other form of conveyance, or from any type of stand temporarily located on a public parking space or any part of the public way shall be considered an itinerant vendor under section 739.03 of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7); Ord. of 12-12-16(1) ) 
739.03 - ITINERANT VENDORS; DEFINED. 
    When used in sections 739.04 to 739.07, "itinerant vendor" means and includes all persons who engage in or conduct within this city, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, a temporary or transient business of selling good, wares and merchandise; and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, use, lease or occupy, either in whole or in part, a room, building or other structure; or who use, lease or occupy for such purposes a room in any hotel or lodging house, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise; or who lease or occupy any vacant lot, or parking lot to park any motor vehicle or trailer which is used for the exhibition and sale of goods, wares and merchandise. Itinerant vendors shall include any person who sells any product other than food or drink from a vehicle, trailer or other form of conveyance, or from any type of stand temporarily located on a public parking space or any part of the public way. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of sections 739.04 to 739.07 by reason of association temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part of the business of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7); Ord. of 12-12-16(1) ) 
739.04 - ITINERANT VENDORS; FEE. 
    The annual license fee to carry on the business of itinerant vendor shall be $500. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.05 - STATEMENT REQUIRED. 
    No itinerant vendor shall advertise, represent or hold forth a sale of goods, wares or merchandise as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor, administrator, receiver, attorney, manufacturer's wholesale or closing-out or a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or otherwise unless before so doing he shall state in writing, under oath, to the director of the division of finance at the time he makes application for a license, provided for by this article, all the facts relating to the reason and character of such special sale as advertised, held forth or represented, including a statement of the names of the persons from whom such goods, wares or merchandise were purchased, and the date of the delivery of the same to the person applying for license; the place, if any, where such goods, wares or merchandise were previously exposed for sale; and such details as are necessary to exactly locate and fully identify all such goods, wares and merchandise proposed to be sold. Such itinerant vendor shall also include in such statement the name and residence of the owner in whose interest the business is conducted, to be kept on file in the office of the director. A record shall be kept by the director of all such statements, in convenient form and open to public inspection. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.06 - BOND. 
    Every itinerant vendor shall execute a continuing bond in the form prescribed by the director of the division of finance with satisfactory corporate surety in the penalty of $5,000 payable to the city, conditioned that such itinerant vendor will pay all damages accruing to anyone by reason of any act or action done, performed or taken by such itinerant vendor in or about the conduct of his business and further conditioned that such itinerant vendor will pay all taxes, fees and penalties imposed by this city; provided, that the aggregate liability of the surety for all such damages, taxes, fees and penalties shall in no event exceed the sum of such bond. Such bond shall be filed with the director and shall be open to inspection during business hours to any person desiring to inspect the same. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.07 - PROHIBITED ACTS OF ITINERANT VENDORS. 
    No itinerant vendor shall sell or exhibit for sale at public or private sale, any goods, wares or merchandise without first obtaining a license therefor and in all other respects complying with the provisions of this Chapter Three, make any false statement in reference to the matter set out in section 739.05, or fail to comply with the requirements of any of the sections of this chapter, and no person, whether principal or agent, shall by circular, handbill, newspaper or in any manner advertise such sale, as described in section 739.05, before proper licenses are issued to the vendor and before he has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.08 - APPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN PERSONS. 
    The provisions of sections 739.03 to 739.07 shall not apply to sales made to persons by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made at trade shows or trade conventions, nor to sales by hawkers or peddlers in the streets, roads or highways from packs or vehicles, to arts and crafts shows and the like, to flea markets conducted at a regular established location at which the owner holds a store license, nor to persons selling meat or the products of the farm, garden or dairy, nor to sales of goods, wares or merchandise on the grounds of any agricultural association during the continuance of any annual fair held by such association, not to any sales by societies acting for charitable, religious or benevolent purposes, nor to judicial sales directed by law or under the orders of any court, nor to the sales of the common necessities of life in any public marketplace. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.09 - PAWN BROKERS AND SECOND HAND DEALERS. 
(a)  The annual license fee to engage in the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealers (i.e., flea markets, antique and consignment store) shall be $20 and said license shall be conspicuously displayed. 
(b)  "Pawnbroker" includes any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal property such as articles made of or containing gold, silver, platinum or other precious metal or precious or semi-precious stones whether real or faux or other valuable thing for the purpose of either reworking the same or providing them for resale either in their original form or in a different form from their construction when purchased. 
(c)  "Secondhand dealer" shall include any flea market, consignment shop, or individual who sells items when not purchased directly by the seller from either a licensed retail establishment or from a licensed wholesale supplier. 
(d)  Any law enforcement officer may issue a citation to any proprietor and/or any employee of said pawnbroker or secondhand dealer engaging in the secondhand sale or pawnbroking or secondhand sale activities without a license. Fines shall be not less than $25 nor greater than $100 for the first offense. The second offense shall not be less than $100 nor greater than $250 and the third offense may include a fine not less than $250 nor greater than $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.10 - DAILY REPORT TO POLICE BY PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS. 
    Any person doing business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in clothing, bicycles, jewelry or other personal property, including dealers in old gold, silver or platinum, shall, every day before the hour of 12:00 noon, prepare and deliver to the chief of police of the city, a legible and correct copy of the description of all such personal property of any kind or description received, pledged or purchased during the preceding day, together with the hour when the property was received and a description of the person by whom the same was left, pledged or from whom the same was purchased. Such information shall be recorded on a pawn card, forms for which shall be available at the police department and each pawn card shall contain only one item. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.11 - PRIVATE CLUBS. 
(a)  The annual license fee for any private club, as defined, regulated and licensed by the state under W. Va. Code, Art. 60-7, shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a license issued to a fraternal or veterans' organization or a nonprofit social club - $375. 
(2)  For a license issued to a private club other than a private club of the type specified in subsection (a)(1) hereof - $500 if such private club has less than 1,000 members and $1,250 if such private club has 1,000 or more members. 
(3)  The fee for any such license issued following January 1 of any year and to expire on June 30 of such year shall be one-half of the annual license fee prescribed by subsection (a)(1) and (2) hereof. 
(4)  All such fees shall be paid to the director of the division of finance and shall be credited to the general revenue of the city. 
(b)  In the event the license fees authorized to be charged by the city under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-7 are modified after the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1972, the annual municipal license fee for such private clubs shall be the maximum amount authorized thereunder for each of the various categories prescribed by state law. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.12 - STREET ARTISTS. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Perform" includes, but is not limited to the following activities: acting, singing, playing musical instruments, pantomime, juggling, magic, dancing and reciting. This shall not include performances by participants in any parade. 
(2)  "Performer" means an individual who owns a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(3)  "Public areas" includes all public access areas within the city. This includes all parks, sidewalks, temporarily closed streets, plazas and all other public ways. Public areas shall not include privately owned property that is generally accessible to the public. 
(b)  License requirement. 
(1)  Upon application and the payment of a license fee of $20, the mayor or his designee may issue a license to an individual for performances in public places. 
(2)  A completed application for a license shall contain the applicant's name, address and telephone number and such other information as may be required. 
(3)  A license shall contain the name and license number of the applicant plus the period for which the license is valid. A license shall be issued for any period up to one year in the discretion of the finance director or his designee. 
(c)  Display of license. A performer shall carry the license on his or her person at all times that he or she is performing. The performer shall make available the permit upon request from any police officer. 
(d)  Permitted performances. 
(1)  Performances shall be limited to areas designated in rules and regulations issued by the mayor. Such rules and regulations shall also contain the time periods during the day in which performances may take place. 
(2)  Performers are prohibited from blocking the passage of the public through a public area. 
(e)  Legal conduct. 
(1)  A performer may accept contribution of money or property at a performance. Contributions may be received in any receptacle. 
(2)  A performer who performs under the provisions of this section shall not be guilty of disorderly conduct, loitering or disturbing the peace. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  Violations of any of the provisions of this section may result in revocation of the license. 
(2)  Any person performing without a license shall be guilty of a violation of this section and shall be fined not more than $100. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
739.13 - RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE FEE. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, §§ 60-3A-12(e) and 8-13-4 respectively, on and after January 1, 2000 any person, firm or corporation desiring to conduct retail sales of liquor within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington, West Virginia shall, after first being licensed by the State of West Virginia shall, after first being licensed by the State of West Virginia pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 60-3A-I et seq., thereafter file as an applicant for retail liquor Director of Finance of the City of Huntington. 
(b)  The annual retail liquor license period shall be from the first day of July to the 30th day of June of the following year. The annual municipal retail liquor license fee if an applicant holds a Class A retail license under the state law shall be the sum of $1,000 per outlet. The annual municipal retail liquor license fee if an applicant holds a Class B retail license shall be $1,000 per outlet. Provided that the initial license period for retail liquor licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be from January 1, 2000 to June 30, 2000. The fee for this initial license period will be prorated to 50% of the regular annual license fee prescribed herein. 
(c)  A retail liquor license shall expire on the 30th day of June of each year and may be renewed only upon the submission of an application and payment of the required annual fee to the Director of Finance of the City of Huntington, West Virginia on or before July 1 of each year, on such forms as the director of finance may prescribe. 
(d)  No person may sell liquor at any retail outlet within the city if the state retail liquor license applicable to such outlet has been suspended or revoked or has expired. 
(e)  All retail liquor licenses issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall expire and be of no further force or effect as of the first day of July, the year after they are issued, unless renewed from year to year, as hereinbefore provided. 
(f)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500. 
(Ord. of 5-13-13(7)) 
ARTICLE 747 - REAL ESTATE BROKERS AND SALESMEN[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Real estate brokers and salesmen, W. Va. Code, Art. 47-12. 

747.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
(a)  "Real estate broker" means a person who, for compensation or consideration, sells, buys, negotiates the purchase or sells, exchanges, leases, rents or manages any real estate or any improvement on real estate, or who offers, advertises or holds himself out to do any of such things for another or others. 
(b)  "Real estate business" means the performing or attempting to perform or the holding out to perform any of the things usually done by a real estate broker or a real estate salesman as hereinafter defined. 
(c)  "Real estate salesman" means any person who, for compensation or consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a real estate broker to engage in the real estate business or to do any of the things set out herein in the definition of the term "real estate broker." 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-55) 
747.02 - BROKER'S AND SALESMAN'S LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    No person shall act as a real estate broker or as a real estate salesman or shall engage in the real estate business without a license as provided for by this article. No license shall be issued to a real estate broker unless every employee who acts for such broker as a salesman secures a license as a real estate salesman. However, if such broker is a partnership, association or corporation, then every bona fide member of such partnership or association and every officer of such corporation shall be licensed as a real estate salesman when and after such broker shall have been granted a broker's license. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-56) 
747.03 - ISSUANCE, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES. 
    Licenses, as provided in this article, shall be issued by the director of the division of finance in such form as council may determine to applicants who are found to be of good character and to be competent to carry on the business for which the license is bought. 
    Council may investigate the actions of any real estate broker or real estate salesman or any person who shall assume to act in either capacity, in the city, and shall have the power to suspend or revoke any license issued by the director that has been fraudulently procured, or when the licensee, in the course of his licensed business, has done or is doing any one or more of the following things: 
(a)  Made any substantial misrepresentations; 
(b)  Made any false representation of a character likely to influence, persuade or induce; 
(c)  Pursued a continued and flagrant course of misrepresentation, or made false representations through agents or salesmen or advertising or otherwise; 
(d)  Acted for more than one party in a transaction without the knowledge of all parties for whom he acts; 
(e)  Accepted a commission or valuable consideration as a real estate salesman for the performance of any of the acts specified in this article, from any person, except his employer, who must be a licensed real estate broker; 
(f)  Represented or attempted to represent a real estate broker other than the employer, without the express knowledge and consent of the employer; 
(g)  Failed, within a reasonable time, to account for or to remit any money coming into his possession which belongs to others; 
(h)  Been unworthy or incompetent to act as a real estate broker or salesman in such manner as to safeguard the interest of the public; 
(i)  Paid a commission or valuable consideration to any person for acts or service performed in violation of this article; 
(j)  Conducted himself in any manner constituting improper, fraudulent or dishonest dealing. 
    The revocation of a broker's license shall automatically suspend every real estate salesman's license granted to any person by virtue of his employment by the broker whose license has been revoked, pending a charge of employers and the issuance of a new license. Such new license shall be issued without charge, if granted during the same year in which the original license was granted. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-57) 
747.04 - LICENSE FEES. 
    The original fee and annual renewal fee for each real estate broker's license shall be $25. 
    The original fee and annual renewal fee for each real estate salesman's license shall be $10. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-58) 
747.05 - EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE. 
    The fiscal year shall constitute the license year under this article. All licenses under this article shall expire at midnight on June 30 of each year. The director of the division of finance shall issue a new license for each ensuing year, in the absence of any reason which might warrant the refusal of the granting of a license upon the receipt of the annual fee therefor, as herein required. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-59) 
747.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person who shall engage in the real estate business in the city, without a license as provided in this article, or who shall violate any provision of this article, shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed for the violation of this article, be liable for the payment of the license tax, together with a penalty of 10% of such license tax for each month or part thereof during which he has been in default, which penalty shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as the license tax. Such license tax and penalty may be collected by action or suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-60) 
ARTICLE 748 - INDOOR SHOOTING RANGE 

748.01 - DEFINITION. 
    The definition of an "Indoor Shooting Range" may be found in section 1315.02. 
( Ord. of 2-22-16(2) ) 
748.02 - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    No person shall engage in the operation of an indoor shooting range in the city unless such person has obtained an annual indoor shooting range license from the city. The fee shall be $90 annually. 
( Ord. of 2-22-16(2) ) 
748.03 - CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATING STANDARDS FOR INDOOR SHOOTING RANGE LICENSE. 
(a)  Any person wishing to obtain a license to establish an indoor shooting range, in addition to general license requirements, must first establish an indoor range which meets or exceeds safety regulations, including safety precautions and proper ventilation, set up by the National Rifle Association and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration current as of the date the building permit was issued and show approved liability insurance of a minimum of $1,000,000 coverage. 
(b)  All indoor shooting ranges shall comply with all local, state, and/or federal regulations related to indoor shooting ranges. 
(c)  Application for a business license shall be made and may be approved only after a certificate of occupancy has been obtained. 
(d)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to enter a range unless accompanied by an adult. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee or instructor to brief patrons concerning the rules and regulations in the range before they are permitted to use the firing range. The licensee shall keep posted in a conspicuous place inside the building and outside the building a sign stating the rules and regulations of the range. 
(f)  Adherence to all requirements of sections 545.14 and 1341.52 shall be maintained at all times in addition to the requirements herein. 
( Ord. of 2-22-16(2) ) 
748.99 - PENALTY. 
    Every person charged with violating any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 2-22-16(2) ) 
ARTICLE 751 - JUNK DEALERS AND YARDS[9] 
GENERALLY 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Salvage yards, W. Va. Code, Art. 17-23; receiving stolen goods, W. Va. Code, § 61-3-18. 

751.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Fence" means an enclosure at least six feet in height, constructed and maintained so as to obscure the junk in such enclosure from ordinary view to those persons passing upon the streets, sidewalks or avenues within the city. 
(b)  "Itinerant junk collector" includes only such persons who gather junk from place to place with the aid of a cart or vehicle hand-drawn or propelled, who have no fixed place of business. 
(c)  "Junk" means used or salvaged base metal or metals and their compounds or combinations, used or salvaged, rope, bags, paper, rags, batteries, glass, rubber, lumber, millwork, brick and similar property; dismantled plumbing fixtures, including, but not limited to, bathtubs, commodes, tanks, septic tanks, hot water tanks and other similar items; used or dismantled kitchen equipment, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, ranges, cabinets and similar items; used motor vehicles, bodies, chassis and other parts thereof; and any other machinery or equipment used, owned or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom. 
(d)  "Junk dealer" means any person engaged in the business of buying or selling junk. 
(e)  "Junk dealer's agent" means any person who buys or sells junk for or on behalf of a junk dealer, but such term shall not be construed to include any persons regularly employed upon a salary by a regularly licensed junk dealer engaged in such business within the city. 
(f)  "Junkyard" means an establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the purpose of storing, keeping, buying, selling, salvaging, dismantling or reducing junk. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-61) 
JUNK DEALERS 
751.02 - LICENSE REQUIRED; RESIDENT LICENSE NOT ISSUED TO CERTAIN PERSONS. 
    No person within the city shall engage in the business of junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector without a city license therefor, which license shall be issued as provided in sections 751.02 to 751.10 provided, that no resident license shall be issued to any junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector who has not been a resident of the city for a period of at least one year prior to the application of such license. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-62) 
751.03 - LICENSE FEES; SPECIAL REGULATIONS AS TO NONRESIDENTS AND ITINERANTS. 
    The annual license fee to act as a resident junk dealer shall be $20; to act as a junk dealer's agent, $20; to act as a nonresident junk dealer or his agent who buys or solicits for the purchase of junk within the city, $20; to act as an itinerant junk collector, $20. Such licenses shall be coextensive with the city, but no nonresident licensee shall be permitted to maintain a fixed place of business within the city; provided, that any nonresident junk dealer may purchase junk from any resident junk dealer without complying with the provisions of sections 751.02 to 751.10, but if such nonresident junk dealer comes into the city in any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle, such nonresident junk dealer shall not be permitted to transport from the city in such vehicle or horse-drawn wagon, junk purchased from resident junk dealers, unless there is a compliance with this sections 751.02 to 751.10. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-63; Ord. of 5-13-13(2)) 
751.04 - PREREQUISITES TO LICENSE ISSUANCE. 
    The director of the division of finance shall not issue a junk dealer's agent's license until the applicant therefor shall first have presented a certificate from a duly licensed junk dealer showing such authorization, and no license shall be issued to a junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector unless he shall file with the director an affidavit setting forth that such applicant has not been convicted of a felony; that he has not been convicted of a misdemeanor in connection with the junk business within a five-year period to the time of his application, and that, in the event the application is for a resident dealer's license, that he has resided in the city for a period of one year next preceding the date of his application, which certificate and affidavit shall be filed by the Director issuing the license in his office. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-64) 
751.05 - LICENSE NOT ISSUED TO EX-CONVICTS. 
    No person who has been convicted of a felony shall be licensed as a junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector, and no one convicted of a misdemeanor in connection with the junk business within a five-year period prior to the date of his application therefor shall be licensed as a junk dealer, junk dealer's agent or itinerant junk collector. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-65) 
751.06 - LICENSE QUALIFICATIONS FOR FIRMS AND CORPORATIONS. 
    No corporation or firm shall engage in the business of junk dealer or junk dealer's agent in the city unless the officers or agents of such corporation or firm who engage in the business of junk dealer or junk dealer's agent, in behalf of such corporation or firm, shall be eligible to be duly licensed as resident junk dealers or junk dealer's agents in accordance with the provisions of sections 751.02 to 751.10. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-66) 
751.07 - CERTAIN LICENSES VOID. 
    Any license issued pursuant to sections 751.02 to 751.10 upon a false affidavit or any improper license issued hereunder shall be ipso facto void. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-67) 
751.08 - LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE. 
    No license issued pursuant to the provisions of sections 751.02 to 751.10 shall be transferable. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-68) 
751.09 - AGENT'S CERTIFICATE; PERMITS. 
    Every resident junk dealer shall certify to the director of the division of finance the names of the agents for whom he desires a license certificate, and shall give to each agent so engaged by him a certificate of authority, which certificate the agent shall at all times keep with his license, and no such junk dealer's agent's license shall be valid and effective without such certificate of authority. The director shall give to each license certificate a numerically designated permit, and such permit so given shall be plainly stenciled or printed as "Dealer's Permit No....", "Agent's Permit No....", "Itinerant Collector's Permit No....", "Nonresident Permit No....", as the case may be, upon both sides of all trucks or other vehicles used in the collecting and transporting of junk. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-69) 
751.10 - JUNK DEALERS NOT TO EMPLOY PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE. 
    No person engaged in the junk business shall engage a person as a junk dealer's agent who is ineligible to receive a resident junk dealer's or junk dealer's agent's license. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-70) 
JUNKYARDS 
751.11 - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    No junkyard shall be operated or maintained within the city without a license, and no license shall be granted any person who fails or refuses to comply with all the provisions of sections 751.11 to 751.16. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-71) 
751.12 - LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE; TERM; RENEWAL. 
    The director of the division of finance shall have the sole authority to issue licenses for the establishment, maintenance and operation of junkyards within the limits defined by sections 751.11 to 751.16 and shall charge therefore a fee of $20 payable annually in advance. All licenses issued under this section shall expire on July 1 following the date of issue. A license may be renewed from year to year upon paying to the director a fee of $20 for each such renewal. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-72; Ord. of 5-13-13(2)) 
751.13 - LICENSE REVOCATION. 
    Council may revoke the license of any person licensed under the provisions of sections 751.11 to 751.16 in case any such licensee has violated any of the provisions of sections 751.11 to 751.16 or has failed or neglected to properly obscure the view of his junkyard by natural objects or a properly maintained fence as set forth and described in this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-73) 
751.14 - FENCES GENERALLY. 
    A fence constructed under sections 751.11 to 751.16 shall be kept in good order and repair and at all times painted. No advertisement shall be permitted thereon, other than the name of the person in whose name the license has been issued and the nature of the business conducted therein. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-74) 
751.15 - CONSTRUCTION AS TO LOCATION. 
    Nothing contained in sections 751.11 to 751.16 shall be so construed as to authorize or permit any person to operate or maintain a junkyard in any restricted zone or area, or in any manner constituting a common nuisance, nor to otherwise keep or maintain any such junkyard in violation of any of the laws of the state, the provisions of these Codified Ordinances or other ordinances of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-75) 
751.16 - VIEW TO BE OBSCURED. 
    Any junkyard operated or maintained under the provisions of sections 751.11 to 751.16 shall have the view thereof obscured from the streets, avenues and sidewalks by natural objects or a fence; provided, that any junkyard operator may request of council a review of the requirement to screen or fence his junkyard. 
(1964 Code Sec. 20-76) 
ARTICLE 752 - CONTRACTOR LICENSING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Business and occupation tax, § 787.11. 
State Law reference- Contractor licensing, W. Va. Code, Art. 21-11. 

752.01 - POLICY DECLARED. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that all persons desiring to perform contracting work in this city be duly licensed to ensure capable and skilled craftsmanship utilized in construction projects in this state, both public and private, fair bidding practices between competing contractors through uniform compliance with the laws of this city and state, and protection of the public from unfair, unsafe and unscrupulous bidding and construction practices. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
752.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this article: 
(a)  "Contractor" means a person who in any capacity for compensation, other than as an employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, structure or excavation associated with a project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith, where the cost of the undertaking is $2,500 or more for the material and labor. 
"Contractor" includes a construction manager who performs management and counseling services for a construction project for a professional fee. 
"Contractor" does not include: 
(1)  One who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating or consuming them in the construction project; 
(2)  A person who personally performs construction work on the site of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or residential purposes; 
(3)  A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and who functions under the control of any licensing or regulatory board, whose primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management and maintenance, who acting in his or her respective professional capacity and any employee of such professional, acting in the course or his or her employment, performs any work which may be considered to be performing contracting work; or 
(4)  A corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship whose primary purpose is to prepare construction plans and specifications used by the contractors defined in subsection (a) hereof and who employs full-time a registered architect licensed to practice in this state or a registered engineer licensed to practice in this state. Employees of such corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship shall also be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  "License" means a license to engage in business in this city as a contractor. 
(c)  "Person" includes an individual, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, assocation or other entity engaged in the undertaking of construction projects or any combination thereof. 
(d)  "Subcontractor" means a person who performs a portion of a project undertaken by a principal or general contractor or another subcontractor. 
(Ord. of 11-8-99; Ord. of 5-13-13(4)) 
752.03 - NECESSITY FOR LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  On or after the effective date of this section, no person shall engage in this city in any act as a contractor, as defined in this article, unless such person holds a license issued under the provisions of this article. No firm, partnership, corporation, association or other entity shall engage in contracting in this city unless an officer thereof holds a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Any person to whom a license has been issued under this article shall keep the license or a copy thereof posted in a conspicuous position at every construction site where work is being done by the contractor. The contractor's license number shall be included in all contracting advertisements and all fully executed and binding contracts. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the following are exempt from licensure: 
(1)  Work done exclusively by employees of the United States Government, the State of West Virginia, the County of Cabell, the City of Huntington and any governmental subdivision or agency thereof directly in conjunction with and in the course of their employment; 
(2)  The sale or installation of a finished product, material or article or merchandise which is not actually fabricated into and does not become a permanent fixed part of the structure; 
(3)  Work performed personally by an owner or lessee of real property on property the primary use of which is for agricultural or farming enterprise; 
(4)  A material supplier who renders advice concerning use of products sold and who does not provide construction or installation services; 
(5)  Work performed by a public utility company regulated by the West Virginia Public Service Commission and its employees on its own property, public property or right-of-way; 
(6)  Repair work contracted for by the owner of the equipment on an emergency basis in order to maintain or restore the operation of such equipment; 
(7)  Work performed by an employer's regular employees, for which the employees are paid regular wages and not a contract price, on business property owned or leased by the employer. "Business property owned or leased by the employer" shall not include any property upon which work is performed by the owner or lessee's employee for the purpose of speculative sales or leasing or otherwise intending the sale or lease of the property for commercial or residential use by the entity other than such employer; 
(8)  Work personally performed on a structure by the owner or occupant thereof; and 
(9)  Work performed when the specifications for such work have been developed or approved by engineering personnel employed by the owner of a facility by registered professional engineers licensed pursuant to the laws of this city when the work to be performed because of its specialized nature or process cannot be reasonably or timely contracted for within the general area of the facility. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
752.04 - LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE. 
    A person desiring to be licensed as a contractor under this article shall submit to the city a written application requesting licensure, providing such information as the city may require, including proof of state licensure, on forms supplied by the city, and shall pay a license fee of $90. Said contractors shall present certification giving evidence of general liability insurance in an amount of at least $300,000/$600,000. The City of Huntington shall be named as an additional insured on each general liability policy and each general liability policy shall specifically states the type of work covered under said policy. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09; Ord. of 12-10-12(1)) 
752.05 - EXPIRATION DATE; FEES; RENEWAL. 
    A license issued under the provisions of this article expires on June 30 of the fiscal year. The application and license fee shall be $90 annually. Renewal fee shall be $90. 
(Ord. 11-8-99) 
752.06 - UNLAWFUL USE; ASSIGNMENT; TRANSFER. 
    No license may be used for any purpose by any person other than the person to whom the license is issued. No license may be assigned, transferred or otherwise disposed of so as to permit the unauthorized use thereof. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
752.07 - PREREQUISITES TO OBTAINING BUILDING PERMIT. 
    Any person making application to the building inspector of the municipality for the construction of any building, highway, sewer or structure or for any removal of materials or earth, grading or improvement, shall, before issuance of the permit, either furnish satisfactory proof to the inspector or authority that such person is duly licensed under the provisions of this article to carry out or superintend the same, or file a written affidavit that such person is not subject to licensure as a contractor or subcontractor as defined in this article. The inspector shall not issue a building permit to any person who does not possess a valid contractor's license when required by this article. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
752.08 - STOP WORK ORDER; CITATION. 
    If the city building inspector or other duly authorized authority determines that a contractor is working within the city without a license, he or she may immediately issue a stop work order and post such order on the premises where the contractor is working and issue a citation to appear before the municipal judge within 30 days. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
752.09 - ARTICLE SUPERSEDES OTHER PROVISIONS. 
    The provisions of this article shall supersede any conflicting provisions contained in these Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
752.10 - DISCLOSURE OF SUBCONTRACTORS. 
    Each contractor under this article shall be required to supply to the city a list of all subcontractors and their addresses for each project the contractor serves as general contractor within the city. This information shall be provided within ten days of the execution of the subcontract. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
752.11 - MASTER PLUMBING LICENSE. 
    In order to obtain a contractor's license to perform plumbing work within the City of Huntington, all persons shall obtain a competency certificate from the board of plumbing examiners as outlined in article 1735, "plumbing regulations" of the City Code. All plumbing work performed within the City of Huntington shall be done under the direct supervision of a master plumber as defined by article 1735. 
(Ord. 3-26-01) 
752.12 - MASTER PLUMBING LICENSE RECIPROCITY. 
    The board of plumbing examiners will grant a certificate of competency to any individual who has obtained a master plumber's license from another governmental jurisdiction which has similar requirements for obtaining a certificate of competency as the City of Huntington, provided that such jurisdiction also will accept a certificate of competency issued by the city in issuing a master plumber license for that jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 3-26-01) 
752.13 - COMPLIANCE. 
    Section 752.11 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington shall go into effect with the passage of this ordinance; however, those contractors currently performing plumbing work within the City of Huntington shall have until August 1, 2001 to comply with section 752.11. 
(Ord. 3-26-01) 
752.99 - PENALTY. 
    The criminal penalty for the violation of this article shall be not more than $500 and/or 30 days in jail. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 10-28-91) 
ARTICLE 755 - INSURANCE AGENCIES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of agents and brokers, W. Va. Code, Art. 33-12. 

755.01 - LICENSE TAX REQUIRED. 
    Any insurance or indemnity company or association, including mutual companies, mutual associations, fraternal and mutual benefit associations and companies or associations engaged in the business of soliciting or receiving deposits or payments on any annuity or investment contract, bond or certificate, in fixed and stipulated installments or single payments, hereinafter referred to as the "company," which is licensed by the insurance commissioner or the commissioner of securities of the state to engage in the insurance or indemnity business, or in the business of soliciting or receiving payments on such contracts, bonds or certificates within the state shall be eligible to engage or continue in such business within the city upon the payment of the tax provided in this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-1) 
755.02 - REPORT TO BE MADE BY AGENTS. 
    Every agent or representative for any company mentioned in section 755.01, engaged or desiring to engage in any such business within the city, hereinafter referred to as the "agent," shall, annually on or before June 1 preceding the tax year or, as to any such company commencing such business after the beginning of the tax year, before it commences such business within the city, make a report under oath to the director of the division of finance showing the following: 
(a)  The name and address of each of such companies which such agent represents; 
(b)  The name and address of each agent attached to his office representing each of such companies within the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-2) 
755.03 - AMOUNT OF TAX. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be collected by the city an annual tax upon each of the companies mentioned in section 755.01 for and upon the privilege of engaging in business within the city, computed as follows: 
(a)  For each company, $25; and 
(b)  For each agent, however designated, $5. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-3) 
755.04 - TAX YEAR; WHEN TAX PAYABLE. 
    The tax year for the imposition and collection of the tax levied in the preceding section is hereby fixed from July 1 to the following June 30, inclusive. Such tax shall be payable to the director of the division of finance, without demand therefor, on or before August 1 of the tax year or, as to any company commencing business after the beginning of the tax year, within 30 days after the filing of the report as to such company required by section 755.01. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-4) 
755.05 - MANNER OF COLLECTION; PENALTY FOR DEFAULT IN PAYMENT. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be a debt due the city and may be collected in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes by the city. A penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax shall be added for any default in payment thereof for 30 days, and for each succeeding 30 days before payment there shall be an additional penalty of 1%. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-5) 
755.06 - PROCEDURE UPON FAILURE OF AGENT TO MAKE REPORT. 
    In the event that the agent of any company fails or refuses to make the report required of him by section 755.02, within the time required therefor, the director of the division of finance shall forthwith proceed in such manner as he deems best to secure the necessary information for the levying of such tax with respect to such company, and shall thereupon give notice to such company, and to such agent, of the amount of tax due and payable by such company under the terms of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-6) 
755.07 - OFFENSES. 
    No person shall engage in the businesses named in section 755.01, or in either of them, as company or agent, within the city without having paid the tax provided for by this article, in the manner and at the time hereby provided for such payemnt, or for any agent to fail or refuse to make the report required by the provisions of section 755.02. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-7) 
ARTICLE 759 - PUBLIC UTILITY EXCISE TAX[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Business and occupation tax on utilities, § 765.06. 
State Law reference- Public utilities tax, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-5a. 

759.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Person" means individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and combinations thereof, of whatever form and character. 
(b)  "Public utility service" means all services and tangible personal property purchased within the city from a seller, as hereinafter in this section defined, namely, telephone service, electric service, gas service, including bottled or liquid gas, if the seller thereof is classified as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the public service commission of the state, water service and sanitary sewer service, if purchased, used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  "Purchaser" means every person who purchases, uses or consumes a public utility service. 
(d)  "Seller" means every person, whether a public service corporation, a municipality or private corporation, classified as a public utility and subject to the jurisdiction of the public service commission of the state, who sells, furnishes or supplies a public utility service. 
(e)  "User" means the owner or tenant of private residential property or the owner or tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes and every combination thereof, of every kind and description. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-8) 
759.02 - IMPOSITION AND LEVYING; AMOUNT. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each and every purchaser of a public utility service, an excise tax upon the privilege of purchasing, using or consuming, within the corporate limits of the city, such public utility service. Such tax shall be in the amount of 2% of the charge exclusive of any federal or state tax thereon, imposed upon the purchaser, made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each public utility service, which tax in every case shall be collected by the seller and paid by the purchaser upon the amount of each periodic statement rendered such purchaser by the seller and shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and the seller. The tax imposed and levied by this section is in addition to all other taxes imposed and levied by the city. In the event the amount of the charge for any single public utility service exceeds the sum of $20,000 in any given calendar month, to any single purchaser, no tax shall be imposed for such additional purchase, use or consumption in excess of the amount of $20,000. In the event more than one public utility shall furnish the identical public utility service to the same purchaser, such purchaser shall be entitled to group the same as a single public utility service in calculating the amount of the charges in any calendar month for such public utility service. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-9) 
759.03 - COLLECTION; TIME OF PAYMENT; EFFECTIVE DATE; PRORATION. 
    Every seller shall, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city, collect from each purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for its public utility service, and the amount of tax actually collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the city, and each seller shall remit the amount of tax shown by each report to have been collected to the city on or before the tenth day of the first calendar month following the month in which it was collected, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has failed or refused to pay the tax so imposed and levied. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the director of the division of finance. 
(Ord. 1-9-84) 
759.04 - MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS; INSPECTION. 
    Each and every seller shall keep and maintain complete records showing all purchases of public utility service within the corporate limits of the city, which records shall show the charge made against each purchaser, the dates such public utility service was furnished, the date of payment therefor and the amount of tax imposed hereunder, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make, at the expense of the city such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-11) 
759.05 - EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX. 
    The tax hereby imposed and levied shall not apply to the following transactions, which transactions are hereby exempted from such tax: 
(a)  Purchases of public utility service for resale. 
(b)  Purchases of public utility service by the United States of America, the state, and the political subdivisions, municipalities, boards, commissions, authorities and public corporations thereof. 
(c)  Purchases of tangible personal property such as appliances or the like, as distinguished from the public service supplied. 
(d)  Charges for telephone services which are paid by the insertion of coins into coin-operated telephones and specified charges or tolls for telephone calls to points outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(e)  Nonrecurring or one-time charges incidental to the furnishing of public utility service. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-11.1) 
759.06 - NONLIABILITY OF UTILITY; DUTY OF CITY; REFUNDS; RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    There shall be no liability upon the seller for erroneously collecting the tax hereby imposed and levied or for erroneously failing to bill for such tax as a result of a good faith mistake on the part of the seller. When any purchaser contends that such tax is not owed by such purchaser on the grounds that the public utility service was not purchased, used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city, the seller shall refer the question to the director of the division of finance, and such seller shall thereafter collect or refrain from collecting such tax from such purchaser for such public utility service as instructed in writing to do by the director. Any and all claims for refunds of any such tax shall be presented to the city and not to the seller. 
    The director shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-11.2) 
759.07 - ADDITIONAL REMEDIES FOR COLLECTION OF TAX. 
    Any amount of tax due and unpaid under this article shall be a debt due the city. In addition to all other methods set forth and prescribed in this article for the collection of the taxes due hereunder, the city, through its director of the division of finance, is authorized and empowered to collect the same, in the same manner as other similar taxes are collected and may impose and collect the same in the same manner and by the same remedies as are now, or may hereafter be, provided by law for the enforcement of liens and levies for state, county and municipal taxes. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-11.3) 
759.08 - EFFECTIVE DATE OF ARTICLE; NOTICE TO UTILITIES. 
    This article shall be and become in effect from July 1, 1971, and all taxes prescribed hereunder shall be calculated beginning with such date; provided, that in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 13-8-5a, as amended, such tax shall not be effective until the city gives 60 days' written notice by certified mail to all utilities doing business within the corporate limits of the city of the effective date of the article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 33-11.4) 
ARTICLE 763 - AMUSEMENT TAX[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- License taxes, § 739.22; business and occupation tax, § 765.08. 
State Law reference- Power to levy, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-6. 

763.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
(a)  "Admission" means the fee, charge, cost or price required to be paid by each person for the right to attend or utilize the amusement regardless of method of payment including the exchange of goods for admittance. 
(b)  "Amusement" or "entertainment" means theaters, including motion picture shows, dances and dancehalls, circuses, carnivals, fairs, art exhibits, exhibits and shows of any kind, and exhibition of natural or artificial curiosities, caravans, menageries and musical exhibitions, performances, and concerts, dramatic entertainment, boxing and wrestling matches or exhibitions, football games, hockey games, baseball games, basketball games, tennis matches, Tom Thumb golf or other golf, mechanical machines, or other amusement device and any and all other forms of amusement or entertainment conducted for private profit or gain. 
(c)  "Tax" means all taxes, interest or penalties levied under this article. 
(d)  "Taxpayer" means a person engaged in the business of furnishing any public amusement or entertainment conducted within the city for private profit or gain. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.02 - LEVY. 
    There is hereby levied an amusement tax of 2% on the sale of each admission to any public amusement or entertainment conducted for private profit or gain within the city; provided, that if the amount of the tax so levied shall, when computed, be or contain a fraction of one ($0.01), such fraction shall be counted as one ($0.01); provided further, that the tax so levied on the sale of admissions to moving picture theaters shall not in any event exceed one cent ($0.01) on each sale of any such adult admission; provided further that a full exemption shall be provided for all co-promoters promoting an event in an indoor arena or indoor place of public gathering with a seating capacity in excess of three thousand persons in one room where an event is co-promoted by the City of Huntington or one of its agencies, and the city assumes partial risk with the private co-promoter. Further exempted shall be all co-promoters promoting an event at an outdoor venue within the city where an event is co-promoted by the City of Huntington or one of its agencies, and the city assumes partial risk with the private co-promoter. The exemption hereunder shall apply only to the event or events that meet the criteria set forth in this subsection and shall apply only to the private co-promoter for the specific event. 
(Ord. 6-12-00; Ord. of 6-22-15(1) ) 
763.03 - COLLECTION. 
    It is the intent of this article that the tax levied under this article shall be passed on to and paid by the patron or purchaser. For the privilege of engaging in the business of operating or conducting any amusement or entertainment, the owner or operator shall add the amount of tax to the admission and shall collect the tax from the patron or person paying the admission charge, and shall then pay the amount so collected, to the director of the division of finance in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.04 - WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE; RETURN. 
    The tax levied under this article shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the fifteenth day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued. The taxpayer shall, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, make out and mail to the director of the division of finance a return for the preceding month, in the form prescribed by the director, showing the amount of the tax for which he is liable and any other further information necessary in the computation and collection of the tax which the director may require. A remittance for the amount of the tax shall accompany the return. A monthly return shall be signed by the taxpayer or his duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.05 - LIEN; FAILURE TO FILE RETURN AND REMIT TAX. 
    A tax due and unpaid under this article shall be a debt due to the city. It shall be a personal obligation of the taxpayer and shall be a lien upon all the property of the taxpayer. The lien shall have priority over all other liens and obligations, except those due the state and the United States. 
    A taxpayer who fails to file his return and remit the tax at the time required by the preceding section, in addition to all other penalties, shall pay a penalty of 6% of the amount of the tax due. For each succeeding 30 days elapsing before payment, there shall be added an additional penalty of 1%. If the taxpayer is an association or corporation, the officers thereof whose duty it is to make and return and pay the tax, shall be personally liable jointly and severally for any default on the part of the association or corporation. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.06 - WHEN LIEN ATTACHES; ENFORCEMENT OF LIEN. 
    A lien for taxes under this article shall attach when the obligation to pay the tax to the director of the division of finance accrues. The lien shall be enforceable by the director as any other lien against the property of a debtor. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.07 - DUTIES OF PERSONS LIABLE FOR TAX; RECORDS. 
    A person liable for the tax imposed under this article shall keep the records, render under oath the statements, make returns and comply with the rules and regulations that the director of the division of finance may from time to time prescribe. The director may require such records, statements or returns upon notice from any person in order to determine whether he is liable to tax hereunder. The director may require preservation of records for not to exceed five years and may at any time through his authorized agent inspect all books and accounts of the taxpayer, including banking accounts, which in any way enter into the record of the business out of which the tax imposed by this article arises. In addition, all transactions involving electrical or mechanical devices shall be required to have a tamper proof counting mechanism that would be verifiable by the Director. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.08 - PROCEDURE WHEN RETURN DEEMED INSUFFICIENT. 
    If the director of the division of finance has reason to believe that the tax imposed under this article is insufficiently returned by a taxpayer, either because the taxpayer has failed or refused to make a return, or has made an incomplete return, or has made a return which is deficient or otherwise erroneous, he may proceed to determine the amount of tax for which the taxpayer is liable. The director may make such audits and investigations, and take such evidence and testimony as may be necessary for the purpose of his investigations. As a result of his investigation, the director may assess the amount of the tax which he finds to be due. After ten days' notice in writing to the person assessed, he may proceed to collect the tax. The amount of tax, penalties and interest imposed by this article shall be assessed within three years after the date the return was filed, provided, that in the case of a false or fraudulent return filed with the intent to evade tax, or in the case no return was filed, the assessment made by made at any time. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.09 - INFORMATION TO BE HELD IN CONFIDENCE. 
    Unless in compliance with judicial order, or as may be required by the proper administration hereof, the director of the division of finance, his agents and employees, the former director or his agents and employees, shall not divulge facts or information obtained in the administration of this article. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.10 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The director of the division of finance shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations necessary to the administration of this article. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.11 - LIABILITY OF THE DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION OF FINANCE. 
    In the event the director of the division of finance fails or refuses to collect the tax assessable under this article, he shall be liable on his official bond for the amount of the tax which he fails or refuses to collect. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
763.12 - PERMITS. 
    All persons engaging in the business of conducting dances or furnishing any other public amusement or entertainment conducted for private profit or gain as defined in this article shall obtain a permit therefor from the director of the division of finance at least 24 hours in advance of the dance, amusement or entertainment, unless a permit therefor has been previously issued. 
(Ord. 6-12-00) 
ARTICLE 765 - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- This article 765 was repealed by Ordinance of 3-12-91, passed March 12, 1991. See article 787 for current regulations. 

ARTICLE 769 - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Power to levy, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-3. 

769.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings assigned to them by this section: 
(a)  "Director of the division of finance" means the director of the division of finance of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
(b)  "Consideration paid" or "consideration" means the amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration for or in exchange for the right to occupy a hotel room as herein defined. 
(c)  "Consumer" means a person who pays the consideration for the use or occupancy of a hotel room. "Consumer" shall not be construed to mean the government of the United States of America, its agencies or instrumentalities, or the government of the state or political subdivisions thereof. 
(d)  "Hotel" means any facility, building or buildings, publicly or privately owned in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. "Hotel" includes but is not limited to, boardinghouses, hotels, motels, inns, courts, lodges, cabins and tourist homes. "Hotel" includes state, county and city parks offering accommodations as herein set forth. "Hotel" shall not be construed to mean any hospital, sanitarium, extended care facility, nursing home or university or college housing unit or any facility providing fewer than three hotel rooms, not exceeding a total of ten days in a calendar year nor any tent, trailer or camper campsites; provided, that where a university or college housing unit provides sleeping accommodations for the general nonstudent public for a consideration, "Hotel" shall, if otherwise applicable, apply to such accommodations for the purposes of this tax. 
(e)  "Hotel operator" means the person who is the proprietor of a hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, trustee in possession, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, executer or in any other capacity. Where the hotel operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed a hotel operator for the purpose of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
(f)  "Hotel room" means any room or suite of rooms or other facility affording sleeping accommodations to the general public and situated within a hotel. The term "hotel room" does not include: 
1.  A banquet room, meeting room or any other room not primarily used for, or in conjunction with sleeping accommodations; or 
2.  Sleeping accommodations rented on a month-to-month basis or other rental arrangement for 30 days or longer at the inception at a boarding house, condominium, cabin, tourist home, or home. 
3.  Sleeping accommodations rented by a hotel operator to those persons directly employed by the hotel operator for the purposes of performing duties in support of the operation of the hotel or related operations. 
(g)  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, syndicate, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, receiver, corporation, guardian, trust, business trust, trustee, committee, estate, executor, administrator or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
(h)  "Tax", "taxes" or "this tax" means the hotel occupancy tax authorized by this article. 
(i)  "Taxing authority" means the City of Huntington, a municipality, levying or imposing the tax authorized by this article. 
(j)  "Taxpayer" means any person liable for the tax authorized by this article. 
(Ord. 7-22-85; Ord. of 4-11-16(1) ) 
769.02 - IMPOSITION AND LEVY OF TAX; EXCEPTIONS; RATE. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied an excise tax upon the occupancy, on or after October 15, 2007, of all hotel rooms within the corporate limits of the city equal to 6% of the cost of each such hotel room. 
(Ord. 10-9-07; Ord. of 4-11-16(1) ) 
769.03 - COLLECTION. 
(a)  The amount of such tax shall be separately stated by the operator on any bill, statement, invoice or charge made for the occupancy of any hotel room or rooms. Such tax shall be collected by the operator from the person paying the consideration for the occupancy of the hotel room or rooms at the time payment for the occupancy of the hotel room or rooms is made. The operator shall be liable for the collection of the tax and for the tax. 
(b)  Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the person paying the consideration for the occupancy of the hotel room or rooms which is extinguished only by payment of such tax to the operator. If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the operator by the person paying the consideration for the occupancy of the hotel room or rooms, the director of the division of finance may require the tax to be paid directly by such person to the director. 
(c)  All collections under the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator until the same have been remitted to the director in the manner provided in this article. 
(d)  No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, either directly or indirectly, that such tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the cost of any room or rooms, or that, if added, any part will be refunded. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.04 - OCCUPANCY BILLED TO GOVERNMENT AGENCIES OR EMPLOYEES. 
(a)  Hotel room occupancy billed directly to the Federal Government shall be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for by a Federal government employee for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this tax. 
(b)  Hotel room occupancy billed directly to this state or its political subdivisions shall be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for by an employee of this state for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this tax. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.05 - COLLECTION OF TAX WHEN SALE ON CREDIT. 
    A hotel operator doing business wholly or partially on a credit basis shall require the consumer to pay the full amount of tax due upon a credit sale at the time such sale is made or within 30 days thereafter. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.06 - RECEIVERSHIP BANKRUPTCY; PRIORITY OF TAX. 
    In the distribution, voluntary or compulsory, in receivership, bankruptcy or otherwise, of the property or estate of any person, all taxes due and unpaid authorized under this article shall be paid from the first money available for distribution in priority to all claims and liens, except taxes and debts due to the United States which under federal law are given priority over the debts and liens created by municipal ordinance or order of the county commission for this tax and taxes and debts due to the state. Any person charged with the administration or distribution of any such property or estate who violates the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any taxes accrued and unpaid which are chargeable against the person whose property or estate is in administration or distribution. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.07 - FAILURE TO COLLECT OR REMIT TAX; LIABILITY OF HOTEL OPERATOR. 
    If any hotel operator fails to collect the tax authorized by this article and levied pursuant to municipal ordinance or order of the county commission, he shall be personally liable for such amount as he failed to collect or remit; provided, that such hotel operator shall not be held liable for failure to collect such tax if the hotel operator can by good and substantial evidence prove the refusal of the purchaser to pay this tax despite the diligent effort in good faith of the hotel operator to collect the tax. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.08 - TOTAL AMOUNT COLLECTED TO BE REMITTED. 
    No profit shall accrue to any person as a result of the collection of the tax authorized under this article. Notwithstanding that the total amount of such taxes collected by a hotel operator may be in excess of the amount for which a consumer would be liable by the application of the levy of 3% for the occupancy of a hotel room or rooms, the total amount of all taxes collected by any hotel operator shall be remitted to the taxing authority as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.09 - INTEREST AND PENALTIES. 
(a)  The tax imposed and levied by this article, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the due date of the return until paid. 
(b)  If any operator fails to make the return or any quarterly installment required by this article, or makes his return, but fails to remit in whole or in part the proper amount of tax, there shall be added to the amount of tax unpaid, from the date such tax should have been paid, a penalty in the amount of 5% of the tax for the first month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency and 1% of the tax for each succeeding month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency; provided, that if such failure is due to reasonable cause, the director of the division of finance may waive in whole or in part these penalties. 
(c)  Interest and penalties may be collected in the same manner as the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.10 - RECORDS. 
    Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of the tax imposed and levied by this article, shall keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records necessary to determine the amount of such tax due the city, which records the director of the division of finance shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.11 - CESSATION OF BUSINESS. 
    Whenever any operator required to collect and pay the director of the division of finance any tax collected pursuant to provisions of this article shall cease to operate, go out of business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax then payable to the director shall become immediately due and payable; and such operator shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due the director. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.12 - ASSESSMENT OF TAX WHEN INSUFFICIENTLY RETURNED. 
    If the director of the division of finance believes that the tax imposed by this article has been insufficiently returned by an operator, either because the operator has failed or refused to properly collect or remit the tax, or has failed to make a return, or has made a return which is incomplete, deficient or otherwise erroneous, he may proceed to investigate and determine or estimate the tax liability of the operator and make an assessment therefor. Assessments shall be served upon the taxpayer either personally or by certified mail. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.13 - NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; PETITION FOR REASSESSMENT. 
    The director of the division of finance shall give the operator written notice of any assessment made pursuant to this article. Unless the operator to whom a notice of assessment is given shall, within 30 days after service thereof, either personally or by certified mail, file with the director a petition in writing, verified under oath by the operator or his duly authorized agent having knowledge of the facts, setting forth with particularity the items of the assessment objected to, together with the reasons for the objections, the assessment shall become final and not subject to administrative or judicial review. The amount of an assessment shall be due and payable on the day following the date upon which the assessment becomes final. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.14 - HEARING PROCEDURE; ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. 
(a)  When a petition for reassessment provided for in section 769.13 is filed within the time prescribed in such section for such filing, the director of the division of finance shall assign a time and place of a hearing hereon and shall notify the operator of such hearing by written notice at least 20 days in advance thereof. Such hearing shall be held within 100 days from the date of filing the petition unless continued by agreement of the parties or by the director for sufficient cause. 
(b)  The hearing shall be informal and shall be conducted in an impartial manner by the director or a hearing examiner designated by the director. The burden of proof shall be upon the operator to show that the assessment is incorrect and contrary to law, in whole or in part. 
(c)  After any such hearing, the director shall, within a reasonable time, give notice in writing of his decision. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.15 - APPEALS TO CIRCUIT COURT. 
(a)  An appeal may be taken by the operator to the Circuit Court of Cabell County within 30 days after service of the director of the division of finance's decision. 
(b)  The appeal shall be taken by the filing of a petition and notice, which petition and notice shall be served upon or accepted by the director as an original notice. When the petition and notice are so served, they shall, with the return or acceptance, thereon, be filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and docketed as other cases with the operator as plaintiff and the director as defendant. The filing of the appeal shall not stay the collection of the tax. The collection of the tax shall be stayed if the plaintiff files with such clerk a bond, for the use of the defendant, with sureties approved by the clerk, the penalty of the bond to be not less than the total amount of the tax, interest and penalties, to such date, appealed from and conditioned that the plaintiff shall perform the orders of the court; provided, that a judge of the circuit court may stay the collection of the tax without the requirement of a bond upon a proper showing by the operator that the properties of the operator are sufficient to secure performance of the court's orders or that the ends of justice will be served thereby. 
(c)  The court shall hear the appeal and determine anew all questions submitted to it on appeal from the determination of the director. In such appeal, a certified copy of the director's assessment shall be admissible and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the tax due under the provisions of this article. The court shall render its decree thereon; and a certified copy of the decree shall be filed by the clerk of the court with the director, who shall then correct the assessment in accordance with such decree. 
(d)  Unless an appeal is taken pursuant to this section within 30 days after service of the administrative decision, the director's decision shall become final and conclusive and not subject to administrative or judicial review. The amount, if any, due the city under such decision shall be due and payable on the day following the date upon which such decision becomes final. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.16 - TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT DUE CITY. 
    Any tax, penalties or interest due and payable under this article shall be a debt due the city and shall be recoverable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such tax, penalty or interest. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.17 - INJUNCTION. 
    If the failure of any operator to comply with the provisions of this article continues for 60 days, the director of the division of finance may proceed to obtain an injunction restraining the operator from doing business in this city until he fully complies with the provisions of this article. In any proceeding under this section, upon judgment or decree for the plaintiff, he shall be awarded his costs. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.18 - RECORDS; LIMITATION ON ASSESSMENTS. 
    The amount of tax, interest and penalties imposed by this article shall be assessed within two years after the due date of the return; provided, that in the case of a false or fraudulent return filed with the intent to evade the tax or in case no return is filed, the assessment may be made at any time. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.19 - REFUNDS. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under the provisions of this article, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, if a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the director of the division of finance within two years of the date of payment of such tax, interest or penalty. Claims for refunds shall be on forms prescribed by the director. 
(b)  An operator may claim a refund or take as a credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not liable for the payment of such tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has been refunded to the person from whom the tax was collected. 
(c)  A person paying the tax may obtain a refund of tax overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim for refund but only when the tax was paid by such person directly to the director or when such person, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes that such person has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)  No refund shall be paid unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records evidencing his entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.20 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. 
    The administration of this article is vested in and shall be exercised by the director of the division of finance, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules of procedure in conformity with this article for the making of returns and for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed and levied hereunder; and the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article in any of the courts of the state shall be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the director. 
769.21 - USE OF TAX MONEYS BY THE CITY. 
    All revenues collected by the city from the tax levied by this article shall be deposited in the general revenue fund of the city and expended for the following purposes and none other: 
(a)  At least 50% of the revenue derived from this article shall be used for the Convention and Visitors Bureau; 
(b)  The planning, construction, reconstruction, establishment, acquisition, improvement, renovation, extension, enlargement, equipment, maintenance, repair and operation of publicly owned convention facilities including, but not limited to arenas, auditoriums, civic centers and convention centers; 
(c)  The payment of principal, interest or both on revenue bonds issued to finance such convention facilities; 
(d)  The promotion of conventions; 
(e)  The construction or maintenance of public parks and recreation facilities, including land acquisition; or 
(f)  The promotion of the arts. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
769.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  No person shall willfully refuse to collect or to pay the tax or willfully refuse to make the return required to be made by this article; or willfully make any false or fraudulent return or false statement in any return with the intent to defraud any taxing authority, or willfully evade the payment of the tax, or any part thereof; or willfully aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax, or any part thereof; and no officer, partner or principal of any corporation or association shall willfully make or willfully permit to be made for such corporation or association any false return, or any false statement in any return authorized by this article, with the intent to evade the payment of this tax. 
(b)  Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of this article shall for the first offense be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days, or both. For each offense after the first offense, such person shall be guilty of a felony, and shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned in the penitentiary not more than three years, or in the discretion of the court, be confined in the county jail not more than one year, or both. 
(c)  Every prosecution for any offense arising under this article shall be commenced within three years after the offense was committed, notwithstanding any provision of these Codified Ordinances to the contrary. 
(d)  Proceedings against any person under this section shall be initiated in the county of this state wherein such person resides if any element of the offense occurs in such county of residence, or if no element of the offense occurs in such county of residence, then in the county where the offense was committed. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the term: 
(1)  "Willfully" means the intentional violation of a known legal duty to perform any act, required to be performed by any provision of this article, in respect of which the violation occurs; provided, that the mere failure to perform any act shall not be a willful violation under this article. A willful violation of this article requires that the defendant had knowledge of or notice of a duty to perform such act, and that the defendant, with knowledge of or notice of such duty, intentionally failed to perform such act. 
(2)  "Evade" means to willfully and fraudulently commit any act with the intent of depriving the state of payment of any tax which there is a known legal duty to pay. 
(3)  "Fraud" means any false representation or concealment as to any material fact made by any person with the knowledge that it is not true and correct, with the intention that such representation or concealment be relied upon by the state. 
(Ord. 7-22-85) 
ARTICLE 772 - CITY SERVICE FEE 

772.01 - STATEMENT OF POLICY AND FINDINGS. 
    Council finds that the City of Huntington provides to all persons in its borders certain services, whether they be residents employed within the city, or persons living outside the city and employed within the corporate boundaries of the city or persons visiting within the city. Such services include police protection and traffic and street maintenance and other valuable services associated with the police department and public works department. Such services are within the authority and are the responsibility of the municipal government as provided under the general laws of the State of West Virginia and, since such services are essential to the creation and maintenance of those jobs which provide livelihood to all persons employed within the city, as well as to the property interests of residents and visitors to the city, it is, therefore, reasonable to derive a portion of the cost of providing and maintaining such services from said individuals. Additionally, the council finds that an individual who is a resident and employed has a greater interest and direct benefit from such municipal services. W. Va. Code, § 8-13-13 provides that every municipality has the plenary power and authority to provide by ordinance for the installation, continuance, maintenance or improvement of such services, to make reasonable regulations with respect thereto, and to impose by ordinance upon the users of such services reasonable rates, fees and charges to be collected in the manner specified in the ordinance. 
    Council further finds that all of those who actually use, enjoy and benefit from these services should bear an equitable share of the cost thereof. Council acknowledges that the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia has recognized that no system of assessing the costs to all users will be absolutely perfect, and that municipalities are only required to install a reasonable system of distributing the costs to all of the users that it can reach through reasonable and prudent means and legislation. 
    Council further acknowledges that the Legislature of the State of West Virginia has conferred upon municipalities the plenary power to enact reasonable administrative provisions to ensure the efficient, orderly and equitable implementation and collection of the service fees from all possible users. 
    Council further finds that it has determined that it is in the best interests of the citizens of the City of Huntington and the users of all city services to enact this article to impose a city service fee. 
    Council further finds that there are thousands of persons who use and benefit from municipal services who are not owners of property or residents of the City of Huntington, but who are employed within the city. 
    Council further finds that employers located within the City of Huntington possess important employment information necessary to properly enforce certain aspects and provisions of this article. Therefore, reasonable regulations concerning obtaining certain information from such employers shall be a necessary and important part of the administration of the city service fee. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this article: 
(a)  "User" shall mean any person who is employed within the city by an employer located within the city and whose conduct is consistent with that of an employee benefitting from the use of municipal services as stated in section 772.03 of this article. 
(b)  "Municipal service or municipal services" shall mean any valuable service provided by the City of Huntington, its departments, boards, commissions and agents, which shall include, but not be limited to, fire protection, flood protection, police protection, street maintenance and improvement, street lighting, providing a public park, and other valuable city services. 
(c)  "User of municipal services" shall mean any person, as defined in this section, who uses any municipal service, as defined in this section, and who is found or declared to be such a user in section 772.03 of this article. 
(d)  "Fee" shall mean the city service fee to be imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(e)  "Director" shall mean the director of the division of finance as designated and defined in section 9.4 of the Official Charter of the City of Huntington, as amended. 
(f)  "Business" shall mean all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain or economic benefit, either direct or indirect. 
(g)  "City" shall mean the City of Huntington. 
(h)  "Employer" shall mean one who employs the services of others; one for whom employees work and who pays their wages or salaries. 
(i)  "Employee" shall mean one who works for an employer; a person working for salary, wages or compensation. 
(j)  "Transient employee" shall mean an employee who remains for a short period of time and their principal office is not within the Huntington municipality. 
(k)  "Self-employed" shall mean an individual who operates a business or profession as a sole proprietor, partner in a partnership, independent contractor, or consultant. 
(Ord. of 4-27-09) 
772.03 - DECLARATION AS TO CONDUCT EVIDENCING THE USE OF A MUNICIPAL SERVICE. 
    Council finds that holding employment with an employer with a place of business located within the City of Huntington during a calendar year is legal and valid proof of the use of one or more municipal services sufficient to assess and collect a city service fee from the person engaging in the activity stated. However, a transient employee whose principal office is out of the City of Huntington and either pays an employee user's fee or makes remuneration to another municipality for services based upon employment shall be exempt. For purposes of this article, "employer" shall include all for-profit and not-for-profit entities and all local, county, state and federal governmental entities. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.04 - IMPOSITION OF CITY SERVICE FEE. 
(a)  Effective October 1, 2015, and thereafter, there is hereby imposed an increase in the city serve fee to help defray the cost of providing and maintaining city services within the city. The fee is hereby imposed upon any person who is employed within the city and meets the requirements of a user of municipal services as defined in section 772.02(a) of this article. Such person or persons shall be required to pay a city service fee of $5 per calendar week. 
(b)  The director of the division of finance shall place all fees collected under this article in a separate account. 
(Ord. 6-10-02; Ord. 3-24-03; Ord. of 4-27-09; Ord. of 9-28-15(1) ) 
772.05 - ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS; INVESTIGATIONS AND POWER TO AUDIT. 
(a)  Pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 8-13-13, the director shall have the authority and responsibility to promulgate reasonable regulations for the collection of the fees imposed by this article. Said regulations shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Regulations setting due dates for all fees; 
(2)  Regulations setting forth guidelines for the orderly collection of the fees; 
(3)  Regulations requiring employers employing persons within the City of Huntington to collect and remit said fees and supply to the director any and all information which may include the following: the number of total employees; the number of transient employees; the number of full-time/part-time employees; hire dates and termination dates for new employees or those who have left employment; names, social security numbers and addresses; 
(4)  Regulations requiring employers to collect from their employees and to remit to the division of finance the fee imposed herein. Such rules, regulations and procedures shall be reduced to writing and shall take effect upon being filed in the office of the city clerk; 
(5)  The director of finance may, upon his discretion, allow employees to submit information on an annual basis, however, payment of fees shall be made monthly; and 
(6)  The method of reporting can be done by any means found to be acceptable by the director of finance. 
(b)  For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any information submitted to the director as required by subsection (a) of this section, and for the further purpose of conducting hearings as provided for in section 772.11 of this article, the director, or his designee, shall have the power to examine or cause to be examined, any books, papers, records, memoranda, documents and any other payroll data and information, and may take testimony and require material proof with power to administer oaths to any person or persons from whom testimony may be taken. The mayor or mayor's designee shall further have the power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum in the name of the City of Huntington to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, memoranda, documents and testimony at the time and place specified. Every such subpoena and subpoena duces tecum shall be served at least five days before the return date thereof by either personal service made by any credible person over 18 years of age, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. A return receipt shall be required to prove service by registered or certified mail. The mayor or mayor's designee shall have plenary power and authority to further enforce the provisions of this article by instituting the appropriate civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 8-13-15. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.06 - DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS. 
    Each installment of the city service fee shall be due within 30 days from the last day of the reporting period. Fees not received within 30 days of said due date shall be considered delinquent. There shall be added to each delinquent account a penalty of 5% of the balance thereof on the 31st day after the bill has been sent. Thereafter, a penalty of 2% shall be added to the total outstanding balance at the end of each quarter. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.07 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    The director of finance is charged with enforcement of this article and may institute appropriate legal proceedings in the corporate name of the city and against any employer who fails to collect or remit the fee imposed herein pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 8-13-15. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.08 - APPEAL BOARD. 
    An appeal board shall be established in accordance with article 790 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, as revised. 
(Ord. 3-10-03) 
772.09 - PROTEST AND APPEAL. 
    Any user who feels aggrieved by any charge to his city service fee account may protest the same by filing written notice of such protest with the director setting forth his objections thereto and remitting the payment of the assessed amount. The director shall review such user's account, render a decision on the protest and forthwith notify the user of such decision in writing within 15 days of the filing of the protest. If the user is still aggrieved, he may, within 15 days of the date of the director's decision, petition the city service fee appeal board, which shall set a date and time for hearing on the protest, which hearing shall be held within 30 days from the filing of such appeal. The appeal board shall hear evidence relevant to the protest and shall render its decision on the issues raised at such hearing within 20 days after the hearing, giving notice of its decision in writing to the user and to the director. The user may, within 30 days from the date of the decision of the appeal board, file a petition, duly verified, with a court of competent jurisdiction, requesting review of the board's decision. If no such petition is filed within 30 days, the decision of the appeal board shall become final and conclusive. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the accrual during the course of the appeal process of any penalty upon the balance of any account ultimately found to be properly charged. A user's appeal shall not be deemed to be upheld if the city or board fails to meet a deadline contained herein. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.10 - EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY. 
    It shall be the responsibility of all persons or firms employing persons subject to the city service fee pursuant to section 772.04(a) of this article to make monthly payment and complete reports when required to the director pursuant to regulations promulgated by the director and pursuant to the provisions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.11 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, provision, sentence, clause or word of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity, constitutionality, legality or application of any other portion of this article. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.12 - CONDITIONAL REPEALER OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS. 
    In the event of the enactment of a statute by the Legislature of the State of West Virginia enabling municipalities in said state to impose a gross wage tax upon all persons employed in such municipalities, or to impose any other tax of a similar nature; and further, in the event that the City of Huntington shall thereafter impose, by ordinance, such a tax, such ordinance shall also provide for the immediate repealer of this article, and such repealer shall operate to discontinue the imposition of the city service fee imposed by said article. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.13 - DEDICATION OF REVENUES. 
    All revenues generated by the city service fee imposed herein are hereby dedicated to and shall be utilized for police protection and traffic and street maintenance. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.14 - FEE IMPOSED IN ADDITION TO MUNICIPAL SERVICE FEE IN ARTICLE 773. 
    The fee imposed herein shall be in addition to and independent and exclusive of the municipal service fee for fire and flood protection services imposed under article 773 of these Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. 6-10-02) 
772.15 - EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVISIONAL EXPIRATION. 
    The provisions of this article shall become effective on July 1, 2003, and shall remain in full force and effect until such time as rescinded by further ordinance of council. 
(Ord. 3-24-03) 
ARTICLE 773 - MUNICIPAL SERVICE FEE[16] 
PREAMBLE 
    The "municipal service fee" ordinance has been amended to exclude flood protection which service will be provided through the Water Quality Board, thus, this ordinance may be referred to generally as the "fire service fee" ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(4)) 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to levy, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-13. 

773.01 - STATEMENT OF POLICY. 
    The city provides its residents with the essential and special services of fire protection under W. Va. Code, § 8-13-13, municipalities in the state are authorized to impose fees upon the users of these services to defray the costs of providing them. Inasmuch as revenues from other sources are insufficient to allow the city to provide these services adequately, it is necessary to impose a service fee upon the users thereof in order that these services may continue for the benefit of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. 2-13-90; Ord. of 6-23-14(4)) 
773.02 - "USER" DEFINED. 
    For the purposes of this article, "user of municipal services" and "user" refers to any person, firm, corporation or governmental entity of any kind owning any building or structure, whether residential, commercial, governmental or otherwise, within the limits of the city which benefits from fire protection services provided by the city. 
(Ord. 2-13-90; Ord. of 6-23-14(4)) 
773.03 - IMPOSITION. 
(a)  On or after October 1, 2011, there is hereby imposed upon all users of services a municipal service fee for each lot or parcel of land containing any building or structure owned by each user. The fee shall be imposed at an annual rate of $120 per lot plus $0.0735 per square foot of each building or structure existing on each such lot and shall expire at midnight on September 30, 2014. 
(b)  On or after October 1, 2014, there is hereby imposed upon all users of services a municipal service fee, commonly known as the "fire service fee," for each lot or parcel of land containing any building or structure owned by each user. The fee shall be imposed at an annual rate of $108 per lot plus $0.0662 per square foot of each building or structure existing on each such lot. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06; Ord. of 10-25-11(1); Ord. of 6-23-14(4)) 
773.04 - BILLING. 
(a)  The director of the division of finance shall set up an account for each user and shall charge the municipal service fee to each user on an annual basis in advance. The fee shall be billed to each user giving such user the option of paying the entire yearly fee or paying the same in quarterly installments in advance. 
(b)  The director shall bill all users which are exempt from and do not make payment for billing as described in subsection (a) hereof for the actual costs associated with the fire department rendering fire or other emergency services to the user's real or personal property. The basis or billing rate used to determine the actual costs for said service shall be determined by the director on an annual basis at the beginning of the fiscal year and shall compute the same as follows: 
(1)  Determine the number of man minutes spent in the past fiscal year by fire department personnel handling all types of emergency calls. Total man minutes will include time spent by the fire department in route to and from each emergency in addition to time spent at the scene. 
(2)  Determine the amount of actual expenditures for the fire department in the previous fiscal year. 
(3)  Divide the actual expenditures from subsection (b)(2) hereof by the total man minutes from subsection (b)(1) hereof to arrive at a cost per man minute rate which will be used for billing purposes in accordance with this section for all emergencies occurring in the subsequent fiscal year. 
    The billing amount for each emergency will be the man minute billing rate multiplied by the total man minutes spent by the fire department on that emergency. A separate bill shall be prepared and sent to the user for each emergency. 
    For purposes of this section, a "billable emergency" may include, but is not limited to, fires, system malfunctions, false alarms, good intent calls, medical emergency calls, responses to accidents involving vehicles owned by the user or any other occurrence which necessitates the dispatching of fire department equipment or personnel to property owned by the user. 
(Ord. 1-12-98) 
773.05 - DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS. 
    Each installment of the municipal service fee shall be due within 30 days of the date the bill is sent. Bills not paid within 30 days of their issuance shall be considered delinquent. There shall be added to each delinquent account a penalty of 2% of the balance thereof on the 31st day after the bill has been sent. Thereafter, a penalty of 2% shall be added to the total outstanding balance at the end of each quarter. 
(Ord. 11-26-01) 
773.06 - AGREEMENTS WITH GOVERNMENTAL USERS. 
    Any provision herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the mayor shall have the authority to negotiate with users of municipal services who are also federal, state or local governmental entities with regard to special or unusual circumstances which would warrant adjusting the fee rates as provided in this article as to such governmental users and to enter into agreements with any such governmental user as to such adjusted rates. Any agreement negotiated with such governmental user shall be reduced to writing, signed by both parties, and filed in the office of the director of the division of finance. Nothing herein shall be construed to impose a duty upon the mayor to negotiate any such agreement, and in the absence of any agreement, a governmental user shall be charged the entire fee as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. 2-13-90) 
773.07 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    The director of the division of finance is charged with the enforcement of this article and may institute appropriate legal proceedings in the corporate name of the city for the collection of the municipal service fee from any user at any time such user's account is delinquent. 
(Ord. 2-13-90) 
773.08 - APPEAL BOARD. 
    An appeal board shall be established in accordance with article 790 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, as revised. 
(Ord. 3-10-03) 
773.09 - PROTEST AND APPEAL. 
    Any user who feels aggrieved by any charge to his municipal service fee account may protest the same by filing written notice of such protest with the director of the division of finance, setting forth his objections thereto and the reasons therefor, on or before the due date of his next quarterly installment payment. The director shall review such user's account, render a decision on the protest and forthwith notify the user of such decision in writing within 15 days of the filing of the protest. If the user is still aggrieved, he may within 15 days of the date of the director's decision petition the municipal service fee appeal board, which shall set a date and time for hearing on the protest, which hearing shall be held within 30 days from the filing of such appeal. The appeal board shall hear evidence relevant to the protest and shall render its decision on the issues raised at such hearing within 20 days after the hearing, giving notice of its decision in writing to the user and to the director of the division of finance. The user may, within 30 days from the date of the decision of the appeal board, file a petition, duly verified, with a court of competent jurisdiction, requesting review of the board's decision. If no such petition is filed within 30 days, the decision of the appeal board shall become final and conclusive. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the accrual during the course of this appeal process of any penalty upon the balance of any account ultimately found to be properly charged. 
(Ord. 2-13-90) 
773.10 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The mayor may adopt such rules, regulations and procedures, not inconsistent with this article, as he may deem necessary to the proper and efficient administration and collection of the municipal service fee imposed herein, which rules, regulations and procedures shall have the same effect as if fully set forth in this article. Such rules, regulations and procedures shall be reduced to writing and shall take effect upon being filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2-13-90) 
773.11 - NON-RESIDENT MOTOR VEHICLES; FEE FOR EXTINGUISHMENT OF FIRES AND ABATEMENT OF OTHER EMERGENCIES; ENFORCEMENT. 
    Notwithstanding any other section contained in this article, in the event it is necessary for the fire department to extinguish a fire or abate any other emergency on or about a motor vehicle owned by a non-resident of the city, the director of finance shall assess a fee of $400 upon the owner of such vehicle, which shall be due and payable to the city within a time period to be fixed by the director. There shall be an additional fee of $50 assessed upon such owner for each fire department vehicle remaining on the scene of the fire or other emergency for each 15-minute increment after the initial first hour of emergency service. Such owner shall also be liable for, and the city shall have the right to recover from such owner, the actual cost and expense for the utilization of any specialized and disposable equipment or materials necessary to render an emergency scene safe and secure. The director of finance shall have plenary power and authority to enforce this section is accordance with and pursuant to section 773.07. The provisions of this section shall be subject to and superseded by any and all mutual aid agreements currently in force and effect or hereinafter agreed to by and between the City of Huntington's and any other municipalities' paid or volunteer fire departments and law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. 8-23-93) 
773.12 - PURPOSE. 
    The City of Huntington is a member of the Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program enacted by the West Virginia Legislature. W. Va. Code, § 8-1-5a [2007]. The legislation authorizes pilot municipalities to exercise broad-based home rule to improve urban and state development. The legislation establishes a framework for municipalities to explore new ideas to see if they can or should be implemented on a statewide basis. 
    This article is an authorized enactment under the Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program and is intended to prevent owners of real property within the City of Huntington from failing to remit fees, taxes and charges owed unto the City of Huntington prior to the transfer of the property to a new owner. 
(Ord. of 8-24-09) 
773.13 - REPORTING OF TRANSFERS OF REAL PROPERTY WITHIN CITY LIMITS; PAYMENT OF CITY FEES. 
(a)  All transfers of real property located within the corporate boundaries of the city and consummated after the effective date of the enactment of this section, shall be reported, in writing, to the director of finance, by either, the closing agent, purchasing agent, closing attorney or any individual responsible for the consummation of a real estate transaction and the disbursement of the proceeds of said transfer, 24 hours prior to the date the transaction is scheduled to be closed. Prior to the closing date, the director of finance shall provide to the closing agent an accounting of all outstanding municipal service and refuse fees, and any other city fees, taxes and charges which are due and owing for the subject property. It shall be the responsibility of the closing agent to remit said fees within 24 hours of the closing. 
    Said fees, taxes and charges shall be remitted to the division of finance within 24 hours of the closing thereof, provided, that, in the event the transaction is closed on a regular business day after the close of business or on a Friday after the close of business, or on a Saturday or Sunday, or on a legally recognized holiday pursuant to W. Va. Code, Art. 2-2, as amended, such sale shall be reported to the division of finance no later than the close of business on the next regular business day. The written report shall be made on a form to be prescribed and provided by the director of the division of finance. The grantor, or a closing agent on behalf of the grantor, shall further pay any and all refuse service fees, municipal service fees and any other city fees, taxes and charges which are due and owing the city for services provided to the real property being conveyed, over to the division of finance within the time periods set forth in this subsection for reporting the sale of such property. Any fees, taxes and charges that remain due and owing after the date of the transfer of the real property shall be the responsibility of the new property owner as said fees, taxes and charges shall assess against the real property. 
(b)  The director of the division of finance and the director of the division of audit and compliance, or their designees, shall have plenary power and authority to enforce this section by civil action in the Circuit Courts of Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all real estate transactions closed on or after October 1, 2009. 
(Ord. of 8-24-09) 
773.14 - OFFICIAL SQUARE FOOTAGE FROM GOVERNMENT OFFICES. 
    The mayor and/or his designee may from time to time as necessary acquire official square footage of structures from any county or state office and may use such in computing the fee on any lot or parcel as outlined in section 773.03. 
(Ord. of 8-24-09) 
773.15 - SPECIAL CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL SERVICE FEE. 
(a)  The City of Huntington furnishes essential services such as fire protection, and refuse and trash removal. In exchange for these services, the city charges reasonable rates and fees known as municipal service fee or "fire service fee" and refuse service fee. The timely payment of such fees by the property owners within the city is necessary for providing funds for the expenses associated with the provision of these essential services. 
(b)  In accordance with the applicable state law, the City of Huntington is empowered to enact an ordinance allowing for the filing of liens for unpaid municipal service fees and refuse services fees on real property located within the municipal corporate limits of the city on which such fees are delinquent, past due and owing to the City of Huntington. 
(c)  The City of Huntington Finance Division shall provide administrative procedures for the assessment and collection of such fees. Prior to any lien being filed, the City of Huntington shall give notice to the property owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last known mailing address of record on the delinquent account, of the city's intent to place a lien against the property, unless the delinquency is paid within 90 days from the date the notice is mailed. Upon written request a property owner may demand a hearing before the Municipal Service Fee Board referenced in section 773.08 of this article. Such written request shall state the property owner's objections and the reasons therefor and must be filed with the city clerk's office within 30 days of receipt of the notice of intent to file lien. 
(d)  The property owner shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city to file a lien against the property to the circuit court in which the property is located. 
(e)  The mailing of a notice of lien filing or the filing of a lien shall in no way prevent the City of Huntington from pursuing other collection efforts for the collection of delinquent fees due and owing the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. of 10-26-09; Ord. of 6-23-14(4)) 
ARTICLE 776 - MUNICIPAL SALES, SERVICES AND USE TAX 
    W. Va. Code, § 8-1-5a created a pilot program known as the Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program granting five selected class I, class II and/or class III municipalities and/or metro governments the authority to enact any ordinances, acts, resolutions, rules and regulations not contrary to the constitutions of the United States or West Virginia, federal law or W. Va. Code, Chs. 60-A, 61, 62. On or about December 21, 2007 the City of Huntington applied to the Municipal Home Rule Board to be selected as one of the five municipalities to be authorized to have a Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program. Thereafter the city was notified that it was selected to be one of the municipalities authorized to undertake a Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program. 
    W. Va. Code, § 8-1-5a provides that a pilot municipalities selected to participate in the pilot program shall have the following powers: (1) the authority to pass any ordinances, acts, resolutions, rules and regulations not contrary to the constitutions of the United States or West Virginia, federal law or W. Va. Code, Chs. 60-A, 61 and 62 as specified in its written and approved plans; provided, that the pilot municipalities may not adopt any ordinance, rule, regulation or resolution or take any action that would create a defined contribution employee pension or retirement plan for its employees currently covered by a defined benefit pensions plan; and (2) any other powers necessary to implement the provisions of its approved plan. 
    The city's Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program approved plan provides for the enactment of a municipal sales, service and use for the sale of all goods within the corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 

776.01 - GENERAL CONSUMERS SALES, SERVICE AND USE TAX IMPOSED. 
    The purpose of this article is to impose a municipal sales, service and use tax in accordance with the Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.02 - FINDINGS. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  It is the intent of the council that the municipal sales, service and use tax imposed by the provisions of this article, be complementary laws and wherever possible be construed and applied to accomplish such intent as to the imposition, administration and collection of these taxes; and further, that the taxes imposed pursuant to this article shall be in all respects consistent with the imposition and collection of the state sales, service and use tax pursuant to W. Va. Code, Arts. 15, 15-a and 15-b, W. Va. Code, Ch. 11. 
(2)  The council understands that the collection of this tax will be accomplished through the voluntary and cooperative efforts of the State Tax Commissioner and his/her office and that the City of Huntington is without authority to compel the Tax Commissioner's cooperation in this regard. Further, remittance of all local sales, service and use taxes to the West Virginia Department of Revenue will allow for the efficient and consistent collection of local sales, service and use taxes for the state and its political subdivisions. Should any provision contained herein conflict with state law, the same shall be stricken and be of no further force and effect. 
(3)  On and after the first day of April, 2011, the taxes levied by this article shall also be administered and collected in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law. 
(4)  It is further the intention of council to implement and enact W. Va. Code, Arts. 9a and 9b, Ch. 11, as enacted and amended, as if the same were included in their entirety herein. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  General. When used in this article, words defined in subsection (b) of this section have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where a different meaning is provided in this article or the context in which the word is used clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended by the council. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Business" includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain or economic benefit, direct or indirect, and all activities of the state and its political subdivisions which involve sales of tangible personal property or the rendering of services when those service activities compete with or may compete with the activities of other persons. 
(2)  "Communication" means all telephone, radio, light, light wave, radio telephone, telegraph and other communication or means of communication, whether used for voice communication, computer data transmission or other encoded symbolic information transfers and includes commercial broadcast radio, commercial broadcast television and cable television. 
(3)  "Contracting": 
A.  In general. "Contracting" means and includes the furnishing of work, or both materials and work, for another (by a sole contractor, general contractor, prime contractor, subcontractor or construction manager) in fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration or improvement of a new or existing building or structure, or any part thereof, or for removal or demolition of a building or structure, or any part thereof, or for the alteration, improvement or development of real property. Contracting also includes services provided by a construction manager so long as the project for which the construction manager provides the services results in a capital improvement to a building or structure or to real property. 
B.  Form of contract not controlling. An activity that falls within the scope of the definition of contracting constitutes contracting regardless of whether the contract governing the activity is written or verbal and regardless of whether it is in substance or form a lump sum contract, a cost-plus contract, a time and materials contract, whether or not open-ended, or any other kind of construction contract. 
C.  Special rules. For purposes of this definition: 
(i)  The term "structure" includes, but is not limited to, everything built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and attached or affixed to real property or which adds utility to real property or any part thereof or which adds utility to a particular parcel of property and is intended to remain there for an indefinite period of time; 
(ii)  The term "alteration" means, and is limited to, alterations which are capital improvements to a building or structure or to real property; 
(iii)  The term "repair" means, and is limited to, repairs which are capital improvements to a building or structure or to real property; 
(iv)  The term "decoration" means, and is limited to, decorations which are capital improvements to a building or structure or to real property; 
(v)  The term "improvement" means, and is limited to, improvements which are capital improvements to a building or structure or to real property; 
(vi)  The term "capital improvement" means improvements that are affixed to or attached to and become a part of a building or structure or the real property or which add utility to real property, or any part thereof, and that last or are intended to be relatively permanent. As used herein, "relatively permanent" means lasting at least a year in duration without the necessity for regularly scheduled recurring service to maintain the capital improvement. "Regular recurring service" means regularly scheduled service intervals of less than one year; 
(vii)  Contracting does not include the furnishing of work, or both materials and work, in the nature of hookup, connection, installation or other services if the service is incidental to the retail sale of tangible personal property from the service provider's inventory; provided, that the hookup, connection or installation of the foregoing is incidental to the sale of the same and performed by the seller thereof or performed in accordance with arrangements made by the seller thereof. Examples of transactions that are excluded from the definition of contracting pursuant to this subdivision include, but are not limited to, the sale of wall-to-wall carpeting and the installation of wall-to-wall carpeting, the sale, hookup and connection of mobile homes, window air conditioning units, dishwashers, clothing washing machines or dryers, other household appliances, drapery rods, window shades, venetian blinds, canvas awnings, free-standing industrial or commercial equipment and other similar items of tangible personal property. Repairs made to the foregoing are within the definition of contracting if the repairs involve permanently affixing to or improving real property or something attached thereto which extends the life of the real property or something affixed thereto or allows or intends to allow the real property or thing permanently attached thereto to remain in service for a year or longer; and 
(viii)  The term "construction manager" means a person who enters into an agreement to employ, direct, coordinate or manage design professionals and contractors who are hired and paid directly by the owner or the construction manager. The business activities of a "construction manager" as defined in this subdivision constitute contracting, so long as the project for which the construction manager provides the services results in a capital improvement to a building or structure or to real property. 
(4)  "Directly used or consumed" in the activities of manufacturing, transportation, transmission, communication or the production of natural resources means used or consumed in those activities or operations which constitute an integral and essential part of the activities, as contrasted with and distinguished from those activities or operations which are simply incidental, convenient or remote to the activities. 
A.  Uses of property or consumption of services which constitute direct use or consumption in the activities of manufacturing, transportation, transmission, communication or the production of natural resources include only: 
(i)  In the case of tangible personal property, physical incorporation of property into a finished product resulting from manufacturing production or the production of natural resources; 
(ii)  Causing a direct physical, chemical or other change upon property undergoing manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(iii)  Transporting or storing property undergoing transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(iv)  Measuring or verifying a change in property directly used in transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(v)  Physically controlling or directing the physical movement or operation of property directly used in transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(vi)  Directly and physically recording the flow of property undergoing transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(vii)  Producing energy for property directly used in transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(viii)  Facilitating the transmission of gas, water, steam or electricity from the point of their diversion to property directly used in transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(ix)  Controlling or otherwise regulating atmospheric conditions required for transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(x)  Serving as an operating supply for property undergoing transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources, or for property directly used in transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(xi)  Maintaining or repairing of property, including maintenance equipment, directly used in transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources; 
(xii)  Storing, removal or transportation of economic waste resulting from the activities of manufacturing, transportation, communication, transmission or the production of natural resources; 
(xiii)  Engaging in pollution control or environmental quality or protection activity directly relating to the activities of manufacturing, transportation, communication, transmission or the production of natural resources and personnel, plant, product or community safety or security activity directly relating to the activities of manufacturing, transportation, communication, transmission or the production of natural resources; or 
(xiv)  Otherwise using as an integral and essential part of transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources. 
B.  Uses of property or services which do not constitute direct use or consumption in the activities of manufacturing, transportation, transmission, communication or the production of natural resources include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  Heating and illumination of office buildings; 
(ii)  Janitorial or general cleaning activities; 
(iii)  Personal comfort of personnel; 
(iv)  Production planning, scheduling of work or inventory control; 
(v)  Marketing, general management, supervision, finance, training, accounting and administration; or 
(vi)  An activity or function incidental or convenient to transportation, communication, transmission, manufacturing production or production of natural resources, rather than an integral and essential part of these activities. 
(5)  "Directly used or consumed" in the activities of gas storage, the generation or production or sale of electric power, the provision of a public utility service or the operation of a utility business means used or consumed in those activities or operations which constitute an integral and essential part of those activities or operation, as contrasted with and distinguished from activities or operations which are simply incidental, convenient or remote to those activities. 
A.  Uses of property or consumption of services which constitute direct use or consumption in the activities of gas storage, the generation or production or sale of electric power, the provision of a public utility service or the operation of a utility business include only: 
(i)  Tangible personal property, custom software or services, including equipment, machinery, apparatus, supplies, fuel and power and appliances, which are used immediately in production or generation activities and equipment, machinery, supplies, tools and repair parts used to keep in operation exempt production or generation devices. For purposes of this subsection, production or generation activities shall commence from the intake, receipt or storage of raw materials at the production plant site; 
(ii)  Tangible personal property, custom software or services, including equipment, machinery, apparatus, supplies, fuel and power, appliances, pipes, wires and mains, which are used immediately in the transmission or distribution of gas, water and electricity to the public, and equipment, machinery, tools, repair parts and supplies used to keep in operation exempt transmission or distribution devices, and these vehicles and their equipment as are specifically designed and equipped for those purposes are exempt from the tax when used to keep a transmission or distribution system in operation or repair. For purposes of this subsection, transmission or distribution activities shall commence from the close of production at a production plant or wellhead when a product is ready for transmission or distribution to the public and shall conclude at the point where the product is received by the public; 
(iii)  Tangible personal property, custom software or services, including equipment, machinery, apparatus, supplies, fuel and power, appliances, pipes, wires and mains, which are used immediately in the storage of gas or water, and equipment, machinery, tools, supplies and repair parts used to keep in operation exempt storage devices; 
(iv)  Tangible personal property, custom software or services used immediately in the storage, removal or transportation of economic waste resulting from the activities of gas storage, the generation or production or sale of electric power, the provision of a public utility service or the operation of a utility business; 
(v)  Tangible personal property, custom software or services used immediately in pollution control or environmental quality or protection activity or community safety or security directly relating to the activities of gas storage, generation or production or sale of electric power, the provision of a public utility service or the operation of a utility business. 
B.  Uses of property or services which would not constitute direct use or consumption in the activities of gas storage, generation or production or sale of electric power, the provision of a public utility service or the operation of a utility business include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  Heating and illumination of office buildings; 
(ii)  Janitorial or general cleaning activities; 
(iii)  Personal comfort of personnel; 
(iv)  Production planning, scheduling of work or inventory control; 
(v)  Marketing, general management, supervision, finance, training, accounting and administration; or 
(vi)  An activity or function incidental or convenient to the activities of gas storage, generation or production or sale of electric power, the provision of public utility service or the operation of a utility business. 
(6)  "Gas storage" means the injection of gas into a storage reservoir or the storage of gas for any period of time in a storage reservoir or the withdrawal of gas from a storage reservoir engaged in by businesses subject to the business and occupation tax imposed by W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 13, §§ 2 and 2E. 
(7)  "Generating or producing or selling of electric power" means the generation, production or sale of electric power engaged in by businesses subject to the business and occupation tax imposed by W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 13, §§ 2, 2D, 2M and 2N. 
(8)  "Gross proceeds" means the amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from sales and services within this city, without deduction on account of the cost of property sold, amounts paid for interest or discounts or other expenses whatsoever. Losses may not be deducted, but any credit or refund made for goods returned may be deducted. 
(9)  "Includes" and "including" , when used in a definition contained in this article, does not exclude other things otherwise within the meaning of the term being defined. 
(10)  "Manufacturing" means a systematic operation or integrated series of systematic operations engaged in as a business or segment of a business which transforms or converts tangible personal property by physical, chemical or other means into a different form, composition or character from that in which it originally existed. 
(11)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership or any other legal entity, or the guardian, trustee, committee, executor or administrator of any person. 
(12)  "Personal service" includes those: (A) Compensated by the payment of wages in the ordinary course of employment; and (B) rendered to the person of an individual without, at the same time, selling tangible personal property, such as nursing, barbering, shoe shining, manicuring and similar services. 
(13)  "Prepaid wireless calling service" means a telecommunications service that provides the right to utilize mobile wireless service as well as other nontelecommunications services, including the download of digital products delivered electronically, content and ancillary services, which must be paid for in advance that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number decline with use in a known amount. 
(14)  Production of natural resources. 
A.  "Production of natural resources" means, except for oil and gas, the performance, by either the owner of the natural resources or another, of the act or process of exploring, developing, severing, extracting, reducing to possession and loading for shipment and shipment for sale, profit or commercial use of any natural resource products and any reclamation, waste disposal or environmental activities associated therewith and the construction, installation or fabrication of ventilation structures, mine shafts, slopes, boreholes, dewatering structures, including associated facilities and apparatus, by the producer or others, including contractors and subcontractors, at a coal mine or coal production facility. 
B.  For the natural resources oil and gas, "production of natural resources" means the performance, by either the owner of the natural resources, a contractor or a subcontractor, of the act or process of exploring, developing, drilling, well-stimulation activities such as logging, perforating or fracturing, well-completion activities such as the installation of the casing, tubing and other machinery and equipment and any reclamation, waste disposal or environmental activities associated therewith, including the installation of the gathering system or other pipeline to transport the oil and gas produced or environmental activities associated therewith and any service work performed on the well or well site after production of the well has initially commenced. 
C.  All work performed to install or maintain facilities up to the point of sale for severance tax purposes is included in the "production of natural resources" and subject to the direct use concept. 
D.  "Production of natural resources" does not include the performance or furnishing of work, or materials or work, in fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration or improvement of a new or existing building or structure, or any part thereof, or for the alteration, improvement or development of real property, by persons other than those otherwise directly engaged in the activities specifically set forth in this subdivision as "production of natural resources". 
(15)  "Providing a public service or the operating of a utility business" means the providing of a public service or the operating of a utility by businesses subject to the business and occupation tax imposed by W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 13, §§ 2, 2D. 
(16)  "Purchaser" means a person who purchases tangible personal property, custom software or a service taxed by this article. 
(17)  "Sale", "sales" or "selling" includes any transfer of the possession or ownership of tangible personal property or custom software for a consideration, including a lease or rental, when the transfer or delivery is made in the ordinary course of the transferor's business and is made to the transferee or his or her agent for consumption or use or any other purpose. "Sale" also includes the furnishing of a service for consideration. "Sale" also includes the furnishing of prepaid wireless calling service for consideration. 
(18)  "Service" or "selected service" includes all nonprofessional activities engaged in for other persons for a consideration, which involve the rendering of a service as distinguished from the sale of tangible personal property or custom software, but does not include contracting, personal services or the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer or any service rendered for resale; provided, that the term "service" or "selected service" does not include payments received by a vendor of tangible personal property as an incentive to sell a greater volume of such tangible personal property under a manufacturer's, distributor's or other third party's marketing support program, sales incentive program, cooperative advertising agreement or similar type of program or agreement, and these payments are not considered to be payments for a "service" or "selected service" rendered, even though the vendor may engage in attendant or ancillary activities associated with the sales of tangible personal property as required under the programs or agreements. 
(19)  "Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement" or "agreement" , when used in this article, has the same meaning as when used in W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B, except when the context in which the word "agreement" is used clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended by the West Virginia State Legislature. 
(20)  "Tax" includes all taxes, additions to tax, interest and penalties levied under this article or article ten of this chapter. 
(21)  "Finance director" means the city finance director or his or her delegate. The term "delegate" in the phrase "or his or her delegate", when used in reference to the finance director, means any officer or employee of the finance division duly authorized by the finance director directly, or indirectly by one or more redelegations of authority, to perform the functions mentioned or described in this article or rules promulgated for this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such definition shall also include the State Tax Commissioner. 
(22)  "Taxpayer" means any person liable for the tax imposed by this article or additions to tax, penalties and interest imposed by W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 10. 
(23)  "Transmission" means the act or process of causing liquid, natural gas or electricity to pass or be conveyed from one place or geographical location to another place or geographical location through a pipeline or other medium for commercial purposes. 
(24)  "Transportation" means the act or process of conveying, as a commercial enterprise, passengers or goods from one place or geographical location to another place or geographical location. 
(25)  "Ultimate consumer" or "consumer" means a person who uses or consumes services or personal property. 
(26)  "Vendor" means any person engaged in this state in furnishing services taxed by this article or making sales of tangible personal property or custom software. "Vendor" and "seller" are used interchangeably in this article. 
(c)  Additional definitions. Other terms used in this ordinance are defined in W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B which definitions are incorporated herein by reference. Additionally, other sections of this article may define terms primarily used in the section in which the term is defined. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.04 - AMOUNT OF TAX; ALLOCATION OF TAX AND TRANSFERS. 
(a)  Vendor to collect. For the privilege of selling tangible personal property or custom software and for the privilege of furnishing certain selected services defined in section 776.03 of this article, the vendor shall collect from the purchaser the tax as provided under this article and W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B, and shall pay the amount of tax to the State Tax Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this article or W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B. 
(b)  Amount of tax. The general consumer sales, service and use tax imposed by this article shall be at the rate of one percent. 
    The tax computation under subsection (b) of this section shall be carried to the third decimal place, and the tax rounded up to the next whole cent whenever the third decimal place is greater than four and rounded down to the lower whole cent whenever the third decimal place is four or less. The vendor may elect to compute the tax due on a transaction on a per item basis or on an invoice basis provided the method used is consistently used during the reporting period. 
(c)  No aggregation of separate sales transactions, exception for coin-operated devices. Separate sales, such as daily or weekly deliveries, shall not be aggregated for the purpose of computation of the tax even though the sales are aggregated in the billing or payment therefor. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, coin-operated amusement and vending machine sales shall be aggregated for the purpose of computation of this tax. 
(d)  Rate of tax on certain mobile homes. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the tax levied on sales of mobile homes to be used by the owner thereof as his or her principal year-round residence and dwelling shall be an amount equal to one percent of fifty percent of the sales price. 
(e)  Construction; custom software. whenever the words "tangible personal property" or "property" appear in this article, the same shall also include the words "custom software". 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.05 - PURCHASER TO PAY; ACCOUNTING BY VENDOR. 
(a)  The purchaser shall pay to the vendor the amount of tax levied by this article which is added to and constitutes a part of the sales price, and is collectible by the vendor who shall account to the city for all tax paid by the purchaser. 
(b)  The vendor shall keep records necessary to account for: 
(1)  The vendor's gross proceeds from sales of personal property and services; 
(2)  The vendor's gross proceeds from taxable sales; 
(3)  The vendor's gross proceeds from exempt sales; 
(4)  The amount of taxes collected under this article, which taxes shall be held in trust for the City of Huntington until paid over to the State Tax Commissioner; and 
(5)  Any other information as required by this article, or W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B, or as required by the State Tax Commissioner and/or the City of Huntington Finance Director. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.06 - FAILURE TO COLLECT TAX; LIABILITY OF VENDOR. 
    If any vendor fails to collect the tax imposed by section 776.04 of this article, the vendor shall be personally liable for the amount the vendor failed to collect, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.07 - LIABILITY OF PURCHASER; ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION. 
(a)  General. If any purchaser refuses or otherwise does not pay to the vendor the tax imposed by section 776.04 of this article, or a purchaser refuses to present to the vendor a proper certificate indicating the sale is not subject to this tax, or presents to the vendor a false certificate, or after presenting a proper certificate uses the items purchased in a manner that the sale would be subject to the tax, the purchaser shall be personally liable for the amount of tax applicable to the transaction or transactions. 
(b)  Collection of tax from purchaser. Nothing in this section relieves any purchaser who owes the tax and who has not paid the tax imposed by section three of this article from liability for payment of the tax. In those cases the Tax Commissioner has authority to make an assessment against the purchaser, based upon any information within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. 
(c)  Liability of vendor. This section may not be construed as relieving the vendor from liability for the tax, except as otherwise provided in this article or W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.08 - TOTAL AMOUNT COLLECTED IS TO BE REMITTED. 
    No profit shall accrue to any person as a result of the collection of the tax levied by this article notwithstanding the total amount of the taxes collected may be in excess of the amount for which the person would be liable by the application of the rate of tax levied by section three of this article to the vendor's gross proceeds from taxable sales and services. The total amount of all taxes collected by the vendor shall be returned and remitted to the State Tax Commissioner as provided in this article or W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.09 - VENDOR MUST SHOW SALE OR SERVICE EXEMPT; PRESUMPTION. 
(a)  The burden of proving that a sale or service was exempt from the tax shall be upon the vendor, unless the vendor takes from the purchaser an exemption certificate signed by and bearing the address of the purchaser and setting forth the reason for the exemption and substantially in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. 
(b)  To prevent evasion, it is presumed that all sales and services are subject to the tax until the contrary is clearly established. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.10 - TAX ON GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES OR VALUE OF MANUFACTURED, ETC., PRODUCTS. 
(a)  A person exercising the privilege of producing for sale, profit or commercial use, any natural resources, product or manufactured product, and either engaged in the business of selling such product not otherwise exempted herein, or engaged in a business or activity in which such natural resource, product or manufactured product is used or consumed by him and such use or consumption is not otherwise exempt under this article, shall make returns of the gross proceeds of such sales or, in the absence of sale, the gross value of the natural resource, product or manufactured product, so used or consumed by him, and pay the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  The Tax Commissioner shall promulgate such uniform and equitable rules as he deems necessary for determining the gross value upon which the tax imposed by this article is levied in the absence of a sale, which value shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or character by the same person or by another person. 
(c)  The provisions of this section, as amended by this act, shall apply to natural resources, products or manufactured products, used or consumed by the producer or manufacturer thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.11 - TAX ON THE MANUFACTURE, SALE AND INSTALLATION OF MODULAR DWELLINGS. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15, § 7, persons engaged in the manufacture and sale or the manufacture, sale and installation of a modular dwelling shall pay the tax imposed by this article only on the value of the building supplies and materials used in the manufacture and installation of the modular dwelling and the preparation of the site for permanent installation, and not on the labor involved in such activities. For purposes of this section, the value of the building supplies and materials shall be the actual cost of the building supplies and materials. If the manufacturer asserts an exemption at the time of purchase of the building supplies and materials, the manufacturer shall remit the tax due on the value of the building supplies and materials used in the manufacture of the modular dwelling at the time of sale of the modular dwelling. If the manufacturer pays the tax at the time of purchase of the building supplies and materials, the manufacturer is responsible for maintaining records evidencing payment of the tax. Failure to maintain such records will result in the tax being assessed to the manufacturer. 
(b)  Persons engaged in the sale and installation of a modular dwelling shall pay the tax imposed by this article on only the value of the materials used in the manufacture and installation of the modular dwelling and the preparation of the site for permanent installation, and not on the labor involved in such activities. For purposes of this section, the value of the materials used in the manufacture of the modular dwelling shall be the actual cost of the materials and building supplies to the manufacturer as delineated on the invoice to the purchaser. If the actual cost of the materials is not available, then the cost of the materials used in the manufacture of the modular dwelling shall be sixty percent of the total cost of the modular dwelling. A credit will be given to the purchaser for any sales or use tax that has been lawfully imposed by another state and paid by the manufacturer on the purchase of building supplies and materials used in the manufacture of the modular dwelling. If the manufacturer pays the tax at the time of purchase of the building supplies and materials, the manufacturer is responsible for maintaining records evidencing payment of the tax and delineating this amount on the invoice. Failure to maintain such records will result in the credit being denied. 
(c)  Definition of modular dwelling. For purposes of this article, a modular dwelling shall include, but not be limited to, single and multi-family houses, apartment units and commercial dwellings comprised of two or more sections without a permanent chassis, built to a state or model code other than the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which are primarily constructed at a location other than the permanent site at which they are to be finally assembled and which are shipped to the site with most permanent components in place. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.12 - FURNISHING OF SERVICES INCLUDED; EXCEPTIONS. 
    The provisions of this article apply not only to selling tangible personal property and custom software, but also to the furnishing of all services, except professional and personal services, and except those services furnished by businesses subject to the control of the public service commission when the service or the manner in which it is delivered is subject to regulation by the public service commission. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.13 - CONTRACTORS. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to contracting services. However, purchases by a contractor of tangible personal property or taxable services for use or consumption in the providing of a contracting service shall be taxable, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Transition rules. The exemption from payment of tax on purchases of tangible personal property or taxable services directly used or consumed in the activity of contracting, as defined in section two of this article, which expires as of the 1st day of March, 1989, shall nevertheless remain in effect with respect to: 
(1)  Tangible personal property or taxable services purchased by a contractor on or after said 1st day of March in fulfillment of a written contract for contracting, as defined in section two of this article, that was executed and legally binding on the parties thereto on or before the 15th day of February, 1989; or in fulfillment of a written contract entered into after the said 15th day of February pursuant to a written bid for contracting that was made on or before the said 15th day of February that was binding on the contractor, but only to the extent that the bid is subsequently incorporated into a written contract; or 
(2)  Tangible personal property or taxable services purchased by a contractor on or after the said 1st day of March pursuant to a written contract executed on or before the 15th day of February, 1989, to purchase in specified quantities identified tangible personal property or specified taxable services; or 
(3)  Tangible personal property or taxable services purchased by a contractor for consumption or use in fulfillment of a written contract entered into before the 1st day of September, 1989, when such contract is for the construction of a new improvement to real property the construction or operation of which was approved by a federal or state regulatory body prior to the 1st day of February, 1989, or pursuant to a federal grant awarded prior to such 1st day of February. 
(c)  Renewals and extensions. A renewal of any contract shall constitute a new contract for purposes of this section, and the date of entry into a contract renewal by the parties, the date or dates of tender of consideration and the time of performance of any contractual obligations under a renewed contract shall be treated as the dates for determining application of this section to the renewed contract. Extensions of time granted or agreed upon by the parties to a contract for performance of the contract or for tender of consideration under the contract shall not be treated as contract renewals. Contracts to which such extensions apply shall be treated under these transition rules as if the original contractual provisions for performance and tender of consideration remain in effect. 
(d)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term "contract" or "contracts" means written agreements reciting or setting forth a fixed price consideration or a consideration based upon cost plus a stated percentage or a stated monetary increment. This term shall not mean or include ongoing sales contracts, contracts whereby any element of the consideration or the property or services sold or to be rendered in performance of the contract are undefined, or determined, as to either nature or quantity, subsequent to the making of the contract, or any open-ended contract. 
(2)  The term "contract renewal" or "renewal" means a covenant or agreement entered into or assumed by parties which have a current contractual relation or which have had a past contractual relation, whereby the parties agree to incur obligations beyond those which they were, or would have been, required, at the minimum, to carry out under their current or past contractual relation. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.14 - NONRESIDENT CONTRACTOR-REGISTRATION, BOND, ETC. 
(a)  Every nonresident contractor shall register with the Tax Commissioner prior to engaging in the performance of a contract in the City of Huntington. 
(b)  (1)  At the time of registration, the contractor shall deposit with the Tax Commissioner percent of the amount the contractor is to receive for the performance of the contract which shall be held within a contractors use tax fund pending the completion of the contract, the determination of the taxes due this state under this article and W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15A, because of such contract and the payment of the tax. 
(2)  In lieu of the deposit, the contractor may provide a corporate surety bond to be approved by the Tax Commissioner as to form, sufficiency, value, amount, stability, and other features necessary to provide a guarantee of payment of the compensating tax due this state. 
(c)  In addition, within 30 days after registration, under this section, the contractor shall file a statement with the Tax Commissioner itemizing the machinery, materials, supplies, and equipment that he has or will have on hand at the time he begins the fulfillment of the contract, including where such tangible personal property has been brought, shipped, or transported from outside this state upon which neither the tax imposed by this article nor W. Va. Code, Art. 15A (use tax) of this chapter has been paid, and shall pay the tax due thereon at the time of filing and thereafter shall report and pay the taxes as required by this article and W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15A. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.15 - TRANSITION RULES FOR ELIMINATION OF EXEMPTION FOR MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES INCORPORATED IN REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES. 
(a)  General rule. The expired provisions in subsection (j), section nine of this article, which previously exempted sales of tangible personal property to persons engaging in the activity of contracting, pursuant to a written contract with the United States, this state, or with a political subdivision thereof, or with a public corporation created by the Legislature or by another governmental entity pursuant to an act of the Legislature, for a building or structure, or improvement thereto, or other improvement to real property that is or will be owned and used by the governmental entity for a governmental or proprietary purpose, shall continue in force for: 
(1)  Tangible personal property purchased by a contractor on or after the 1st day of October, 1990, in fulfillment of a written contract for contracting, as defined in section two of this article, that was executed and legally binding on the parties thereto on or before the 15th day of September, 1990; or in fulfillment of a written contract entered into after said 15th day of September pursuant to a written bid for contracting that was made on or before said fifteenth day of September that was binding on the contractor, but only to the extent that the bid is subsequently incorporated into a written contract; and 
(2)  Tangible personal property purchased by a contractor on or after the 1st day of October, 1990, for consumption or use in fulfillment of a written contract for the construction of a new improvement to real property, the construction or operation of which was approved by a federal or state regulatory body prior to the 15th day of September, 1990, or pursuant to a federal grant awarded prior to said 15th day of September. 
(b)  Renewals and extensions. A renewal of any contract shall constitute a new contract for purposes of this section, and the date of entry into a contract renewal by the parties, the date or dates of tender of consideration and the time of performance of any contractual obligations under a renewed contract shall be treated as the dates for determining application of this section to the renewed contract. Extensions of time granted or agreed upon by the parties to a contract for performance of the contract or for tender of consideration under the contract shall not be treated as contract renewals. Contracts to which such extensions apply shall be treated under these transition rules as if the original contractual provisions for performance and tender of consideration remain in effect. For purposes of this section, the terms "contract" or "contracts", and "contract renewal" or "renewal" shall have the same meaning as defined in subsection (d), section eight-a of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.16 - LIMITATIONS ON RIGHT TO ASSERT EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  Persons who perform "contracting" as defined in section two of this article, or persons acting in an agency capacity, may not assert any exemption to which the purchaser of such contracting services or the principal is entitled. Any statutory exemption to which a taxpayer may be entitled shall be invalid unless the tangible personal property or taxable service is actually purchased by such taxpayer and is directly invoiced to and paid by such taxpayer. This section shall not apply to purchases by an employee for his or her employer; purchases by a partner for his or her partnership; or purchases by a duly authorized officer of a corporation, or unincorporated organization, for his or her corporation or unincorporated organization so long as the purchase is invoiced to and paid by the employer, partnership, corporation or unincorporated organization. 
(b)  Transition rule. This section shall not apply to purchases of tangible personal property or taxable services in fulfillment of a purchasing agent or procurement agent contract executed and legally binding on the parties thereto prior to September 15, 1999; provided, that this transition rule shall not apply to any purchases of tangible personal property or taxable services made under such a contract after August 31, 1991; and this transition rule shall not apply if the primary purpose of the purchasing agent or procurement agent contract was to avoid payment of consumers sales and use taxes. However, effective July 1, 2007, this section shall not apply to purchases of services, machinery, supplies or materials, except gasoline and special fuel, to be directly used or consumed in the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of a new or existing building or structure by a person performing "contracting", as defined in section two of this article, if the purchaser of the "contracting" services would be entitled to claim the refundable exemption under subdivision (2), subsection (b), section nine of this article had it purchased the services, machinery, supplies or materials. Effective July 1, 2009, this section shall not apply to purchases of services, computers, servers, building materials and tangible personal property, except purchases of gasoline and special fuel, to be installed into a building or facility or directly used or consumed in the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of a new or existing building or structure by a person performing "contracting", as defined in section two of this article, if the purchaser of the "contracting" services would be entitled to claim the exemption under subdivision (7), subsection (a), section nine-h of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.17 - EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  Exemptions for which exemption certificate may be issued. A person having a right or claim to any exemption set forth in this subsection may, in lieu of paying the tax imposed by this article and filing a claim for refund, execute a certificate of exemption, in the form required by the Tax Commissioner, and deliver it to the vendor of the property or service in the manner required by the Tax Commissioner. However, the Tax Commissioner may, by rule, specify those exemptions authorized in this subsection for which exemption certificates are not required. The following sales of tangible personal property and services are exempt as provided in this subsection: 
(1)  Sales of gas, steam and water delivered to consumers through mains or pipes and sales of electricity; 
(2)  Sales of textbooks required to be used in any of the schools of this state or in any institution in this state which qualifies as a nonprofit or educational institution subject to the West Virginia Department of Education and the Arts, the Board of Trustees of the University System of West Virginia or the board of directors for colleges located in this state; 
(3)  Sales of property or services to this state, its institutions or subdivisions, governmental units, institutions or subdivisions of other states; provided, that the law of the other state provides the same exemption to governmental units or subdivisions of this state and to the United States, including agencies of federal, state or local governments for distribution in public welfare or relief work; 
(4)  Sales of vehicles which are titled by the Division of Motor Vehicles and which are subject to the tax imposed by W. Va. Code, Ch. 17A, Art. 3, § 4 or like tax; 
(5)  Sales of property or services to churches which make no charge whatsoever for the services they render; provided, that the exemption granted in this subdivision applies only to services, equipment, supplies, food for meals and materials directly used or consumed by these organizations and does not apply to purchases of gasoline or special fuel; 
(6)  Sales of tangible personal property or services to a corporation or organization which has a current registration certificate issued under article twelve of this chapter, which is exempt from federal income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and which is: 
A.  A church or a convention or association of churches as defined in Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; 
B.  An elementary or secondary school which maintains a regular faculty and curriculum and has a regularly enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place in this state where its educational activities are regularly carried on; 
C.  A corporation or organization which annually receives more than one-half of its support from any combination of gifts, grants, direct or indirect charitable contributions or membership fees; 
D.  An organization which has no paid employees and its gross income from fundraisers, less reasonable and necessary expenses incurred to raise the gross income (or the tangible personal property or services purchased with the net income), is donated to an organization which is exempt from income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; 
E.  A youth organization, such as the Girl Scouts of the United States of America, the Boy Scouts of America or the YMCA Indian Guide/Princess Program and the local affiliates thereof, which is organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes and has as its primary purpose the nonsectarian character development and citizenship training of its members; 
F.  For purposes of this subsection: 
(i)  The term "support" includes, but is not limited to: 
(I)  Gifts, grants, contributions or membership fees; 
(II)  Gross receipts from fundraisers which include receipts from admissions, sales of merchandise, performance of services or furnishing of facilities in any activity which is not an unrelated trade or business within the meaning of Section 513 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; 
(III)  Net income from unrelated business activities, whether or not the activities are carried on regularly as a trade or business; 
(IV)  Gross investment income as defined in Section 509(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; 
(V)  Tax revenues levied for the benefit of a corporation or organization either paid to or expended on behalf of the organization; and 
(VI)  The value of services or facilities (exclusive of services or facilities generally furnished to the public without charge) furnished by a governmental unit referred to in Section 170(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to an organization without charge. This term does not include any gain from the sale or other disposition of property which would be considered as gain from the sale or exchange of a capital asset or the value of an exemption from any federal, state or local tax or any similar benefit; 
(ii)  The term "charitable contribution" means a contribution or gift to or for the use of a corporation or organization, described in Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and 
(iii)  The term "membership fee" does not include any amounts paid for tangible personal property or specific services rendered to members by the corporation or organization; 
G.  The exemption allowed by this subdivision does not apply to sales of gasoline or special fuel or to sales of tangible personal property or services to be used or consumed in the generation of unrelated business income as defined in Section 513 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The exemption granted in this subdivision applies only to services, equipment, supplies and materials used or consumed in the activities for which the organizations qualify as tax-exempt organizations under the Internal Revenue Code and does not apply to purchases of gasoline or special fuel; 
(7)  An isolated transaction in which any taxable service or any tangible personal property is sold, transferred, offered for sale or delivered by the owner of the property or by his or her representative for the owner's account, the sale, transfer, offer for sale or delivery not being made in the ordinary course of repeated and successive transactions of like character by the owner or on his or her account by the representative; provided, that nothing contained in this subdivision may be construed to prevent an owner who sells, transfers or offers for sale tangible personal property in an isolated transaction through an auctioneer from availing himself or herself of the exemption provided in this subdivision, regardless of where the isolated sale takes place. 
(8)  Sales of tangible personal property or of any taxable services rendered for use or consumption in connection with the commercial production of an agricultural product the ultimate sale of which is subject to the tax imposed by this article or which would have been subject to tax under this article; provided, that sales of tangible personal property and services to be used or consumed in the construction of or permanent improvement to real property and sales of gasoline and special fuel are not exempt; provided, however, that nails and fencing may not be considered as improvements to real property; 
(9)  Sales of tangible personal property to a person for the purpose of resale in the form of tangible personal property; provided, that sales of gasoline and special fuel by distributors and importers is taxable except when the sale is to another distributor for resale; provided, however, that sales of building materials or building supplies or other property to any person engaging in the activity of contracting, as defined in this article, which is to be installed in, affixed to or incorporated by that person or his or her agent into any real property, building or structure is not exempt under this subdivision; 
(10)  Sales of newspapers when delivered to consumers by route carriers; 
(11)  Sales of drugs, durable medical goods, mobility-enhancing equipment and prosthetic devices dispensed upon prescription and sales of insulin to consumers for medical purposes; 
(12)  Sales of radio and television broadcasting time, preprinted advertising circulars and newspaper and outdoor advertising space for the advertisement of goods or services; 
(13)  Sales and services performed by day care centers; 
(14)  Casual and occasional sales of property or services not conducted in a repeated manner or in the ordinary course of repetitive and successive transactions of like character by a corporation or organization which is exempt from tax under subdivision (6) of this subsection on its purchases of tangible personal property or services. For purposes of this subdivision, the term "casual and occasional sales not conducted in a repeated manner or in the ordinary course of repetitive and successive transactions of like character" means sales of tangible personal property or services at fundraisers sponsored by a corporation or organization which is exempt, under subdivision (6) of this subsection, from payment of the tax imposed by this article on its purchases when the fundraisers are of limited duration and are held no more than six times during any twelve-month period and "limited duration" means no more than eighty-four consecutive hours; provided, that sales for volunteer fire departments and volunteer school support groups, with duration of events being no more than eighty-four consecutive hours at a time, which are held no more than eighteen times in a twelve-month period for the purposes of this subdivision are considered "casual and occasional sales not conducted in a repeated manner or in the ordinary course of repetitive and successive transactions of a like character"; 
(15)  Sales of property or services to a school which has approval from the Board of Trustees of the University System of West Virginia or the Board of Directors of the State College System to award degrees, which has its principal campus in this state and which is exempt from federal and state income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; provided, that sales of gasoline and special fuel are taxable; 
(16)  Sales of lottery tickets and materials by licensed lottery sales agents and lottery retailers authorized by the state lottery commission, under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 29, Art. 22; 
(17)  Leases of motor vehicles titled pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 17A, Art. 3 to lessees for a period of 30 or more consecutive days; 
(18)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section eighteen or eighteen-b of this article or any other provision of this article to the contrary, sales of propane to consumers for poultry house heating purposes, with any seller to the consumer who may have prior paid the tax in his or her price, to not pass on the same to the consumer, but to make application and receive refund of the tax from the Tax Commissioner pursuant to rules which are promulgated after being proposed for legislative approval in accordance with W. Va. Code, Ch. 29A by the Tax Commissioner; 
(19)  Any sales of tangible personal property or services purchased and lawfully paid for with food stamps pursuant to the federal food stamp program codified in 7 U.S.C. § 2011, et seq., as amended, or with drafts issued through the West Virginia special supplement food program for women, infants and children codified in 42 U.S.C. § 1786; 
(20)  Sales of tickets for activities sponsored by elementary and secondary schools located within this state; 
(21)  Sales of electronic data processing services and related software; provided, that, for the purposes of this subdivision, "electronic data processing services" means: 
A.  The processing of another's data, including all processes incident to processing of data such as keypunching, keystroke verification, rearranging or sorting of previously documented data for the purpose of data entry or automatic processing and changing the medium on which data is sorted, whether these processes are done by the same person or several persons; and 
B.  Providing access to computer equipment for the purpose of processing data or examining or acquiring data stored in or accessible to the computer equipment; 
(22)  Tuition charged for attending educational summer camps; 
(23)  Dispensing of services performed by one corporation, partnership or limited liability company for another corporation, partnership or limited liability company when the entities are members of the same controlled group or are related taxpayers as defined in Section 267 of the Internal Revenue Code. "Control" means ownership, directly or indirectly, of stock, equity interests or membership interests possessing fifty percent or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of the stock of a corporation, equity interests of a partnership or membership interests of a limited liability company entitled to vote or ownership, directly or indirectly, of stock, equity interests or membership interests possessing 50 percent or more of the value of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company; 
(24)  Food for the following are exempt: 
A.  Food purchased or sold by a public or private school, school-sponsored student organizations or school-sponsored parent-teacher associations to students enrolled in the school or to employees of the school during normal school hours; but not those sales of food made to the general public; 
B.  Food purchased or sold by a public or private college or university or by a student organization officially recognized by the college or university to students enrolled at the college or university when the sales are made on a contract basis so that a fixed price is paid for consumption of food products for a specific period of time without respect to the amount of food product actually consumed by the particular individual contracting for the sale and no money is paid at the time the food product is served or consumed; 
C.  Food purchased or sold by a charitable or private nonprofit organization, a nonprofit organization or a governmental agency under a program to provide food to low-income persons at or below cost; 
D.  Food sold by a charitable or private nonprofit organization, a nonprofit organization or a governmental agency under a program operating in West Virginia for a minimum of five years to provide food at or below cost to individuals who perform a minimum of two hours of community service for each unit of food purchased from the organization; 
E.  Food sold in an occasional sale by a charitable or nonprofit organization, including volunteer fire departments and rescue squads, if the purpose of the sale is to obtain revenue for the functions and activities of the organization and the revenue obtained is actually expended for that purpose; 
F.  Food sold by any religious organization at a social or other gathering conducted by it or under its auspices, if the purpose in selling the food is to obtain revenue for the functions and activities of the organization and the revenue obtained from selling the food is actually used in carrying out those functions and activities; provided, that purchases made by the organizations are not exempt as a purchase for resale; or 
G.  Food sold by volunteer fire departments and rescue squads that are exempt from federal income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, when the purpose of the sale is to obtain revenue for the functions and activities of the organization and the revenue obtained is exempt from federal income tax and actually expended for that purpose; 
(25)  Sales of food by little leagues, midget football leagues, youth football or soccer leagues, band boosters or other school or athletic booster organizations supporting activities for grades kindergarten through twelve and similar types of organizations, including scouting groups and church youth groups, if the purpose in selling the food is to obtain revenue for the functions and activities of the organization and the revenues obtained from selling the food is actually used in supporting or carrying on functions and activities of the groups; provided, that the purchases made by the organizations are not exempt as a purchase for resale; 
(26)  Charges for room and meals by fraternities and sororities to their members; provided, that the purchases made by a fraternity or sorority are not exempt as a purchase for resale; 
(27)  Sales of or charges for the transportation of passengers in interstate commerce; 
(28)  Sales of tangible personal property or services to any person which this state is prohibited from taxing under the laws of the United States or under the constitution of this state; 
(29)  Sales of tangible personal property or services to any person who claims exemption from the tax imposed by this article or article fifteen-a of this chapter pursuant to the provision of any other chapter of this code; 
(30)  Charges for the services of opening and closing a burial lot; 
(31)  Sales of livestock, poultry or other farm products in their original state by the producer of the livestock, poultry or other farm products or a member of the producer's immediate family who is not otherwise engaged in making retail sales of tangible personal property; and sales of livestock sold at public sales sponsored by breeders or registry associations or livestock auction markets; provided, that the exemptions allowed by this subdivision may be claimed without presenting or obtaining exemption certificates provided the farmer maintains adequate records; 
(32)  Sales of motion picture films to motion picture exhibitors for exhibition if the sale of tickets or the charge for admission to the exhibition of the film is subject to the tax imposed by this article and sales of coin-operated video arcade machines or video arcade games to a person engaged in the business of providing the machines to the public for a charge upon which the tax imposed by this article is remitted to the Tax Commissioner; provided, that the exemption provided in this subdivision may be claimed by presenting to the seller a properly executed exemption certificate; 
(33)  Sales of aircraft repair, remodeling and maintenance services when the services are to an aircraft operated by a certified or licensed carrier of persons or property, or by a governmental entity, or to an engine or other component part of an aircraft operated by a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property, or by a governmental entity and sales of tangible personal property that is permanently affixed or permanently attached as a component part of an aircraft owned or operated by a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property, or by a governmental entity, as part of the repair, remodeling or maintenance service and sales of machinery, tools or equipment directly used or consumed exclusively in the repair, remodeling or maintenance of aircraft, aircraft engines or aircraft component parts for a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property or for a governmental entity; 
(34)  Charges for memberships or services provided by health and fitness organizations relating to personalized fitness programs; 
(35)  Sales of services by individuals who babysit for a profit; provided, that the gross receipts of the individual from the performance of baby-sitting services do not exceed five thousand dollars in a taxable year; 
(36)  Sales of services by public libraries or by libraries at academic institutions or by libraries at institutions of higher learning; 
(37)  Commissions received by a manufacturer's representative; 
(38)  Sales of primary opinion research services when: 
A.  The services are provided to an out-of-state client; 
B.  The results of the service activities, including, but not limited to, reports, lists of focus group recruits and compilation of data are transferred to the client across state lines by mail, wire or other means of interstate commerce, for use by the client outside the State of West Virginia; and 
C.  The transfer of the results of the service activities is an indispensable part of the overall service. 
For the purpose of this subdivision, the term "primary opinion research" means original research in the form of telephone surveys, mall intercept surveys, focus group research, direct mail surveys, personal interviews and other data collection methods commonly used for quantitative and qualitative opinion research studies; 
(39)  Sales of property or services to persons within the state when those sales are for the purposes of the production of value-added products; provided, that the exemption granted in this subdivision applies only to services, equipment, supplies and materials directly used or consumed by those persons engaged solely in the production of value-added products; provided, however, that this exemption may not be claimed by any one purchaser for more than five consecutive years, except as otherwise permitted in this section. 
For the purpose of this subdivision, the term "value-added product" means the following products derived from processing a raw agricultural product, whether for human consumption or for other use. For purposes of this subdivision, the following enterprises qualify as processing raw agricultural products into value-added products; those engaged in the conversion of: 
A.  Lumber into furniture, toys, collectibles and home furnishings; 
B.  Fruits into wine; 
C.  Honey into wine; 
D.  Wool into fabric; 
E.  Raw hides into semifinished or finished leather products; 
F.  Milk into cheese; 
G.  Fruits or vegetables into a dried, canned or frozen product; 
H.  Feeder cattle into commonly accepted slaughter weights; 
I.  Aquatic animals into a dried, canned, cooked or frozen product; and 
J.  Poultry into a dried, canned, cooked or frozen product; 
(40)  Sales of music instructional services by a music teacher and artistic services or artistic performances of an entertainer or performing artist pursuant to a contract with the owner or operator of a retail establishment, restaurant, inn, bar, tavern, sports or other entertainment facility or any other business location in this state in which the public or a limited portion of the public may assemble to hear or see musical works or other artistic works be performed for the enjoyment of the members of the public there assembled when the amount paid by the owner or operator for the artistic service or artistic performance does not exceed three thousand dollars; provided, that nothing contained herein may be construed to deprive private social gatherings, weddings or other private parties from asserting the exemption set forth in this subdivision. For the purposes of this exemption, artistic performance or artistic service means and is limited to the conscious use of creative power, imagination and skill in the creation of aesthetic experience for an audience present and in attendance and includes, and is limited to, stage plays, musical performances, poetry recitations and other readings, dance presentation, circuses and similar presentations and does not include the showing of any film or moving picture, gallery presentations of sculptural or pictorial art, nude or strip show presentations, video games, video arcades, carnival rides, radio or television shows or any video or audio taped presentations or the sale or leasing of video or audio tapes, air shows or any other public meeting, display or show other than those specified herein; provided, however, that nothing contained herein may be construed to exempt the sales of tickets from the tax imposed in this article. Provided further, that nude dancers or strippers may not be considered as entertainers for the purposes of this exemption; 
(41)  Charges to a member by a membership association or organization which is exempt from paying federal income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, for membership in the association or organization, including charges to members for newsletters prepared by the association or organization for distribution primarily to its members, charges to members for continuing education seminars, workshops, conventions, lectures or courses put on or sponsored by the association or organization, including charges for related course materials prepared by the association or organization or by the speaker or speakers for use during the continuing education seminar, workshop, convention, lecture or course, but not including any separate charge or separately stated charge for meals, lodging, entertainment or transportation taxable under this article; provided, that the association or organization pays the tax imposed by this article on its purchases of meals, lodging, entertainment or transportation taxable under this article for which a separate or separately stated charge is not made. A membership association or organization which is exempt from paying federal income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, may elect to pay the tax imposed under this article on the purchases for which a separate charge or separately stated charge could apply and not charge its members the tax imposed by this article or the association or organization may avail itself of the exemption set forth in subdivision (9) of this subsection relating to purchases of tangible personal property for resale and then collect the tax imposed by this article on those items from its member; 
(42)  Sales of governmental services or governmental materials by county assessors, county sheriffs, county clerks or circuit clerks in the normal course of local government operations; 
(43)  Direct or subscription sales by the Division of Natural Resources of the magazine currently entitled Wonderful West Virginia and by the Division of Culture and History of the magazine currently entitled Goldenseal and the journal currently entitled West Virginia History; 
(44)  Sales of soap to be used at car wash facilities; 
(45)  Commissions received by a travel agency from an out-of-state vendor; 
(46)  The service of providing technical evaluations for compliance with federal and state environmental standards provided by environmental and industrial consultants who have formal certification through the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection or the West Virginia Bureau for Public Health or both. For purposes of this exemption, the service of providing technical evaluations for compliance with federal and state environmental standards includes those costs of tangible personal property directly used in providing such services that are separately billed to the purchaser of such services and on which the tax imposed by this article has previously been paid by the service provider; 
(47)  Sales of tangible personal property and services by volunteer fire departments and rescue squads that are exempt from federal income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, if the sole purpose of the sale is to obtain revenue for the functions and activities of the organization and the revenue obtained is exempt from federal income tax and actually expended for that purpose; 
(48)  Lodging franchise fees, including royalties, marketing fees, reservation system fees or other fees that have been or may be imposed by a lodging franchiser as a condition of the franchise agreement; and 
(49)  Sales of the regulation size United States flag and the regulation size West Virginia flag for display. 
(b)  Refundable exemptions. Any person having a right or claim to any exemption set forth in this subsection shall first pay to the vendor the tax imposed by this article and then apply to the Tax Commissioner for a refund or credit, or as provided in section nine-d of this article, give to the vendor his or her West Virginia direct pay permit number. The following sales of tangible personal property and services are exempt from tax as provided in this subsection: 
(1)  Sales of property or services to bona fide charitable organizations who make no charge whatsoever for the services they render; provided, that the exemption granted in this subdivision applies only to services, equipment, supplies, food, meals and materials directly used or consumed by these organizations and does not apply to purchases of gasoline or special fuel; 
(2)  Sales of services, machinery, supplies and materials directly used or consumed in the activities of manufacturing, transportation, transmission, communication, production of natural resources, gas storage, generation or production or selling electric power, provision of a public utility service or the operation of a utility service or the operation of a utility business, in the businesses or organizations named in this subdivision and does not apply to purchases of gasoline or special fuel; 
(3)  Sales of property or services to nationally chartered fraternal or social organizations for the sole purpose of free distribution in public welfare or relief work; provided, that sales of gasoline and special fuel are taxable; 
(4)  Sales and services, fire-fighting or station house equipment, including construction and automotive, made to any volunteer fire department organized and incorporated under the laws of the State of West Virginia; provided, that sales of gasoline and special fuel are taxable; 
(5)  Sales of building materials or building supplies or other property to an organization qualified under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, which are to be installed in, affixed to or incorporated by the organization or its agent into real property or into a building or structure which is or will be used as permanent low-income housing, transitional housing, an emergency homeless shelter, a domestic violence shelter or an emergency children and youth shelter if the shelter is owned, managed, developed or operated by an organization qualified under Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and 
(6)  Sales of construction and maintenance materials acquired by a second party for use in the construction or maintenance of a highway project. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.18 - EXEMPTIONS; EXCEPTIONS FOR SALES OF LIQUORS AND WINES TO PRIVATE CLUBS. 
    The exemptions provided in this article for sales of tangible personal property and services rendered for use or consumption in connection with the conduct of the business of selling tangible personal property to consumers or dispensing a service subject to the tax under this article and, for sales of tangible personal property for the purpose of resale in the form of tangible personal property, shall not apply to persons or organizations licensed under authority of W. Va. Code, Ch. 60, Art. 7, for the purchase of liquor or wines for resale either from the Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner or from retail liquor licensees licensed under authority of W. Va. Code, Ch. 60, Art. 3A. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.19 - EXEMPTION FOR PURCHASES OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY AND SERVICES FOR DIRECT USE IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. 
(a)  Sales of tangible personal property and services directly used or consumed in the activity of research and development are exempt from tax imposed by this article. Any person having a right or claim to the exemption set forth in this section shall first pay to the vendor the tax imposed by this article and then apply to the Tax Commissioner for a refund or credit or give to the vendor the person's West Virginia direct pay permit number in accordance with the provisions of section nine-d of this article. 
(b)  For purposes of this article: 
(1)  "Directly used or consumed in the activity of research and development" means used or consumed in those activities or operations which constitute an integral and essential part of research and development, as contrasted with and distinguished from those activities or operations which are simply incidental, convenient or remote to research and development. 
(A)  Uses of property or consumption of services which constitute direct use or consumption in the activity of research and development include only: 
(i)  In the case of tangible personal property, physical incorporation of property into tangible personal property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(ii)  Causing a direct physical, chemical or other change upon property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(iii)  Transporting or storing property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(iv)  Measuring or verifying a change in property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(v)  Physically controlling or directing the physical movement or operation of property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(vi)  Directly and physically recording the flow of property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(vii)  Producing energy for property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(viii)  Controlling or otherwise regulating atmospheric or other environmental conditions required for research and development; 
(ix)  Serving as an operating supply for property that is the subject of, or directly used in, research and development; 
(x)  Maintenance or repair of property, including maintenance equipment, that is directly used in research and development; 
(xi)  Storage, removal or transportation of economic or other waste resulting from the activity of research and development; 
(xii)  Pollution control or environmental quality or environmental protection activity directly relating to the activity of research and development, and personnel, plant, property or community safety or security activity directly relating to the activity of research and development; or 
(xiii)  Otherwise being used as an integral and essential part of research and development. 
(B)  Uses of property or services which do not constitute direct use or consumption in the activity of research and development include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  Heating and illumination of office buildings; 
(ii)  Janitorial or general cleaning activities; 
(iii)  Personal comfort of personnel; 
(iv)  Planning or scheduling of work or inventory control; 
(v)  Marketing, general management, supervision, finance, training, accounting and administration; or 
(vi)  An activity or function incidental or convenient to research and development, rather than an integral and essential part of these activities. 
(2)  "Research and development" means systematic scientific, engineering or technological study and investigation in a field of knowledge in the physical, computer or software sciences, often involving the formulation of hypotheses and experimentation, for the purpose of revealing new facts, theories or principles, or increasing scientific knowledge, which may reveal the basis for new or enhanced products, equipment or manufacturing processes. Research and development includes, but is not limited to, design, refinement and testing of prototypes of new or improved products, or design, refinement and testing of manufacturing processes before commercial sales relating thereto have begun. For purposes of this section commercial sales include, but are not limited to, sales of prototypes or sales for market testing. 
(A)  Research and development does not include: 
(i)  Market research; 
(ii)  Sales research; 
(iii)  Efficiency surveys; 
(iv)  Consumer surveys; 
(v)  Product market testing; 
(vi)  Product testing by product consumers or through consumer surveys for evaluation of consumer product performance or consumer product usability; 
(vii)  The ordinary testing or inspection of materials or products for quality control (quality control testing); 
(viii)  Management studies; 
(ix)  Advertising; 
(x)  Promotions; 
(xi)  The acquisition of another's patent, model, production or process or investigation or evaluation of the value or investment potential related thereto; 
(xii)  Research in connection with literary, historical or similar projects; 
(xiii)  Research in the social sciences, economics, humanities or psychology and other nontechnical activities; and 
(xiv)  The providing of sales services or any other service, whether technical service or nontechnical service. 
(c)  No provision of this section may be interpreted to alter, abrogate or impede application of the exemption for sales of primary opinion research services set forth in section nine of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.19.1 - EXEMPTION FOR SERVICES AND MATERIALS REGARDING TECHNICAL EVALUATION FOR COMPLIANCE TO FEDERAL AND STATE ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS PROVIDED BY ENVIRONMENTAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONSULTANTS. 
    The service of providing technical evaluations for compliance with federal and state environmental standards provided by environmental and industrial consultants who have formal certification through the West Virginia department of environmental protection or the West Virginia bureau for public health or both is exempt from the tax imposed by this article. For purposes of this exemption, the service of providing technical evaluations for compliance with federal and state environmental standards includes those costs of tangible personal property directly used in providing the services that are separately billed to the purchaser of the services, and on which the tax imposed by this article has previously been paid by the service provider. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.20 - APPORTIONMENT OF PURCHASE PRICE; EXISTING CONTRACTS PROTECTED. 
    Whenever a purchaser will use acquired tangible personal property, a service, or the results of a service for both exempt and nonexempt purposes, the gross proceeds of such sale paid to the vendor for such property or service shall be apportioned between the exempt and nonexempt uses, in a manner established as reasonable by the Tax Commissioner, by regulations the Tax Commissioner may prescribe, for the purpose of determining the tax liability in respect of such purchase. 
    Contracts existing, executed, and binding prior to the 1st day of July, 1987, for the purchase of tangible personal property or services, by lease or otherwise, and in connection with which an exemption from tax was applicable to such purchase prior to such date but terminated on and after the same; no new tax liability shall arise in respect of payments to be subsequently made under such a contract nor to payments prepaid thereunder for any periods subsequent to such date, but only new contracts entered into on and after the 1st day of July, 1987, shall be liable for tax under the provisions of this article or of article fifteen-a of this chapter where such a prior applicable exemption has been so terminated. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.21 - EXEMPTION FOR SALES AND SERVICES SUBJECT TO SPECIAL DISTRICT EXCISE TAX. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, any sale or service upon which a special district excise tax is paid, pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 7, Art. 22, § 12, W. Va. Code, Ch. 8, Art. 13B, § 11, or W. Va. Code, Ch. 8, Art. 38, § 12 is exempt from the tax imposed by this article; provided, that the special district excise tax does not apply to sales of gasoline and special fuel. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.22 - EXEMPTIONS FOR SALES OF COMPUTER HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE DIRECTLY INCORPORATED INTO MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS; CERTAIN LEASES; SALES OF ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING SERVICE; SALES OF COMPUTER HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE DIRECTLY USED IN COMMUNICATION; SALES OF EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE; SALES OF INTERNET ADVERTISING; SALES OF HIGH-TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS SERVICES DIRECTLY USED IN FULFILLMENT OF A GOVERNMENT CONTRACT; SALES OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY FOR DIRECT USE IN A HIGH-TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS OR INTERNET ADVERTISING BUSINESS; DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  In order to modernize the exemptions from tax contained in this article as a result of technological advances in computers and the expanded role of computers, the internet and global instant communications in business and to encourage computer software developers, computer hardware designers, systems engineering firms, electronic data processing companies and other high-technology companies to locate and expand their businesses in West Virginia, the following sales of tangible personal property and software are exempt: 
(1)  Sales of computer hardware or software (including custom designed software) to be directly incorporated by a manufacturer into a manufactured product. For purposes of this subsection, the payment of licensing fees for the right to incorporate hardware or software developed by persons other than the manufacturer into a manufactured product is exempt from the tax imposed by this article; 
(2)  Sales of computer hardware or software (including custom designed software) directly used in communication as defined in this article; 
(3)  Sales of electronic data processing services; 
(4)  Sales of educational software required to be used in any of the public schools of this state or in any institution in this state which qualifies as a nonprofit or educational institution subject to administration, regulation, certification or approval of the Department of Education, the Department of Education and the Arts or the Higher Education Policy Commission; 
(5)  Sales of internet advertising of goods and services; 
(6)  Sales of high-technology business services to high-technology businesses which enter into contracts with this state, its institutions and subdivisions, governmental units, institutions or subdivisions of other states, or with the United States, including agencies of federal, state or local governments for direct use in fulfilling the government contract; and 
(7)  Sales of prewritten computer software, computers, computer hardware, servers and building materials and tangible personal property to be installed into a building or facility for direct use in a high-technology business or an Internet advertising business. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Computer hardware" means a computer, as defined in W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B, and the directly and immediately connected physical equipment involved in the performance of data processing or communications functions, including data input, data output, data processing, data storage, and data communication apparatus that is directly and immediately connected to the computer. The term "computer hardware" does not include computer software. 
(2)  "High-technology business" means and is limited to businesses primarily engaged in the following activities: Computer hardware design and development; computer software design, development, customization and upgrade; computer systems design and development; website design and development; network design and development; design and development of new manufactured products which incorporate computer hardware and software; electronic data processing; network management, maintenance, engineering, administration and security services; website management, maintenance, engineering, administration and security services and computer systems management, maintenance, engineering, administration and security services. High-technology business as defined herein is intended to include businesses which engage in the activities enumerated in this definition as their primary business activity, and not as a secondary or incidental activity and not as an activity in support of or incidental to business activity not specifically enumerated in this definition. 
(3)  "High-technology business services" means and is limited to computer hardware design and development; computer software design, development, customization and upgrade; computer systems design and development; website design and development; network design and development; electronic data processing; computer systems management; computer systems maintenance; computer systems engineering; computer systems administration and computer systems security services. 
(4)  "Internet advertising business" means a for-profit business that is engaged, for monetary remuneration, in the primary business activity of announcing, or calling public attention to, goods or services in order to induce the public to purchase those goods or services, and which uses the internet as its sole advertising communications medium. For purposes of this definition, internet advertising must be the primary business activity of the business and not a secondary or incidental activity and not an activity in support of or incidental to other business activity. 
(5)  "Network" means a group of two or more computer systems linked together. 
(6)  "Server" means a computer or device on a network that manages network resources. 
(c)  The amendments to this section made in the first extraordinary session of the Legislature in 2009 shall apply to purchases made on and after July 1, 2009. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.23 - EXEMPT DRUGS, DURABLE MEDICAL GOODS, MOBILITY ENHANCING EQUIPMENT AND PROSTHETIC DEVICES. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article, W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15A or Art. 15B, the purchase by a health care provider of drugs, durable medical goods, mobility enhancing equipment and prosthetic devices, all as defined in W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15B, § 2, to be dispensed upon prescription and intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of injury or disease are exempt from the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  For purposes of this exemption, "health care provider" means any person licensed to prescribe drugs, durable medical goods, mobility enhancing equipment and prosthetic devices intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of injury or disease. For purposes of this section, the term "health care provider" includes any hospital, medical clinic, nursing home or provider of inpatient hospital services and any provider of outpatient hospital services, physician services, nursing services, ambulance services, surgical services or veterinary services. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.24 - EXEMPTION FOR SALES OF CLOTHING AND CLOTHING ACCESSORIES BY TAX-EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. 
    Sales of clothing and clothing accessories by organizations that are exempt from federal income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or Section 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and that have annual revenue obtained from the sales of less than $40,000, are exempt from the tax imposed under this article and article fifteen-a of this chapter; provided, that the purpose of the sale is to obtain revenue for the activities and functions of the organization, and the revenue obtained is exempt from federal income tax and actually expended for that purpose; provided, however, that the clothing and clothing accessories sold are acquired or obtained by donation only, without compensation, remuneration or consideration to the donor. The Tax Commissioner may, by rule, specify the exemption authorized in this section to be a "per se" exemption for which exemption certificates are not required. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.25 - DISCRETIONARY DESIGNATION OF PER SE EXEMPTIONS. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the Tax Commissioner may, by rule, specify those exemptions authorized in this article or in other provisions of this code or applicable federal law for which exemption certificates or direct pay permits are not required. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.26 - TAX PAID BY ULTIMATE CONSUMER. 
    It is the intent of this article that the tax levied hereunder shall be passed on to and be paid by the ultimate consumer. The amount of the tax shall be added to the sales price, and shall constitute a part of that price and be collectible as such. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.27 - EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS. 
(a)  Sales of taxable services by a corporation or organization that are exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that meet the requirements set forth in subsection (b) of this section, are exempt from the tax imposed by this article, except that this exemption shall not apply to sales of taxable services to the extent that income received from the sales of such services is taxable under Section 511 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  The exemption set forth in this section applies only to those corporations or organizations meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  The corporation or organization is organized and operated primarily for charitable or educational purposes and its activities and programs contribute importantly to promoting the general welfare of youth, families and the aged, improving health and fitness and providing recreational opportunities to the public; 
(2)  The corporation or organization offers membership or participation in its programs and activities to the general public and charges fees or dues which make its programs and activities accessible by a reasonable cross-section of the community; and 
(3)  The corporation or organization offers financial assistance on a regular and on-going basis to individuals unable to afford the organization's membership dues or fees. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "corporation" and the term "organization" are used interchangeably and mean a corporation or other organization that is exempt from income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall affect the application of this article to nonprofit tax-exempt hospitals. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.28 - AGREEMENTS BY COMPETING TAXPAYERS. 
    To provide uniform methods of adding the average equivalent of the tax to the selling price in each sale or transaction subject to the tax, appropriate rules and regulations, except as otherwise herein provided, may be agreed upon or adopted by competing taxpayers or associations of taxpayers, except that all collections shall be made on the basis of the total transaction at the time of sale, without regard to the value of the separate items making up the total amount of the sale. Such rules and regulations, if they do not involve price fixing, shall not be deemed illegal as in restraint of trade or commerce. The Tax Commissioner shall cooperate in formulating such rules and regulations, and, in the event appropriate rules and regulations are not submitted to him within thirty days after this article takes effect, or within a reasonable extended period fixed by the Tax Commissioner, he shall himself formulate and promulgate appropriate rules and regulations to effectuate the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.29 - COLLECTION OF TAX WHEN SALE ON CREDIT. 
    A vendor doing business wholly or partially on a credit basis shall remit to the Tax Commissioner the tax due on the credit sale for the month in which the credit transaction occurred. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.30 - WHEN SEPARATE RECORDS OF SALES REQUIRED. 
(a)  Any vendor engaged in a business subject to this tax, who is at the same time engaged in some other kind of business, occupation or profession, not taxable under this article, shall keep records to show separately the transactions used in determining the tax base taxed under this article. 
(b)  In the event the person fails to keep separate records there shall be levied upon the person a tax based upon the entire gross proceeds of both or all of the person's businesses. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.31 - SALES TO AFFILIATED COMPANIES OR PERSONS. 
    In determining gross proceeds of sales from one to another of affiliated companies or persons, or under other circumstances where the relation between the buyer and seller is such that the gross proceeds from a sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale, the Tax Commissioner shall prescribe uniform and equitable rules for determining the amount upon which the tax shall be levied, corresponding as nearly as possible to gross proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or character, where no common interest exists between the parties. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.32 - TAX RETURN AND PAYMENT. 
(a)  Payment of tax. The taxes levied by this article are due and payable in monthly installments, on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Tax return. The taxpayer shall, on or before the twentieth day of each month, make out and mail to the Tax Commissioner a return for the preceding month, in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, showing: 
(1)  The total gross proceeds of the vendor's business for the preceding month; 
(2)  The gross proceeds of the vendor's business upon which the tax is based; 
(3)  The amount of the tax for which the vendor is liable; and 
(4)  Any further information necessary in the computation and collection of the tax which the Tax Commissioner may require, except as otherwise provided in this article or article fifteen-b of this chapter. 
(c)  Remittance to accompany return. Except as otherwise provided in this article or article fifteen-b of this chapter, a remittance for the amount of the tax shall accompany the return. 
(d)  Deposit of collected tax. Tax collected by the Tax Commissioner shall be deposited as provided in section thirty of this article, except that: 
(1)  Tax collected on sales of gasoline and special fuel shall be deposited in the state road fund; and 
(2)  Any sales tax collected by the Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner from persons or organizations licensed under authority of W. Va. Code, Ch. 60, Art. 7 shall be paid into a revolving fund account in the state treasury, designated the Drunk Driving Prevention Fund, to be administered by the Commission on Drunk Driving Prevention, subject to appropriations by the Legislature. 
(e)  Return to be signed. A return shall be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent, when a paper return is prepared and filed. When the return is filed electronically, the return shall include the digital mark or digital signature, as defined in W. Va. Code, Ch. 39A, Art. 3, or the personal identification number of the taxpayer, or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent, made in accordance with any procedural rule that may be promulgated by the Tax Commissioner. 
(f)  Accelerated payment. 
(1)  Taxpayers whose average monthly payment of the taxes levied by this article and article fifteen-a of this chapter during the previous calendar year exceeds one hundred thousand dollars, shall remit the tax attributable to the first 15 days of June each year on or before the twentieth day of June; provided, that on and after the 1st day of June, two thousand seven, the provisions of this subsection that require the accelerated payment on or before the 20th day of June of the tax imposed by this article and W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15A are no longer effective and any such tax due and owing shall be payable in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  For purposes of complying with subdivision (1) of this subsection, the taxpayer shall remit an amount equal to the amount of tax imposed by this article and W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, Art. 15A, on actual taxable sales of tangible personal property and custom software and sales of taxable services during the first 15 days of June or, at the taxpayer's election, the taxpayer may remit an amount equal to fifty percent of the taxpayer's liability for tax under this article on taxable sales of tangible personal property and custom software and sales of taxable services made during the preceding month of May. 
(3)  For a business which has not been in existence for a full calendar year, the total tax due from the business during the prior calendar year shall be divided by the number of months, including fractions of a month, that it was in business during the prior calendar year; and if that amount exceeds one hundred thousand dollars, the tax attributable to the first 15 days of June each year shall be remitted on or before the 20th day of June as provided in subdivision (2) of this subsection. 
(4)  When a taxpayer required to make an advanced payment of tax under subdivision (1) of this subsection makes out its return for the month of June, which is due on the 20th day of July, the taxpayer may claim as a credit against liability under this article for tax on taxable transactions during the month of June the amount of the advanced payment of tax made under subdivision (1) of this subsection. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.33 - LIABILITY OF OFFICERS OF CORPORATION, ETC. 
    If the taxpayer is an association or corporation, the officers thereof shall be personally liable, jointly and severally, for any default on the part of the association or corporation, and payment of the tax and any additions to tax, penalties and interest thereon imposed by article ten of this chapter may be enforced against them as against the association or corporation which they represent. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.34 - RECEIVERSHIP; BANKRUPTCY; PRIORITY OF TAX. 
    In the distribution, voluntary or compulsory, in receivership, bankruptcy or otherwise, of the property or estate of any person, all taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be paid from the first money available for distribution in priority to all claims and liens except taxes and debts due the United States which under federal law are given priority over the debts and liens created by this article. Any person charged with the administration or distribution of any such property or estate who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any taxes accrued and unpaid under this article which are chargeable against the person whose property or estate is in administration or distribution. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.35 - OTHER TIMES FOR FILING RETURNS. 
    The Tax Commissioner may, upon written request, authorize a taxpayer whose books and records are not kept on a monthly basis to file returns at times other than those specified in section sixteen, but in no event shall a taxpayer make less than one return a calendar month, except as provided by section twenty or as may be authorized in writing by the Tax Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.36 - QUARTERLY AND ANNUAL RETURNS. 
(a)  When the total consumers sales and use tax remittance for which a person is liable does not exceed an average monthly amount over the taxable year of $250, he or she may pay the tax and make a quarterly return on or before the 20th day of the first month in the next succeeding quarter in lieu of monthly returns. 
(b)  When the total consumers sales and use tax remittance for which a person is liable does not in the aggregate exceed $600 for the taxable year, he or she may pay the tax and make an annual return on or before 30 days after the end of his or her taxable year for federal and state income tax purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.37 - ANNUAL RETURN; EXTENSION OF TIME. 
(a)  Date due. On or before 30 days after the end of the tax year, each person liable for the payment of any tax due under this article shall make and file an annual return in such form as may be required by the Tax Commissioner, showing: 
(1)  Total gross proceeds of his business for preceding tax year, 
(2)  Gross proceeds upon which the tax for that year was computed, and 
(3)  Any other information necessary in the computation or collection of the tax that the Tax Commissioner may require. 
(b)  Supporting schedule for consolidated return. Whenever a person operates two or more places of business and files a consolidated monthly return, a schedule shall be attached to the consolidated annual return showing, for each place of business, total sales and charges for rendering services, total transactions subject to tax and total tax collections. 
(c)  Payment. After deducting the amount of prior payments during the tax year, the taxpayer shall forward the annual return along with payment of any remaining tax, due for the preceding tax year, to the Tax Commissioner. The taxpayer or his duly authorized agent shall verify the return under oath. 
(d)  Extension of time. The Tax Commissioner for good cause shown, may, on written application of a taxpayer, extend the time for making any return required by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.38 - CONSOLIDATED RETURNS. 
    A person operating two or more places of business of like character from which are made or dispensed sales or services which are taxable hereunder shall file consolidated returns covering all such sales or services. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.39 - KEEPING AND PRESERVING OF RECORDS. 
    Each taxpayer shall keep complete and accurate records of taxable sales and of charges, together with a record of the tax collected thereon, and shall keep all invoices, bills of lading and such other pertinent documents in such form as the Tax Commissioner may by regulation require. Such records and other documents shall be preserved for a period of time not less than three years, unless the Tax Commissioner shall consent in writing to their destruction within that period or by order require that they be kept longer. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.40 - RECORDS OF NONRESIDENTS DOING BUSINESS IN STATE. 
    A nonresident person or foreign corporation engaged in a business within this state in the conduct of which the tax levied by this article becomes due, shall keep within this state adequate records concerning the operation of the business, and all taxes collected in the course of the business. The amount of the tax collected shall not be transmitted outside of this state without the written consent of, and in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.41 - RECORDS OF FINANCE DIRECTOR; PRESERVATION OF RETURNS. 
    The finance director shall keep full and accurate records of all moneys received by him. He shall preserve all returns filed with him hereunder for five years. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.42 - PROCEEDS OF TAX. 
    The proceeds of the tax imposed by this article shall be deposited in the General Revenue Fund of the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.43 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Severability. If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid, unlawful or unconstitutional, that decision may not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article or any part thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
776.44 - GENERAL PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION. 
    Each and every provision of the "West Virginia Tax Procedure and Administration Act" set forth in article ten of this chapter shall apply to the tax imposed by this article fifteen with like effect as if said act were applicable only to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10(3)) 
ARTICLE 777 - INTOXICATING LIQUOR[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Liquor control, Art. 521. 
State Law reference- Authority to levy, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-13-7, 60-7-7. 

777.01 - SALES TAX. 
    Pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 8-13-7, there is hereby imposed a tax of 5% of the retail purchase price of any and all intoxicating liquors purchased from the Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner or from any person licensed to sell wine at retail to the public under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8, within the corporate boundaries of the city. Such tax shall be levied upon the purchaser of intoxicating liquor or wine, and shall be added to any collected with the retail purchase price of such intoxicating liquor or wine. The tax shall be received by the municipality from the state treasury pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner; provided, however, that such tax shall not be collected on intoxicating liquors sold by or purchased from holders of a license issued under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Art. 60-7. 
(Ord. 6-8-81) 
ARTICLE 781 - NONINTOXICATING BEER[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- Liquor control, Art. 521. 
State Law reference- Nonintoxicating beer, W. Va. Code, Art. 11-16; municipal license tax, W. Va. Code, § 11-16-17. 

781.01 - CITY LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    No person shall manufacture, sell, possess for sale, transport or distribute nonintoxicating beer within the city except in accordance with the provisions of this article and after first obtaining a city license. 
(1964 Code Sec. 3-6) 
781.02 - LICENSE TAX ESTABLISHED; LICENSE PERIOD. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed an annual license tax upon all dealers in and of nonintoxicating beer, which license period shall begin on July 1 of each year, and end on June 30 of the following year, and if granted for a less period, the same shall be computed quarterly in proportion to the remainder of the fiscal year as follows: 
(a)  Retail dealers shall be divided into two classes, Class A and Class B. In the case of a Class A retail dealer, the license fee shall be $100 for each place of business; the license fee for social, fraternal or private clubs not operating for profit, and having been in continuous operation for two years or more, immediately preceding the date of application, shall be $100; and except, that railroads operating through the city may dispense nonintoxicating beer upon payment of an annual license tax of $10 for each dining, club or buffet car in which the same is dispensed. 
    Class A licenses issued for social, fraternal or public clubs and for railroad dining, club or buffet cars, as herein provided, shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail for consumption only on the licensed premises where sold. All other Class A licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail for consumption on or off the licensed premises. 
    In the case of a Class B retailer, there shall be two types of a Class B license, each type to be colored differently so as to be easily distinguished. The fee for a Class B license authorizing the sale of unchilled beer only shall be $15 for each place of business. The fee for a Class B license authorizing the sale of both chilled and unchilled beer shall be $100 for each place of business. A Class B license shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers only, and only for consumption off the licensed premises. Sales under this license to any person at any one time shall be in less quantities than five gallons. Such license may be issued only to the proprietor or owner of a grocery store. For the purpose of this section, "grocery store" means and includes any retail establishment commonly known as a grocery store or delicatessen, where food or food products are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(b)  In the case of a distributor, the license fee shall be $250 for each place of business. 
(c)  In the case of a brewer, with its principal place of business located in the city, the license fee shall be $500 for each place of manufacture. 
(1964 Code Sec. 3-8) 
781.03 - LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; CHANGE OF LOCATION. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred to another person, nor shall the location of the premises to which the license relates be changed without the written consent of the director of the division of finance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 3-9) 
781.04 - LICENSE INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY APPLICANT. 
    A license shall be issued by the director of the division of finance to any person who has received a similar license from the state and who submits an application therefor, accompanied by the proper license fee, stating the following under oath: 
(a)  The name and location of the business for which the application is made; 
(b)  The name and residence address of the person signing the application; 
(c)  The name, address and telephone number of the person having primary responsibility for operation of the business; 
(d)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers of the corporation and the address of its principal office; 
(e)  The West Virginia beer license number for the same year and location. 
(1964 Code Sec. 3-10) 
781.05 - CONTAINER LABELING. 
    No label shall be affixed upon any beer, ale or other malt beverage container sold or for sale in this city bearing any design, picture or wording indicating that the contents of this container are brewed for one particular retailer or group of retailers, or use any trademark other than that of the brewer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 3-7) 
ARTICLE 785 - WINE DEALERS[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- Liquor control, Art. 521. 
State Law reference- Authority to levy, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-4. 

785.01 - APPLICATION OF ARTICLE ON SALE OF WINES; DEFINITIONS. 
    The provisions of this article shall relate solely to distribution and retail sale of wine within the city as provided by W. Va. Code, Art. 60-8. For the purposes of this article, "distributer", "grocery store", "retailer", and "wine" shall be as defined by W. Va. Code, § 60-8-2. 
(Ord. 7-11-83) 
785.02 - LICENSES, FEES; GENERAL RESTRICTIONS. 
    No person may engage in business in the capacity of a distributer or retailer without first obtaining a license from the director of the division of finance nor shall a person continue to engage in any such activity after his license has expired, been suspended or revoked. No person may be licensed in more than one of such capacities at the same time. 
    The director shall collect an annual fee of $150 per year for a retailer's license. 
    The license period shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, and if the initial license is granted for less than a year, the fee shall be computed in proportion to the number of quarters remaining in the fiscal year, including the quarter in which the application is made. 
    A retailer who has more than one place of retail business shall obtain a license for each separate retail establishment. A retailer's license may be issued only to the proprietor or owner of a bona fide grocery store or wine specialty shop. 
(Ord. 7-11-83) 
785.03 - APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. 
    A license shall be issued by the director of the division of finance to any person who has received a similar license from the state and who submits an application therefor, accompanied by the proper license fee, stating the following under oath: 
(a)  The name and location of the business for which the application is made. 
(b)  The name and residence address of the person signing the application. 
(c)  The name, address and telephone number of the person having primary responsibility for operation of the business. 
(d)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers of the corporation and the address of its principal office. 
(e)  The West Virginia wine license number for the same year and location. 
(Ord. 7-11-83) 
ARTICLE 786 - ABANDONMENT FEE 

786.01 - IMPOSITION. 
    Whenever council abandons a parcel of property or right-of-way pursuant to the procedures set forth in state law, the abutting property owners shall be charged the fair market value of the property acquired plus the cost of the appraisal of the same. The "fair market value" of said property shall be determined by a West Virginia licensed appraiser who shall be selected by the mayor from the list of pre-approved appraisers. The mayor may waive any charges over and above the minimum charge of $250 upon showing by the property owners that the property sought to be abandoned is undeveloped and unimproved as of the date of the filing of the petition for abandonment, and that the property, if abandoned, will thereafter be utilized in such a manner so as to contribute to and further the economic development and interests of the city. 
(Ord. 4-13-98) 
786.02 - FEE DUE. 
    The fee charged herein shall be due and collectible at the time the mayor approves with his or her signature the ordinance abandoning the property. The property shall be conveyed by deed to the proper abutting property owners after the requisite fee has been paid. 
(Ord. 4-13-98) 
786.03 - SELECTION OF APPRAISERS. 
    Any West Virginia licensed appraiser desiring to perform appraisals for the city pursuant to this section shall submit, in writing, a resume of their qualifications, credentials and fees as an appraiser and a statement indicating their willingness to perform the same. Provided, that the appraiser is acceptable to the mayor, said appraiser shall be placed upon a list of those from whom the mayor may select the appraiser. 
(Ord. 4-13-98) 
ARTICLE 787 - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to tax, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-5; collection of taxes, W. Va. Code, § 8-13-15 et seq. 

787.01 - SHORT TITLE. 
    The title of this article and of the tax herein provided shall be the "City of Huntington Business and Occupation Tax". 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.02 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    The effective date of this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  The provisions imposing the tax and tax rates shall be effective April 1, 1991. 
(b)  The administrative provisions shall be effective upon passage. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.03 - COLLECTIONS UNDER PRIOR BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX PRESERVED. 
    The provisions of the prior business and occupation tax are herein substantially re-enacted, and the city reserves all rights and authority to collect any and all taxes due and owing under the prior business and occupation tax as of the effective date of this article. The reservation of rights contained in this section applies to all taxes due and owing whether or not a civil action has been filed as of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.04 - CONSTRUCTION TO CONFORM TO STATE LAW. 
    The substantive provisions of the business and occupation tax provided herein shall be construed, whenever such construction is necessary, to adopt the meaning of the similar provision found in W. Va. Code, § 11-13-1 et seq., as it existed on June 31, 1987, and the administrative provisions of the business and occupation tax provided herein shall be construed, whenever such construction is necessary, to adopt the meaning of the similar provisions found in W. Va. Code, § 11-10-1 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.05 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Banking business" or "financial organization" means any bank, banking association, trust company, industrial loan company, small loan company or licensee, building and loan association, savings and loan association, credit union, finance company, investment company, investment broker or dealer, and any other similar business organization at least 90% of the assets of which consists of intangible personal property and at least 90% of the gross receipts of which consists of dividends, interest and other charges derived from the use of money or credit. 
(b)  "Business" includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain or economic benefit, either direct or indirect. "Business" shall not include a casual sale by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved in such casual sale. "Business" shall include the production of natural resources or manufactured products which are used or consumed by the producer or manufacturer and shall include the activities of a banking business or financial organization. 
(c)  "Person" or "company" , herein used interchangeably, includes any individual, firm, partnership, copartnership, joint adventure, association, corporation, trust, estate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the intention to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context. 
(d)  "Contracting" includes the furnishing of work, or both materials and work, in the fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration or improvement of a new or existing building or structure, or any part thereof, or for the alteration, improvement or development of real property. 
(e)  "Gross income" means the gross receipts of the taxpayer, other than a banking or financial business, received as compensation for personal services and the gross receipts of the taxpayer derived from trade, business, commerce, or sales and the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property (real or personal), or service, or both, and all receipts by reason of the investment of the capital of the business engaged in, including rentals, royalties, fees, reimbursed costs or expenses or other emoluments however designated and including all interest, carrying charges, fees or other like income, however denominated, derived by the taxpayer from repetitive carrying of accounts, in the regular course and conduct of his business, and extension of credit in connection with the sale of any tangible personal property or service, and without any deductions on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, taxes, royalties paid in cash or in kind or otherwise, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever. "Gross income" of a banking or financial business is specified in section 787.15. 
(f)  "Gross proceeds of sales" means the value, whether in money or other property, actually proceeding from the sale of tangible property without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold or expenses of any kind. 
(g)  "Gross income" and "gross proceeds of sales" shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
(2)  The proceeds of sale of goods, wares or merchandise returned by customers when the sale price is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
(3)  The amount allowed as "trade-in value" for any article accepted as part payment for any article sold; 
(4)  Excise taxes imposed by the state; or 
(5)  Money or other property received or held by a professional person for the sole use and benefit of a client or another person or money received by the taxpayer on behalf of a bank or other financial institution for the repayment of debt of another. 
(h)  "Sale", "sales" or "selling" includes any transfer of the ownership of, or title to, property, whether for money or in exchange for other property. 
(i)  "Selling at wholesale" or "wholesale sales" means: 
(1)  Sales of any tangible personal property for the purpose of resale in the form of tangible personal property; 
(2)  Sales of machinery, supplies or materials which are to be directly consumed or used by the purchaser in the conduct of any business or activity which is subject to the tax imposed by this article; 
(3)  Sales of any tangible personal property to the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities or to the State of West Virginia, its institutions or its political subdivisions. 
(j)  "Service business or calling" includes all activities engaged in by a person for other persons for a consideration, which involve the rendering of a service as distinguished from the sale of tangible property, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to his employer. "Service business or calling" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Persons engaged in manufacturing, compounding or preparing for sale, profit or commercial use articles, substances or commodities which are owned by another or others; 
(2)  Persons engaged as independent contractors in producing natural resource products which are owned by another or others, as personal property, immediately after the same are severed, extracted, reduced to possession and produced; 
(3)  The repetitive carrying of accounts, in the regular course and conduct of business, and extension of credit in connection with the sale of any tangible personal property or service, except as to persons taxed pursuant to the provisions of section 787.15. 
(k)  "Taxpayer" means any person liable for any tax hereunder. 
(l)  "Tax year" or "taxable year" means either the calendar year, or the taxpayer's fiscal year when permission is obtained from the city collector to use the same as the tax period in lieu of the calendar year. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.06 - IMPOSITION OF PRIVILEGE TAX. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed and shall be collected annual privilege taxes against the persons, on account of the business and other activities, and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against values or gross income as set forth in sections 787.07 to 787.15, inclusive. 
    If any person liable for any tax under section 787.07 or 787.15 shall ship or transport his products, or any part thereof, out of the city without making sale of such products, the value of the products in the condition or form in which they exist immediately before transportation out of the city shall be the basis for the assessment of the tax imposed in those sections. 
    Gross income included in the measure of the tax under section 787.07 or section 787.08, except in the production of natural gas, shall neither be added nor deducted in computing the tax levied under the other sections of this article. 
    In determining value, however, as regard sales from one to another of affiliated companies or persons, or under other circumstances where the relation between the buyer and the seller is such that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale, the value upon which such privilege tax shall be levied shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or character where no common interests exist between the buyer and the seller but where the circumstances or conditions are otherwise similar. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.07 - PRODUCER OF NATURAL RESOURCE PRODUCTS. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within the city in the business of producing for sale, profit or commercial use any natural resources products, the amount of tax shall be equal to the value of the articles produced as shown by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof by the producer, except as herein provided, multiplied by the respective rates as follows: coal, 1%, limestone or sandstone quarried or mined, 0.80%; oil, 1%; natural gas, in excess of $5,000, 1%; sand, gravel or other mineral product not quarried or mined, 1%; timber, 1%; other natural resource products, 1%. 
    The measure of this tax is the value of the entire production in the city, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that delivery may be made to points outside the city. 
    A person exercising privileges taxable under this section and using or consuming the same in his business or transferring or delivering the same as any royalty paid, in kind, or the like, shall be deemed to be engaged in the business of producing natural resources and shall be required to make returns on account of the production of the business showing the gross proceeds or equivalent in accordance with uniform and equitable rules for determining the value upon which privilege taxes shall be levied, corresponding as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or character by other taxpayers. 
    Persons who produce natural resources products outside of this city and who make sale of the same within the city shall not pay the tax imposed by this section but shall pay the tax imposed by section 787.09 for the privilege of selling said products within the city. 
    A person exercising any privilege taxable under this section and engaging in the business of selling his natural resource products in this city shall be required to make returns of the gross proceeds of such sales and pay the tax imposed in section 787.09 for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling such natural resource products in this city. 
(Ord. 5-23-03) 
787.08. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted August 9, 2010 and an ordinance adopted March 14, 2011, repealed § 787.08, which pertained to manufacturing, compounding or preparing products and derived from Ord. of 5-23-03. 
787.09 - THE BUSINESS OF SELLING TANGIBLE PROPERTY; SALES EXEMPT. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of selling any tangible property whatsoever, real or person, including the sale of food in hotels, restaurants, cafeterias, confectioneries, and other public eating houses, except sales of any person engaging or continuing in the business of horticulture, agriculture, or grazing, or selling stocks, bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, there is likewise hereby levied, and shall be collected, a tax equal to one-fourth of one percent (.25%) of the gross income of the business, except that in the case of selling at wholesale, the tax shall be equal to three-twentieths of one percent of the gross income of the business. 
(Ord. of 5-26-98; Ord. of 8-9-10(4); Ord. of 3-14-11(1)) 
787.10 - PUBLIC SERVICE OR UTILITY BUSINESS. 
    Upon any person engaging or continuing within this city in any public service or utility business, except railroad, railroad car, express, pipeline, telephone and telegraph companies, water carriers by steamboat or steamship and motor carriers, there is likewise levied and shall be collected, taxes on account of the business engaged in equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the respective rates, as follows: electric light and power companies, 4% on sales and demand charges for domestic purposes and commercial lighting and 3% on sales and demand charges for all other purposes; and upon all other public service or utility business, 2% in accordance with state law. Upon every person engaging or continuing within the city in the business of natural gas company, there is hereby levied and shall be collected taxes equal to 3% of the gross income. The measure of the tax under this section shall include only gross income received from the supplying of public services. The gross income of the taxpayer from any other activity shall be included in the measure of the tax imposed upon the appropriate section or sections of this article. 
(Ord. 9-25-06) 
787.11 - BUSINESS OF CONTRACTING. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of contracting, the tax shall be equal to 2% of the gross income of the business. 
(Ord. 3-28-05) 
787.12 - BUSINESS OF OPERATING AMUSEMENTS. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of operating a theatre, opera house, moving picture show, vaudeville, amusement park, dance hall, skating rink, racetrack, or any other place at which amusements are offered to the public, the tax shall be equal to 0.50% of the gross income of the business. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.13 - SERVICE BUSINESS OR CALLING NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFICALLY TAXED. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in any service, business or calling not otherwise specifically taxed under this article, there is likewise hereby levied and shall be collected a tax equal to .50% of the gross income of any such business. 
(Ord. of 5-26-98; Ord. of 8-9-10(4); Ord. of 3-14-11(1)) 
787.14 - BUSINESS OF FURNISHING PROPERTY FOR HIRE. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of furnishing any real or tangible personal property, which has a tax situs in the city, or any interest therein for hire, loan, lease or otherwise, whether the return be in the form of rentals, royalties, fees or otherwise, the tax shall be 1% of the gross income of any such activity. 
    "Tangible personal property" as used herein, shall not include money or public securities. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.15 - BANKING AND OTHER FINANCIAL BUSINESS; COUNCIL FINDINGS. 
    Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of banking or financial business the tax shall be equal to 1% of the gross income received from interest, premiums, discounts, dividends, service fees, or charges, commissions, fines, rents from real or tangible personal property, however denominated, royalties, charges for bookkeeping or data processing, receipts from check sales, charges or fees, and receipts from the sale of tangible personal property; provided, that gross income shall not include: 
(a)  Interest received on the obligations of the United States, its agencies and instrumentalities; 
(b)  Interest received on the obligations of this or any other state, territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision of any of the foregoing or of the District of Columbia; or 
(c)  Interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or deeds of trust on residential property occupied by nontransients; provided, that all interest derived on activities exempt under subsection (c) hereof, shall be reported, as to amounts, on the return of a person taxable under the provisions of this section. 
    Gross income of a banking or financial business, from whatever source derived, shall be taxable under this section only and persons taxed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be taxed under sections 787.07 to 787.10, inclusive. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that it is the intent of the council to subject national banking associations and other financial organizations to the tax imposed by this article, in accordance with the authorization contained in Section 5219 of the Revised Statutes of the United States as amended by Public Law 91-156 enacted December 24, 1969. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.16 - EXEMPTIONS. 
    In accordance with West Virginia state law and as further stated herein, the following entities and organizations shall be exempt from the payment of Business and Occupation Tax to the City of Huntington: 
(a)  Insurance companies which pay the state a tax upon premiums; provided, that such exemptions shall not extend to that part of the gross income of insurance companies which is received for the use of real property, other than property in which any such company maintains its office or offices, in this city, whether such income be in the form of rentals or royalties; 
(b)  Nonprofit cemetery companies organized and operated for the exclusive benefit of their members; 
(c)  Fraternal societies, organizations and associations organized and operated for the exclusive benefit of their members and not for profit; provided, that this exemption shall not extend to that part of gross income arising from the sale of alcoholic liquor, food and related services of such fraternal societies, organizations and associations which are licensed as private clubs under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 7-60; 
(d)  Corporations, associations and societies organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes; or 
(e)  Production credit associations, organized under the provisions of the federal "Farm Credit Act of 1933", provided, that the exemptions of this section shall not apply to corporations or cooperative associations organized under the provisions of W. Va. Code, Ch. 4-19. 
(f)  All co-promoters promoting an event in an indoor arena or indoor place of public gathering with a seating capacity in excess of three thousand persons in one room where an event is co-promoted by the City of Huntington or one of its agencies, and the city assumes partial risk with the private co-promoter. Further exempted shall be all co-promoters promoting an event at an outdoor venue within the city where an event is co-promoted by the City of Huntington or one of its agencies, and the city assumes partial risk with the private co-promoter. The exemption hereunder shall apply only to the event or events that meet the criteria set forth in this subsection and shall apply only to the private co-promoter for the specific event. 
(Ord. 9-11-06; Ord. of 6-22-15(1) ) 
787.17 - TAX CUMULATIVE. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes levied by law as a condition precedent to engaging in any business, trade, calling or activity. A person exercising a privilege taxable under this article, subject to the payment of all licenses and charges which are a condition precedent to exercising the privilege taxed, may exercise the privilege for the current tax year upon the condition that he shall pay the tax accruing under this article. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.18 - COMPUTATION OF TAX; PAYMENT. 
    The taxes levied hereunder shall be payable in quarterly installments on or before the expiration of one month from the end of the quarter in which they accrue. The taxpayer shall, within one month from the expiration of each quarter, make out a return upon a form prescribed by the director of the division of finance, showing the gross proceeds of sale, or gross income of business, trade or calling and compute the amount of the tax for which he is liable for such quarter, sign and mail the same, together with a remittance for the amount of the tax to the office of the director. Such return shall contain a statement: 
"I declare under penalties of perjury, that this return, including any accompanying schedules and statements, has been examined by me and to the best of my knowledge and belief, is a true, correct and complete return". 
    The director, if he deems it necessary to ensure payment of the tax, may require return and payment under this section for other than quarterly periods. If for any reason it is not practicable for the individual taxpayer to sign the same, the signature may be by a duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.19 - REGULATIONS FOR THE BUSINESS OF CONTRACTING. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Contracting" for the purpose of this section shall have the same meaning as that of section 787.05(d). 
(2)  "Prime contractor" means a person engaged in the business of performing for others, contracts for the constructing, repairing, decorating or improving of a new or existing building or buildings or other structures under, upon or above real property, either for the entire work or for a specific portion thereof. 
(3)  "Subcontractor" means a person engaged in the business of performing contracting or a like or similar service for persons other than consumers, either for the entire work or for a specific portion thereof. 
(4)  "Prime contractor" and/or "subcontractor" , in addition to the definition of contracting contained herein includes persons performing labor and services in respect to the moving of earth or clearing of land, razing or moving of existing buildings or structures even though such services may not be done in connection with a contract involving the construction, repairing, or altering of a new or existing building or structure. 
(5)  "Buildings or structures" means but is not limited to, everything artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and attached to real property. "Buildings or structures" includes not only buildings in the general and ordinary sense, but also tanks, fences, conduits, systems, tunnels, monuments, retaining walls, bridges, trestles, parking lots and pavement for foot or vehicular traffic. 
(6)  "Contracting, repairing, decorating or improving" of a new or existing building or structure or any part thereof, in addition to its ordinary meaning, includes the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property in or to real property, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of such installation. 
(b)  The business of contracting is taxable under the business and occupation tax article, and the gross income derived therefrom must be reported under the contracting classification. The rate of tax applied against gross income under the contracting classification is taxable at the rate specified in section 787.11. 
(1)  Prime and subcontractors, taxable on gross income with no deductions therefrom. A prime contractor, one who furnishes work or both materials and work under a written or oral contract, for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration, or for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration or improvement of a new or existing building or structure may take no deduction from gross income on account of payments made to the subcontractor. The subcontractor will also be taxable on his gross income under the contracting classification. 
(2)  Contracting entered into with governments. Gross income received by a person for contracting activities performed for the state, the federal government, or any of their instrumentalities, agencies, boards, commissions or political subdivisions, etc., is taxable and shall be reported under the contracting classification. The fact that the owner is a governmental unit does not relieve the contractor, subcontractor, suppliers, or any other person from liability for business and occupation tax on the full amount of gross income. 
(3)  Prime contractors liable for taxes due from subcontractors. Whenever a contracting, repairing, decorating or improving contract is let for work to be done in the city, the prime contractor shall submit a list of all subcontractors who will work under the contract to the director of finance. The list shall be submitted within 30 days of the original contract. The names of any and all subcontractors engaged after the list is submitted shall be submitted as they are engaged. A standard form for the list shall be approved by the mayor or his designee. Upon completion of the contract, but prior to final payment to the subcontractor or subcontractors, the prime contractor shall notify the director of finance in writing and request a letter of release from the director of finance stating that such subcontractor or subcontractors, as appropriate, have timely filed and paid taxes due the city. If the director of finance is satisfied that such subcontractor or subcontractors, as appropriate, have timely filed and paid taxes due the city, he shall issue such letter of release forthwith. Nothing herein shall be construed to relieve any subcontractor of its liability for taxes due the city under section 787.11. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.20 - GENERAL POWER; REGULATIONS AND FORM. 
    The director of the division of finance (hereinafter in this article "Director") shall administer and enforce the tax to which this article applies and, in connection therewith, shall prescribe all necessary forms. The director in conjunction with the mayor and the director of administration and finance may make all needful rules and regulations for the tax contained herein. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.21 - INVESTIGATIONS. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any tax return or assessment and for the purpose of making an estimate of any taxpayer's liability for tax administered under this article, and for the further purpose of conducting the hearings provided for in this article, the director shall have the power to examine or cause to be examined, by any agent or representative designated by the director, any books, papers, records, memoranda, inventory or equipment bearing upon the matters required to be included in the tax return or the attendance of any other person having knowledge of the matters contained therein and may take testimony and may require material proof with power to administer an oath to such person or persons. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.22 - SUBPOENA AND SUBPOENA DUCES TECUM. 
(a)  Power to issue. For the efficient administration of the powers vested in the director by the preceding section, and to facilitate determination or collection of tax under this article, the director or his delegate, with the concurrence of the city attorney, shall have the power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, in the name of the city, and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, documents and testimony at the time and place specified. The director, or his delegate, may exercise such power, in the name of the city, upon request of any person who is a party in any hearing to be held under the provisions of this article, for purposes of such hearing. 
(b)  Service. Every such subpoena and subpoena duces tecum shall be served at least five days before the return date thereof, by either personal service made by any person over 18 years of age, or by registered or certified mail, but a return receipt signed by the person to whom subpoena or subpoena duces tecum is directed shall be required to prove service by registered or certified mail. Any party requesting a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum is responsible for service thereof and payment of any fee for such service. Service of other subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum shall be the responsibility of the director or his delegate. Any person, except a person in the employ of the city, or any party, who serves any such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum shall be entitled to the same fee as sheriffs who serve witness subpoenas for the circuit courts of this state. 
(c)  Fees. Fees for the attendance of witnesses subpoenaed shall be the same as for witnesses before the circuit courts of this state. All such fees shall be paid by the director if the subpoena or subpoena duces tecum was issued, without the request of an interested party, at the insistence of the city. All such fees related to any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued at the request of a party to an administrative hearing shall be paid by the party who asked that such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum be issued. All requests by interested parties for issuance of subpoena or subpoena duces tecum shall be in writing and shall contain a statement acknowledging that the requesting party agrees to pay such fees. 
(d)  Motion to quash. Upon motion made promptly, and in any event before the time specified in a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum for compliance therewith, the circuit court of the county in which the hearing is to be held or the circuit court of the county in which the person upon whom any such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum was served resides, has his or its principal place of business or is employed, or the circuit court of the county in which any such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum was served, or the judge of such circuit court in vacation, may grant any relief with respect to any such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum which any such circuit court, under the "West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure for Trial Courts of Record" could grant, and for any of the same reasons, with respect to any such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued from any such circuit court. 
(e)  Enforcement of compliance. In case of disobedience or neglect of any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum served on any person, or the refusal of any witness to testify to any matter regarding which he may be lawfully interrogated, the Circuit Court of Cabell County, upon application by the director, with concurrence of the city attorney, may compel obedience by attachment proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued from such circuit court for a refusal to testify therein. 
(f)  Testimony under oath. Witnesses subpoenaed under this section shall testify under oath or affirmation. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.23 - RETURN BY DIRECTOR OF DIVISION OF FINANCE. 
    If any person fails to file any return required by this article, at the time required by law or by regulation made under authority of law, or makes and files willfully or otherwise, a false or fraudulent return, the director may proceed to make such return from any information available to him, whether obtained through testimony or otherwise. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.24 - CONFIDENTIALITY AND DISCLOSURE OF RETURNS; PENALTIES. 
(a)  The confidentiality and disclosure of returns and return information for returns filed with the City shall be governed in accordance with the provisions contained in W. Va. Code, § 11-10-5d, as amended. In applying said state statute, "Tax Commissioner" as it appears shall be replaced with "the Director of the Division of Finance", and "State Tax Department" shall be replaced with "City of Huntington". 
(b)  Any officer, employee or agent of the city or any former officer, employee or agent of the city who shall divulge facts or information obtained from returns or tax statements obtained from the State of West Virginia or the State Tax Commissioner other than for the purpose of administering such tax shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year, or both. 
(c)  Any officer, employee or agent of the city or any former officer, employee or agent of the city who shall make unauthorized disclosure of information received from the State of West Virginia or the State Tax Commissioner under the authority of these Codified Ordinances or of that certain RECIPROCAL EXCHANGE OF TAX INFORMATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA AND THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year, or both. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, "unauthorized disclosure" means the release to any person of any tax information obtained by the city from the State of West Virginia or the State Tax Commissioner unless: 
(1)  The person receiving the information is the authorized counsel of the State of West Virginia or the State Tax Commissioner or the city and shall be using the information only for the purpose of administering business and occupation tax, sales tax from single location businesses, or liquor sales tax; or 
(2)  The person who filed a return has authorized, in writing, its release, thereby waiving his or her right to secrecy, confidentiality and privacy. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.25 - SERVICE OF NOTICE. 
    Notice of assessments and administrative decisions shall be served upon the taxpayer either by personal or substituted service or by certified mail. Service of notice by personal or substituted service shall be valid if made by any method authorized by Rule 4 of the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure. Service of notice by certified mail shall be valid if accepted by the taxpayer, or if addressed to and mailed to the taxpayer's usual place of business or usual place of abode or last known address and accepted by any officer, partner, employee, spouse or child of the taxpayer over the age of 18. Any notice addressed and mailed in the above manner and accepted by any person, shall be presumed to be accepted by such person unless proven otherwise by the taxpayer. Any notice addressed and mailed in the above manner, and which is refused or not claimed, may then be served by regular mail if such notice is subsequently mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the same address; and date of posting in the United States mail shall be the date of service. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.26 - TIMELY FILING AND PAYING. 
(a)  Delivery in person. If any return, claim, statement or other document required to be filed, or any payment required to be made within a prescribed period or on or before a prescribed date, is delivered in person on or before such date to the director, during normal business hours of the city, it shall be timely filed. 
(b)  Timely mailing. If any return, claim, statement or other document, required to be filed, or any payment required to be made within a prescribed period or on or before a prescribed date under authority of this article, is, after such period or such date, delivered by United States mail to the director, the date of the United States postmark stamped on the cover in which such return, claim, statement, or other document or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment, as the case may be, provided the following mailing requirements are met: 
(1)  The postmark date falls within the prescribed period or on or before the prescribed date for filing (including any extension granted for such filing) of the return, claim, statement or other document, or for making the payment (including any extension granted for such payment); and 
(2)  The return, claim, statement, other document or payment was within the time prescribed in subsection (b)(1) hereof, deposited in the mail in the United States in an envelope or other appropriate wrapper, postage prepaid, properly addressed to the finance division. 
(c)  Registered and certified mailing. For purposes of this section, if any return, claim, statement or other document or payment is sent by United States registered or certified mail, the date of registration or certification shall be deemed the postmark date. 
(d)  Last date for filing or payment. The last date for timely filing or timely making payment shall include any extension of time authorized by law or regulation and any extension of time granted in writing by the director. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.27 - TIME FOR PERFORMANCE OF ACTS WHERE LAST DAY FALLS ON SATURDAY, SUNDAY OR LEGAL HOLIDAY. 
    When the last day prescribed under authority of this article for performing any act falls on Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the performance of such act shall be considered timely if it is performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For purposes of this section, the last day for the performance of any act shall be determined by including any authorized extension of time; and "legal holiday" means a legal holiday in this state. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.28 - ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS. 
    The enforcement provisions of this article shall be under the jurisdiction of the director including the responsibility for audit, assessment and processing of delinquent accounts. The director, at his request, may be represented in any such collection or civil action by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.29 - PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED TAX. 
    Payment of estimated tax or any installment thereof, shall be considered payment on account of the tax imposed and administered under this article for the taxable year. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.30 - OVERPAYMENT OF INSTALLMENTS. 
    In the case of tax payable in installments, if the taxpayer has paid, as an installment of the tax, more than the amount determined to be the correct amount of such installment, the overpayment shall be credited against the unpaid installments, if any for the taxable year. If the amount already paid, whether or not on the basis of installments, exceeds the amount determined to be the correct amount of the tax due for the taxable year, the overpayment shall be credited or refunded as provided herein. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.31 - PAYMENT BY CHECK OR MONEY ORDER. 
(a)  Check or money order unpaid. 
(1)  Ultimate liability. If a check or money order tendered in payment of taxes is not duly paid, the person by whom such check or money order was tendered shall remain liable for payment of the tax and for all legal penalties and additions thereto, to the same extent as if such check or money order had not been tendered. 
(b)  Bad check charge. If any check or money order tendered in payment of any amount of tax, interest, or penalties is not duly paid, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, there shall be paid as a penalty by the person who tendered such check, upon written notice and demand by the director, in the same manner as tax an amount equal to the service charge which the bank or other financial institution charged the city for each check returned to the director because the account is closed or there are insufficient funds in the account. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.32 - SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS AND COMPROMISES. 
(a)  Closing agreements authorized. The director is authorized to enter into an agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person (or of the person or estate for whom he acts) in respect of the tax administered under this article, for any taxable period. 
(b)  Finality of closing agreement. If a closing agreement is entered into by the director (within such time as may be stated in such agreement or later agreed to) such agreement shall be final and conclusive, and except upon a showing of fraud or malfeasance or misrepresentation of a material fact: 
(1)  The matters so agreed upon shall not be reopened or the agreement modified by any officer, employee or agent of this city; and 
(2)  In any civil action or administrative proceeding, the closing agreement or any determination, assessment, collection, payment, abatement, refund or credit made in accordance therewith, shall not be annulled, modified, set aside or disregarded. 
(c)  Compromises authorized. The director, in conjunction with the city attorney, may compromise all or part of any civil case arising under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.33 - MATHEMATICAL OR CLERICAL ERRORS; COLLECTION OF BALANCE DUE ON RETURN WITHOUT REMITTANCE. 
(a)  Mathematical or clerical error. When it appears to the director that the taxpayer has made a mathematical error (including an overstatement of the credit for the amount paid as estimated tax), or clerical error, the director shall correct such error and notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the deficiency or overpayment in tax. The taxpayer shall have 15 days after receipt of such notice within which to pay any such deficiency. If the taxpayer fails to pay such deficiency within 15 days, the director shall make an assessment of such deficiency in accordance with this article and shall give the taxpayer written notice thereof. 
(b)  Collection of balance due. If a taxpayer files a mathematically correct return which reflects a balance due of the tax administered under this article, and if full payment thereof has not been made, the director shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of tax, penalties or interest due. The taxpayer shall have 15 days after receipt of such notice within which to make payment. If the taxpayer fails to make payment within such 15-day period, the director shall proceed to collect the amount due. 
(c)  Certain terms defined. For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Mathematical or clerical error. "Mathematical or clerical error" means: 
A.  An error in addition, subtraction, multiplication or division shown on any return; 
B.  An incorrect use of any table provided by the director with respect to any return if such incorrect use is apparent from the existence of other information on the return; 
C.  An entry on a return of an item which is inconsistent with another entry of the same or another item on such return; 
D.  An omission of information which is required to be supplied on the return to substantiate an entry on the return; and 
E.  An entry on a return of a deduction or credit in an amount which exceeds a statutory limit, if such limit is expressed: 
1.  As a specified monetary amount, or 
2.  As a percentage, ratio, or fraction, and if the items entering into the application of such limit appear on such return. 
(2)  Return. "Return" includes any return, statement, schedule or list, and any amendment or supplement thereto filed with respect to the tax administered under this article. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.34 - ASSESSMENT. 
(a)  General. If the director believes that any tax administered under this article has been insufficiently returned by a taxpayer, either because the taxpayer has failed to properly remit the tax, or has failed to make a return or has made a return which is incomplete, deficient or otherwise erroneous, he may proceed to investigate and determine or estimate the tax liability and make an assessment thereof. 
(b)  Jeopardy assessments. If the director believes that the collection of any tax administered under this article will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make an assessment of tax, noting that fact upon the assessment. The amount assessed shall be immediately due and payable. Unless the taxpayer against whom a jeopardy assessment is made posts the required security and petitions for reassessment within 20 days after service of notice of the jeopardy assessment, such assessment shall become final; provided, that upon written request of the taxpayer made within such 20-day period, showing reasonable cause therefor, the director may grant an extension of time not to exceed 30 additional days within which such petition may be filed. If a taxpayer against whom a jeopardy assessment has been made petitions for reassessment or requests an extension of time to file a petition for reassessment, the petition or request shall be accompanied by remittance of the amount assessed or such security as the director may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. If a petition for reassessment is timely filed, and the amount assessed has been remitted, or such other security posted, the provisions for hearing, determination and appeal set forth in this article shall then be applicable. 
(c)  Amendment of assessment. The director may, at any time before the assessment becomes final, amend, in whole or in part, any assessment whenever he ascertains that such assessment is improper or incomplete in any material respect. 
(d)  Supplemental assessment. The director may, at any time within the period prescribed for assessment, make a supplemental assessment whenever he ascertains that any assessment is imperfect or incomplete in any material respect. 
(e)  Address for notice of assessment, general rule. Notice of assessment, if sent by certified mail or registered mail to the taxpayer at his last known address, shall be sufficient even if such taxpayer is deceased, or is under a legal disability, or, in the case of a corporation, has terminated its existence. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.35 - ABATEMENT. 
    General rule. The director is authorized to abate the assessment of any tax or any liability in respect thereto which: 
(a)  Is void, or 
(b)  Is assessed after the expiration of the period of limitation properly applicable thereto, or 
(c)  Is voidable; provided, that no claim for abatement shall be filed by a taxpayer under this section if the assessment has become final. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.36 - NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; PETITION FOR REASSESSMENT OR PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENT WITHIN 60 DAYS. 
(a)  Notice of assessment. The director shall give the taxpayer written notice of any assessment or amended or supplemental assessment made pursuant to this article. The assessment or amended or supplemental assessment, as the case may be, shall become final and conclusive on the liability of the taxpayer and not subject to either administrative or judicial review unless the taxpayer to whom a notice of assessment or amended or supplemental assessment is given, shall within 60 days after service thereof (except in the case of jeopardy assessments) either: 
(1)  Petition for reassessment. Personally or by certified mail, files with the director a petition in writing, verified under oath by the taxpayer or his duly authorized agent having knowledge of the facts, setting forth with particularity the items of the assessment objected to, together with the reasons for such objections, or 
(2)  Payment of assessment. Personally or by certified mail, remits to the director the total amount of the assessment or amended or supplemental assessment, including such additions to tax and penalties as may have been assessed and the amount of interest due. 
(b)  Finality of assessment. The amount of an assessment or amended or supplemental assessment shall be due and payable on the day following the date upon which the assessment or amended or supplemental assessment becomes final. Payment of the amount of the assessment, or amended or supplemental assessment, as provided in subsection (a)(2) hereof, within 60 days after service of notice of such assessment shall not prohibit or otherwise bar the taxpayer from filing a claim for refund or credit under the provisions of this article within the time prescribed therein for the filing of a claim for refund or credit. 
(c)  Payment of assessment after petition filed. A taxpayer who has timely filed a petition for reassessment may, at any time prior to issuance of the director's administrative decision, pay under protest the amount of the assessment. Upon such payment, the contested case shall thereafter be treated for all purposes as a petition for refund; provided, that, if payment is made after the administrative hearing has commenced or concluded, a new hearing shall not be held, but the record thereof, shall be properly amended by the director to show that the amount assessed has been paid under protest by the taxpayer and that the petition for reassessment previously filed under this section is now to be treated as a petition for refund. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.37 - HEARING PROCEDURE. 
    When a petition for reassessment provided for in section 787.36, or a petition for refund or credit is filed within the time prescribed by said sections for such filing, or a hearing is requested pursuant to the provisions of this article, the director shall assign a time and place for a hearing upon the same and shall notify the petitioner of such hearing by written notice at least 20 days in advance thereof. Such hearing shall be held within 90 days from the date of filing the petition or other written request for hearing unless continued by agreement of the parties or by the director for good cause. 
    The hearing shall be informal and shall be conducted in an impartial manner by the director or a hearing examiner designated by him. If the hearing is on a petition for reassessment the burden of proof shall be upon the taxpayer to show the assessment is incorrect and contrary to law, either in whole or in part. If the hearing is on a petition for refund or credit, the petitioner shall also have the burden of proof. 
    After any hearing as above provided for, the director shall, within a reasonable time, give notice in writing of his decision. Unless an appeal from the decision of the director rendered in any such hearing is taken, within 60 days after service of such notice, the director's decision shall become final and conclusive and not subject to either administrative or judicial review. The amount, if any, due the city under such decision shall be due and payable on the day following the date upon which such decision becomes final. The amount, if any, due the taxpayer under such decision shall be promptly refunded, or the same be credited to the taxpayer. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.38 - APPEALS. 
(a)  A taxpayer may appeal the administrative decision of the director by taking an appeal to the Circuit Court of Cabell County or Wayne County, whichever may be applicable, within 60 days after being served with notice of the administrative decision. 
(b)  Petition for appeal. The appeal proceeding shall be instituted by filing a petition with the Circuit County, or the judge thereof in vacation, within the 60-day period prescribed in subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  Hearing of appeal. The court may hear the appeal and determine anew all questions submitted to it on appeal from the determination of the director. In such appeal, a certified copy of the director's notice of assessment or amended or supplemental assessment and administrative decision thereon shall be admissible and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the tax due under the provisions of this article. The court shall render its decree thereon and a certified copy of said decree shall be filed by the clerk of the court with the director who shall then correct the assessment in accordance with the decree. An appeal may be taken by the taxpayer or the director to the supreme court of appeals of this state. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.39 - COLLECTION OF TAXES. 
(a)  General. The director shall collect the taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this article. In addition to all other remedies available for the collection of debts due this city, the director may proceed by foreclosure of the lien or by levy and distraint. 
(b)  Prerequisite to final settlement of contracts with nonresident contractor; user personally liable. 
(1)  Any person contracting with a nonresident contractor subject to the taxes imposed by this article shall withhold payment, in the final settlement of such contract, of such sufficient amount, not exceeding 6% of the contract price, as will in such person's opinion be sufficient to cover such taxes, until the receipt of a certificate from the director to the effect that the above referenced taxes imposed against the nonresident contractor have been paid or provided for. 
(2)  If any person shall fail to withhold as provided herein, such person shall be personally liable for the payment of all such taxes attributed to the contract, not to exceed 6% of the contract price. The same shall be recoverable by the director by appropriate legal proceedings, which may include issuance of an assessment under this article. 
(c)  Payment when person sells out or quits business; liability of successor lien. 
(1)  If any person subject to any tax administered under this article sells out his or its business or stock of goods, or ceases doing business, any tax, penalties and interest imposed by this article shall become due and payable immediately and such person shall, within 30 days after selling out his or its business or stock of goods or ceasing to do business, make a final return or returns and pay any tax or taxes which may be due. The unpaid amount of any such tax shall be a lien upon the property of such person. 
(2)  The successor in business of any person who sells out his business or stock of goods, or ceases doing business, shall be personally liable for the payment of tax, penalties and interest unpaid after expiration of the 30-day period allowed for payment; provided, that if the business is purchased in an arms length transaction, and if the purchaser withholds so much of the consideration for the purchase as will satisfy any tax, penalties and interest which may be due until the seller produces a receipt from the director evidencing the payment thereof, the purchaser shall not be personally liable for any taxes attributable to the former owner of the business unless the contract of sale provides for the purchaser to be liable for some or all of such taxes. The amount of tax, penalties and interest for which the successor is liable shall be a lien on the property of the successor, which shall be enforced by the director as provided in this article. 
(d)  Priority in distribution of estate or property in receivership; personal liability of fiduciary. All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be paid from the first money available for distribution, voluntary or compulsory, in receivership bankruptcy or otherwise, of the estate of any person, firm or corporation, in priority to all claims, except taxes and debts due the United States which under federal law are given priority over the debts and liens created by this article. Any trustee, receiver, administrator, executor, or person charged with the administration of an estate who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any taxes accrued and unpaid under this article, which are chargeable against the person, firm or corporation whose estate is in administration. 
(e)  Injunction. If the taxpayer fails for a period of more than 60 days to fully comply with any of the provisions of this article, the director, in conjunction with the city attorney, may institute a proceeding to secure an injunction to restrain the taxpayer from doing business in this city until the taxpayer fully complies with the provisions of this article. No bond shall be required of the director in any action instituted under this subsection. 
(f)  Costs. In any proceeding under this section, upon judgment or decree for the director, he shall be awarded his costs. 
(g)  Refunds; credits; right to offset. Whenever a taxpayer has a refund or credit due it for an overpayment of any tax administered under this article, the director may reduce the amount of such refund or credit by the amount of the tax administered under this article, which is owed by the same taxpayer, and collectible as provided in subsection (a) hereof. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.40 - LIENS, RELEASE; SUBORDINATION; FORECLOSURE. 
(a)  General. Any tax, penalties or interest due and payable under this article shall be a debt due this city. It shall be a personal obligation of the taxpayer and shall be a lien upon the real and personal property of the taxpayer. 
(b)  Duration of lien. The lien created by this section shall continue until the liability for the tax, penalties and interest is satisfied or becomes unenforceable by reason of lapse of time. 
(c)  Recordation. The lien created by this section shall be subject to the restrictions and conditions embodied in W. Va. Code, § 38-10C-1 et seq. and any amendment made or which may hereafter be made thereto. 
(d)  Release or subordination. The director, pursuant to rules and regulations prescribed by him, may issue his certificate of release of any lien created pursuant to this section when the debt is adequately secured by bond or other security. He shall issue his certificate of release when the debt secured has been satisfied. The certificate of release shall be issued in duplicate. One copy shall be forwarded to the taxpayer, and the other copy shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county commission of the county wherein the lien is recorded. The clerk of the county commission shall record the release and such recordation shall constitute a release and full discharge of the lien. The director may issue his certificate of release of any such lien as to all or any part of the property subject to the lien, or may subordinate such lien to any other lien or interest, but only if there is paid to the city an amount not less than the value of the interest of the city in such property, or if the interest of the city in such property has no value. 
(e)  Foreclosure. The director may enforce any lien created and recorded under this section, against any property subject to such lien by civil action in the circuit court of the county wherein such property is located, in order to subject such property to the payment of the tax secured by such lien. All persons having liens upon or having any interest in the property shall be made parties to such action. 
(f)  Discharge of lien. A sale of property against which the city has a lien under this section, made pursuant to an instrument creating a lien on such property, or made pursuant to a statutory lien on such property, or made pursuant to a judicial order to enforce any judgment in any civil action, shall be made subject to and without disturbing the municipal tax lien if the tax lien was recorded more than 30 days before such sale, unless: 
(1)  The city is made a party to such civil action, or 
(2)  The director is given notice of such sale in writing not less than 15 days prior to sale, or 
(3)  The director consents to such sale. Such notice shall contain the name of the owner of the property and the social security number or federal employer identification number of the owner. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.41 - LEVY AND DISTRAINT. 
(a)  Authority of director. If the tax administered under this article is shown to be due on a return, it is required to be paid at the time the return is filed. If any portion of such tax is not so paid, or if an assessment of tax is made by the director and notice thereof is given as required by this article and such assessment has become final and is not subject to administrative or judicial review, then, if any person liable to pay any tax administered under this article neglects or refuses to pay the same within 15 days after notice and demand, it shall be lawful for the director or his delegate to collect such tax and such further sum as is sufficient to cover the expense of the levy. The director may collect such tax by levy upon all property and rights to property belonging to such person or on which there is a lien provided in this article for payment of the tax. If the director makes a finding that the collection of such tax is in jeopardy, notice and demand for immediate payment of such tax may be given by the director (or his delegate) and, upon failure or refusal to pay such tax, collection thereof by levy shall be lawful without regard to the 15-day period provided in this section. 
(b)  "Levy" defined. "Levy" as used in this section includes the power of distraint and seizure by any means. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a levy shall extend only to property possessed and obligations existing at the time thereof. In any case in which the director or his delegate may levy upon property or rights to property, he may seize and sell such property or right to property, whether such property be real or personal, tangible or intangible. 
(c)  Successive seizures. Whenever any property or a right to property upon which levy has been made by virtue of subsection (a) hereof is not sufficient to satisfy the claim of the city for which levy is made, the levy in like manner upon any other property liable to levy of the person against whom such claim exists, until the amount due from him, together with all expenses, is fully paid. 
(d)  Distress warrant. The director may issue a distress warrant to the sheriff of any county of this state, or to any officer or employee of the city, commanding him to levy upon and sell any such property or rights to property subject to levy in accordance with the provisions of this article. A distress warrant shall be executed within 60 days from the date the warrant was issued. The sheriff or other person shall return the warrant and any money collected to the director within 65 days from the date the warrant was issued. 
(e)  Requirement of notice before levy. 
(1)  In general. Levy may be made under subsection (a) hereof upon the salary or wages or other property or rights to property of any person with respect to any unpaid tax only after the director has notified such person in writing of his intention to make such levy. 
(2)  Ten-day requirement. The notice required under subsection (e)(l) hereof shall be given in person, or sent by certified mail to such person's last known address, no less than ten days prior to the day of levy; provided, that no notice need be given if the director has made a finding under the last sentence of subsection (a) hereof that collection of the tax is in jeopardy. 
(3)  Continuing levy on salary and wages. The effect of a levy on salary or wages payable to or received by a taxpayer shall be continuous from the date such levy is first made until the liability out of which such levy arose is satisfied or becomes unenforceable by reason of lapse of time, at which time the director shall promptly release such levy and notify the person upon whom such levy was made that such levy has been released. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.42 - PROPERTY EXEMPT FROM LEVY. 
(a)  Enumeration. There shall be exempt from levy: 
(1)  Wearing apparel and school books. Items of wearing apparel and school books that are necessary for the taxpayer or for members of his or her family. 
(2)  Fuel, provisions, furniture and personal effects. If the taxpayer is the head of a family, so much of the fuel, provisions, furniture and personal effects in his household and of the arms for personal use, livestock and poultry of the taxpayer, as does not exceed $1,500 in value; if the taxpayer is an individual who is not the head of a household, this exemption shall not exceed $1,000. 
(3)  Books and tools of a trade, business or profession. So many of the books and tools necessary for the trade, business or profession of the taxpayer as do not exceed in the aggregate $1,000 in value. 
(4)  Unemployment benefits. Any amount payable to an individual with respect to his or her employment (including any portion thereof payable with respect to dependents) under an unemployment compensation law of the United States, or of the State of West Virginia or any other state. 
(5)  Undelivered mail. Mail, addressed to any person, which has not been delivered to the addressee. 
(6)  Annuity and pension payments. Annuity or pension payments under any pension or retirement plan, including social security payments. 
(7)  Worker's compensation. Any amount payable to an individual as workers' compensation (including any portion thereof payable with respect to dependents) under a worker's compensation law of the United States, or the State of West Virginia or any other state. 
(8)  Judgments for support of minor children. If the taxpayer is required by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, entered prior to the date of levy, to contribute to the support of his or her minor children, so much of his or her salary, wages, or other income as is necessary to comply with such judgment. 
(9)  Public assistance. Any amount payable to any person from a public assistance or relief fund created under the law of the United States or of the State of West Virginia or any other state. 
(10)  Minimum exemption for wages, salary and other income. Any amount payable to or receivable by an individual as wages or salary for services provided by an employee to his or her employer, or as income derived from other sources, during any period, to the extent that the total of such amounts payable to or received by him or her during such period does not exceed the applicable exempt amount determined under subsection (d) hereof. 
(11)  Homestead. If the taxpayer owns a homestead, the first $5,000 thereof shall be exempt from levy. 
(b)  Appraisal. The officer seizing property of the type described in subsection (a) hereof shall appraise and set aside to the owner the amount of such property declared to be exempt. If the taxpayer objects at the time of the seizure to the valuation fixed by the office making the seizure, the director shall summon three disinterested individuals who shall make the valuation. 
(c)  No other property exempt. Notwithstanding any other law of this state, no property or rights to property shall be exempt from levy other than property specifically made exempt by subsection (a) hereof. 
(d)  Exempt amount of wages, salary or other income. 
(1)  In the case of an individual who is paid or received all of his wages, salary and other income on a weekly basis, the amount of the wages, salary and other income payable to or receivable by the person during any week which is exempt from levy under subsection (a)(1) hereof shall be: 
A.  Thirty times the state minimum wage per hour, plus 
B.  Twenty-five dollars for each additional dependent of the taxpayer. 
(2)  In the case of an individual paid on a greater than weekly basis, the exempt amount shall bear the same relationship to the period worked as to the ratio contained in subsection (1). 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.43 - SURRENDER OF PROPERTY SUBJECT TO LEVY. 
(a)  Requirement. Any person in possession or control of property or rights to property subject to levy upon which a levy has been made shall, upon demand of the drector, surrender such property or rights (or discharge such obligation) to the drector, except such part of the property or rights as is, at the time of such demand, subject to any prior attachment, execution or levy. 
(b)  Enforcement of levy. 
(1)  Extent of personal liability. Any person in possession of or obligated with respect to property subject to levy upon which levy has been made, who fails or refuses to surrender any property or rights to property, subject to levy, upon demand by the director shall be personally liable to the city in a sum equal to the value of the property of rights not so surrendered, but not exceeding the amount of taxes of the collection of which such levy has been made, together with costs and interests on such sum at an annual rate established under state law, from the date of the levy. Any amount (other than costs) received under this subsection shall be credited against the liability for the collection of which such levy was made. 
(2)  Penalty for violation. In addition to the personal liability imposed by subsection (b)(l) hereof, if any person required to surrender property or rights to property fails or refuses to surrender the same without reasonable cause, such person shall be liable for a money penalty equal to 50% of the amount recovered under subsection (b)(1) hereof. No part of this penalty shall be credited against the tax liability for the collection of which such levy was made. 
(c)  Effect of honoring levy. Any person in possession or control of property or rights to property subject to levy upon which levy has been made, who upon demand by the director surrenders such property or rights to property (or discharges such obligation) to the director, or who pays a liability under subsection (b)(1) hereof, shall be discharged from any obligation or liability to the delinquent taxpayer with respect to such property or rights to property arising from such surrender or payment. 
(d)  "Person" defined. "Person" as used in subsection (a) hereof includes an officer or employee of a corporation or a member or employee of a partnership, who as such officer, employee or member is under a duty to surrender the property or rights to property or to discharge the obligation. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.44 - SALE OF SEIZED PROPERTY. 
(a)  Notice of seizure. As soon as practicable after seizure of property, notice in writing shall be given by the director to the owner of the property (or, in the case of personal property, the possessor thereof), or shall be left at his usual place of abode or business if he has such within the county where the seizure is made. If the owner cannot be readily located, or has no dwelling or place of business within such county, the notice may be mailed to his last known address. Such notice shall specify the sum demanded and shall contain, in the case of personal property, an account of the property seized and, in the case of real property, a description with reasonable certainty of the property seized. 
(b)  Notice of sale. The director may sell any property seized under section 787.41. As soon as practicable after the seizure of the property, the director shall give notice to the owner, in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) hereof, and shall cause a notice of sale to be published as a Class II legal advertisement in some newspaper published or generally circulated within the county wherein such seizure is made, or the county where the property is located, the last date of publication being not less than five days prior to sale. This notice shall identify the property to be sold, and the date, time, place, manner and conditions of the sale thereof, all of which shall be at the discretion of the director. The sale shall be conducted by public auction, or by public sale under sealed bids. Before the sale, the director may determine a minimum price for which the property shall be sold, and if no person offers for such property at the sale, the amount of the minimum price, the property shall be declared to be purchased at such price of the city, otherwise the property shall be declared to be sold to the highest bidder. In determining the minimum price the director shall take into account the expense of making the levy and sale. 
(c)  Sale of indivisible property. If any property liable to levy is not divisible, so as to enable the director by sale of a part thereof to raise the whole amount of the tax and expense of making the levy and sale, the whole of such property shall be sold. However, where the property sold is co-owned or jointly-owned by the taxpayer and an innocent third party, the proceeds of sale shall be divided, based on the respective interests of the persons owning the property immediately prior to the levy and sale, and the proceeds attributable to the interest of the innocent owner or owners shall be distributed to them; provided, that where the property to be sold is so co-owned or jointly owned by an innocent third party, having no delinquent tax liability attempted to be collected under such levy and sale, such innocent party may petition the circuit court of the county in which the property is located for relief, including postponement of the sale, in order that the court can determine if the property can be partitioned, so as to avoid sale of the innocent party's portion or grant and afford other relief by the court protective of the rights and interests of such innocent party. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.45 - REDEMPTION OF PROPERTY. 
(a)  Price. Such property or tract of property shall be permitted to be redeemed upon payment to the purchaser, or in case he cannot be found in the county in which the property to be redeemed is situated, then to the director for the use of the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, the amount paid by such purchaser and interest thereon from the date the purchaser paid the purchase price to the date the property is redeemed. 
(b)  Record. When any lands sold are redeemed as provided in this section, the director shall cause entry of the fact to be made upon the record and such entry shall be evidence of such redemption. 
(c)  Subrogation to state lien. Any person redeeming the interest of another shall be subrogated to the lien of the state on such interest. Such person shall lose his right to this lien, however, unless within thirty days after receiving the certificate of sale of personal property, or the tax director's deed of real property, he shall file with the clerk of the county in which the real property is located or of the county in which the personal property is located or where the delinquent taxpayer resides or has his business location, his claim against the delinquent taxpayer and a copy of the certificate of sale of personal property or deed to real property. 
(d)  Before sale. Any person whose property has been levied upon shall have the right to pay the amount due together with the expenses of the proceeding, if any, to the director at any time prior to the sale thereof, and upon such payment, the director shall restore such property to him, and all further proceedings in connection with the levy on such property shall cease from time of such payment. 
(e)  Redemption of real estate after sale period. The owners of any real property sold as provided in section 787.44, their heirs, executors or administrators, or any person having any interest therein, or a lien thereon, or any person in their behalf, shall be permitted to redeem the property sold, or any particular tract of such property, at any time within 180 days after the sale thereof. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.46 - CERTIFICATE OF SALE; DEED TO REAL PROPERTY. 
(a)  Certificate of sale. In the case of property sold as provided in section 787.44, the director shall provide to the purchaser a certificate of sale upon payment in full of the purchase price. In the case of real property, such certificate shall set forth the real property purchased, for whose taxes the same was sold, the name of the purchaser and the price paid therefor. 
(b)  Deed to real property. In the case of any real property sold as provided in section 787.44 and not redeemed in the manner and within the time provided in section 787.45, the director shall execute, in accordance with the laws of this state pertaining to sales of real property under execution, to the purchaser of such real property at such sale, upon his surrender of the certificate of sale, a deed to the real property so purchased by him reciting the facts set forth in the certificate. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.47 - RECORDS OF SALE. 
(a)  Requirement. The director shall keep a record of all sales of real property under section 787.44 and of redemptions of such property. The records shall set forth the tax for which any such sale was made, the dates of seizure and sale, the name of the party assessed and all proceedings in making such sale, the amount of expenses, the names of the purchasers and the date of the deed. 
(b)  Copy as evidence. A copy of such record, or any part thereof, certified by the director shall be evidence in any court of this state of the truth of the facts therein stated. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.48 - EXPENSE OF LEVY AND SALE. 
    The director shall determine the expenses to be allowed in all cases of levy and sale under this article. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.49 - APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF LEVY. 
(a)  Collection of liability. Any money realized from a levy shall be applied as follows: 
(1)  Expenses of levy and sale. First, against the expenses of the proceedings; 
(2)  Liability of delinquent taxpayer. The amount, if any, remaining after applying subsection (a)(1) hereof shall then be applied against the liability in respect of which the levy was made or the sale conducted. The amount, if any, remaining shall then be applied against any other delinquent tax liability of the taxpayer for which levy may be made under section 787.41. 
(b)  Surplus proceeds. Any surplus proceeds remaining after the application of subsection (a) shall, upon application and satisfactory proof in support thereof, be credited or refunded by the director to the person or persons legally entitled thereto. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.50 - AUTHORITY TO RELEASE LEVY AND RETURN PROPERTY. 
(a)  Release of levy. It shall be lawful for the director under prescribed regulations, to release the levy upon all or part of the property or rights to property levied upon where the director determines that such action will facilitate the collection of the liability, but such release shall not operate to prevent a subsequent levy. 
(b)  Return of property. If the director determines that property has been wrongfully levied upon, it shall be lawful for the director to return: 
(1)  The specific property levied upon; 
(2)  An amount of money equal to the amount of money levied upon; or 
(3)  An amount of money equal to the amount of money received by the city from a sale of such property. Property may be returned at any time. An amount equal to the amount of money levied upon or recovered from such sale may be returned at any time before the expiration of nine months from the date of such levy. For purposes of this subsection, if property is declared purchased by the city at a sale pursuant to section 787.44 (relating to manner and conditions to sale), the city shall be treated as having received an amount of money equal to the minimum price determined pursuant to such section or (if larger) the amount received by the city from the resale of such property. 
(c)  The director shall, upon request, make public the names and persons in whose favor a release of levy or return of property has been made in subsections (a) and (b). 
(d)  Interest. Interest shall be allowed and paid at an annual rate established under state law: 
(1)  In a case described in subsection (b)(2) hereof, from the date the director receives the money to a date (to be determined by the director) preceding the date of return by not more than 30 days, or 
(2)  In a case described in subsection (b)(3) hereof, from the date of the sale of the property to a date (to be determined by the director) preceding the date of return by not more than 30 days. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.51 - OVERPAYMENTS; CREDITS; REFUNDS AND LIMITATIONS. 
    The provisions concerning overpayments, credits, refunds and limitations contained in W. Va. Code, § 11-10-14, as amended, shall apply as much as is practicable, to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.52 - LIMITATIONS ON ASSESSMENT. 
(a)  General rule. The amount of any tax, penalties and interest imposed by this article shall be assessed within three years after the date the return was filed (whether or not such return was filed on or after the date prescribed for filing); provided, that in the case of a false or fraudulent return filed with the intent to evade tax, or in case no return was filed, the assessment may be made at any time. 
(b)  Time return deemed filed. 
(1)  Early return. For purposes of this section, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law, or by regulations promulgated by the director for filing thereof, shall be considered as filed on such last date; 
(2)  Returns executed by director. The execution of a return by the director shall not start the running of the period of limitations on assessment and collection. 
(c)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding subsection (a) hereof: 
(1)  Extension by agreement. The director and the taxpayer may enter into written agreements to extend the period within which the director may make an assessment against the taxpayer which shall not exceed two years. The period so agreed upon may be extended for additional periods not in excess of two years each by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon; 
(2)  Special rule for certain amended returns. Where, within the 60-day period ending on the day on which the time prescribed in this section for the assessment of any tax for any taxable year would otherwise expire, the director receives a written document signed by the taxpayer showing that the taxpayer owes an additional amount of such tax for such taxable year, the period for the assessment of such additional amount shall not expire before the sixty days after the day on which the director receives such document; 
(3)  Net operating loss or capital loss carrybacks. In the case of a deficiency attributable to the application by the taxpayer of a net operating loss carryback or a capital loss carryback (including that attributable to a mathematical or clerical error in application of the loss carryback) such deficiency may be assessed at any time before expiration of the period within which a deficiency for the taxable year of the net operating loss or net capital loss which results in such carryback may be assessed; 
(4)  Certain credit carrybacks. In the case of a deficiency attributable to the application to the taxpayer of a credit carryback (including that attributable to a mathematical or clerical error in application of the credit carryback) such deficiency may be assessed at any time before expiration of the period within which a deficiency for the taxable year of the unused credit which results in such carryback may be assessed, or with respect to any portion of a credit carryback from a taxable year attributable to a net operating loss carryback, capital loss carryback, or other credit carryback from a subsequent taxable year, at any time before expiration of the period within which a deficiency for such subsequent taxable year may be assessed. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.53 - LIMITATIONS ON COLLECTION. 
(a)  Where assessment is issued. Every proceeding instituted by the director for the collection of the amount found to be due under an assessment which has become final of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this article irrespective of whether such proceeding shall be instituted in a court or by utilization of other methods provided by law for the collection of such tax, penalty or interest, shall be brought or commenced within five years after the date on which such assessment has become final. 
(b)  Where assessment is not issued. Every proceeding instituted by the director for the collection of the amount determined to be due by methods provided by law other than the issuance of an assessment of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this article irrespective of whether such proceeding shall be instituted in a court or by utilization of other methods provided by law for the collection of such tax, penalties or interest, shall be brought or commenced within five years after the date on which the taxpayer filed the annual return required to be filed. 
(c)  Exception as to false or fraudulent return or no return. In the case of the filing of a false or fraudulent return, or in case no return is filed, the limitations specified in this section shall not apply. 
(d)  Extension of time for institutions of collection proceedings by agreement. The director, in conjunction with the city attorney, and the taxpayer may enter into written agreement to extend the period within which the director may institute proceedings for the collection of the amount found to be due under an assessment which has become final, or the amount determined to be due by methods provided by law other than the issuance of the assessment, of any tax, penalties or interest imposed by this article. Such period shall not exceed two years. The period so agreed upon may be extended for additional periods not in excess of two years each by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.54 - TAX INCENTIVES FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "New business" means any business for gain or economic benefit which opens an office or other place of business within the city on or after June 1, 2008; provided that, businesses located within the city that transfer ownership shall not be considered "new businesses" within the meaning of this section. 
(2)  "Back office operation" means any business that has an office located in the city which is used solely for providing administrative services for the business and said office does not solicit or conduct business directly with clients or customers at that location. 
(3)  "Retail sales" are sales of any kind for gain or economic benefit which is not being sold at wholesale as defined in section 787.05(i). 
(b)  Back office operation exemption. Every new business, which does not have any other existing office or existing business located within the city as of June 1, 2008, and has not maintained another office or other place of business in the city for the preceding 12-month period, upon locating a back office operation within the city, shall be granted a partial exemption, as stated in subsection (b)(1) hereof, from the business and occupation tax set forth in this article. Said tax incentives may only take effect upon the enactment of a resolution granting a specific business the tax incentive. 
(1)  Tax credits granted under subsection (b) hereof shall be granted to businesses employing a minimum of 50 full-time employees or the equivalent of 50 full-time employees during the time of the credit as follows: 
A.  For the first three full years of operation, the business shall be granted a tax credit equal to 50% of the business and occupation tax due. 
B.  After the end of the third full year of operation, the business shall pay 100% of all business and occupation taxes due. 
C.  Fifty full-time employees or the equivalent thereof would be 1,875 hours per week worked by all employees (37.5 × 50 = 1,875). 
(2)  The administration may promulgate regulations which shall provide for tax credits to be provided to back office operations employing less than 50 full-time employees or the equivalent thereof during the period of the credit. The regulations shall provide for tax incentives that shall be provided consistent with this section. Regulations would include but not be limited to: 
A.  The number of hours worked. 
B.  The amount of projected gross sales. 
C.  The total square footage occupied by the business. 
D.  The gross amount of payroll the company would generate in the city. 
(3)  In order to qualify for tax credits under subsection (b), the business must make available all necessary information to verify qualification under this section. This requirement shall be in effect for the duration of the tax credit. 
(c)  New retail business exemption. Any new business that locates within the corporate limits of the municipality and employs a minimum of 15 or more full-time employees or the equivalent of 15 or more full-time employees shall be granted a partial exemption, as stated in subsection (c)(1) hereof, on their retail sales, as defined in subsection (a)(3) hereof, from the business and occupation tax set forth in this article. Fifteen full-time employees or the equivalent thereof would be 562.50 hours per week worked by all employees (37.5 × 15 = 562.50). 
(1)  Tax credits granted under subsection (c) hereof may be granted to new businesses solely on their retail sales as follows: 
A.  Fifty percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article during the first full year of the new business's operation. 
B.  Fifty percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article for the second full year, or portion thereof of the new business's operation. 
C.  Fifty percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article for the third full year, or portion thereof, of the new business's operation. 
D.  There shall be no further tax credits under subsection (c) hereof for the fourth full year, or portion thereof, and for each successive year thereafter, of the new business's operation. 
(2)  The administration may promulgate regulations which may provide for tax credits on retail sales to be provided new businesses employing less than 15 full-time employees or the equivalent thereof during the period of the credit. The regulations shall provide for tax incentives that shall be provided consistent with this section. Regulations would include but not be limited to: 
A.  The number of hours worked. 
B.  The amount of projected gross sales. 
C.  The total square footage occupied by the business. 
D.  The gross amount of payroll the company would generate in the city. 
(3)  Tax credits granted under subsection (c) hereof cannot be taken by any business who is receiving tax credits under subsection (b) or (d) hereof. 
(d)  Service business exemption. Any service business that establishes operations in the City of Huntington by start up of a new business, an established service business moving into the City of Huntington or an established service business voluntarily being annexed into the City of Huntington shall receive a 50% reduction in B&O tax if a minimum of five employees (including owner/operator) are maintained for the duration of the three-year period. 
(e)  Annexation exemption. Any existing ongoing business situated outside of the corporate limits of the municipality which would otherwise be subject to the terms of this article if located within the corporate limits of the municipality, shall upon the annexation of territory in which such business is located, into the corporate limits of the municipality be granted a partial exemption, as stated in subsection (d) hereof, in the amount of 50% of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article during the first three years of operation, or portion thereof, after annexation of the additional territory into the corporate limits of the municipality. 
(1)  Annexation; stacking of tax credits prohibited. Tax credits granted under subsection (e) hereof cannot be taken by any business who is receiving tax credits under subsection (b), (c) or (d) hereof. 
(2)  Annexation; new construction exemption. In addition to the tax credit referenced herein, any existing or ongoing business, non-profit entity, governmental entity or, any general contractor and/or subcontractor retained by said business, non-profit entity or governmental entity for the purpose of erecting a new construction, or rehabilitation or renovation of an existing structure, upon annexation of territory in which such business or entity is located into the corporate limits of the municipality shall be granted a one-time exemption in the amount of 100% of the tax computed under the provisions of this article for the total cost of construction. This exemption is available for initial construction only and is not available for subsequent remodeling, renovation or improvements and must be utilized within two years of annexation. This tax credit is cumulative to any other tax credit identified in this article. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any tax credit previously granted a business which has transferred ownership shall continue for the remainder of the period of the credit. 
(g)  All new businesses that are eligible for multiple incentives are to be given a choice of the best option incentive available to them. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, tax credits allowable under this section shall be claimed within six months of the business being registered with the municipality. Failure to timely apply for tax incentives for the six-month period shall operate as a waiver to any claim for tax incentives identified in this article. 
(i)  Additional tax incentives for new construction and/or renovation and remodeling. In addition to any other tax incentive otherwise available, any business or any general contractor that meets the following qualifying requirements shall be entitled to a credit of 50% of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article for the total cost of construction and/or renovation and remodeling: 
(1)  The total costs of construction and/or rehabilitation, remodeling and renovation, including land acquisition, is in excess of $5,000,000; 
(2)  The project is undertaken by and on behalf of a private, for profit business or entity; 
(3)  An additional 20 new jobs will be created as a result of said construction; and 
(4)  The business, general contractor and any subcontractors for said business are current on all city taxes, permits and fees. 
(Ord. of 6-23-08; Ord. of 8-9-10(4); Ord. of 1-10-11(1); Ord. of 3-24-11(1); Ord. of 6-8-15(2) ) 
787.55 - CORPORATE HEADQUARTER AND SERVICE BUREAU EXEMPTION; EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    Beginning on July 1, 1994, and thereafter, a corporation which is a member of a controlled group of corporations as defined in Section 1563 of the United States Internal Revenue Code reported at 26 U.S.C. 1563 as such existed on January 1, 1994, and which performs certain functions and provides certain services, all of which are primarily administrative or managerial in nature, on behalf of and common to all corporations within the controlled group, shall be exempt from the payment of taxes under this article on any revenues received from other corporations within the controlled group where such revenues constitute and represent reimbursement for costs incurred in performing and providing said administrative or managerial functions and services directly to the corporations. Any and all revenues received from any other entities which are not part of the controlled group of corporations, as aforesaid, shall remain subject to the taxes imposed by this article. 
(Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.56 - ADDITIONAL CREDITS. 
(a)  A person taxable under section 787.09 with respect to selling products at wholesale in this city shall be allowed a non-refundable credit against those taxes for any of the following: 
(1)  Manufacturing taxes paid by such person with respect to the manufacturing of products so sold at wholesale in this city; and/or 
(2)  Extracting taxes paid by such person with respect to the extracting of products so sold in this city or ingredients of products so sold at wholesale in this city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Extracting tax" means a gross receipts of tax imposed by a municipality or other local government unit on the act or privilege of engaging in the business as a producer of natural resource products and includes: (i) the tax imposed in section 787.07 and (ii) similar gross receipts taxes paid to other municipalities or other local government units within the United States (other than state governments within the United States). 
(2)  "Gross receipts tax" means a tax which (i) is imposed on or measured by the gross volume of business in terms of gross receipts or in other terms and in the determination of which deduction allowed would not constitute the tax an income tax or value added tax and (ii) which is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from the sales price. 
(c)  If imposition of city's tax would place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of the city's tax, and still apply the city's tax to as much of the taxpayer's activities as may be subject to the city's taxing authority. 
(Ord. of 5-23-03; Ord. of 8-9-10(4); Ord. of 3-24-11(1)) 
787.60 - SUBDIVISION DEVELOPERS AND CONTRACTORS ANNEXATION INCENTIVES EXEMPTION. 
(a)  Subdivision developer exemption. Effective immediately upon the passage of this section, and thereafter, a developer, as defined in these Codified Ordinances, W. Va. Code, Ch. 11, as amended, and Title 110, Series 26 of the Legislative Regulations of the Department of Tax and Revenue of the State of West Virginia, as amended on or about the 15th day of April, 1992, who has met all other requirements for annexation as set forth in these Codified Ordinances and W. Va. Code, Ch. 8, as amended, and who shall develop and construct an infrastructure which meets the requirements of a subdivision within the meaning of that term under the Official Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Huntington, as revised, shall be exempt from the payment of the business and occupation tax imposed upon said development, including the sale of vacant lots within said subdivision. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall extend to all gross revenue derived by a contractor from the construction of said infrastructure while acting as a duly authorized agent for the developer. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall not extend to gross revenue received from the construction and/or sale of lots containing buildings or residential dwellings within said subdivision. 
(b)  Subdivision contractor exemption for construction of dwellings and sale of residential dwellings. Gross revenue received by the developer of a subdivision resulting from the construction and sale of residential dwellings within the subdivision and by a developer or contractor for the construction of such dwellings within the subdivision shall be exempt from the business and occupation tax imposed herein. The exemption provided for herein shall be contingent upon the developer or contractor either: 
(1)  Building, sub-contracting for the building of, or otherwise constructing a new residential dwelling within the city that meets all of the requirements and specifications of the HOME Program for every three new residential dwellings constructed in the annexed subdivision for which the business and occupation tax exemption provided for herein was taken; or 
(2)  Participating in the housing rehabilitation program of the city and performing, or having performed, rehabilitation construction at a cost of not less than $50,000 for every three new residential dwellings constructed in the annexed subdivision for which the business and occupation tax exemption provided for herein was taken; or 
(3)  Participation in future city sponsored or endorsed programs to increase the supply of affordable housing within the city. 
    The exemption provided for in this section shall extend to gross revenue received as a result of the developer or contractor participating in the housing rehabilitation program for the city or the construction of new residential dwellings within the city that meet all of the requirements and specifications of the HOME Program only to the extent that such gross revenue was received for the sole and express purpose of compliance with the qualifications and criteria set forth in this subsection. 
(c)  Reporting of exempted gross revenue required. Subdivision developers and contractors who meet all of the requirements for the exemptions provided for in this section shall report all exempted gross revenue in writing to the office of the director of finance in such form and manner as prescribed by the director of finance. 
(d)  Powers and duties of director of finance. The director of finance shall be charged with the administration and implementation of the exemptions provided for in this section and shall have plenary power and authority to promulgate such policies, rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the intent of this section. 
(Ord. 10-9-95; Ord. 5-26-98) 
787.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the due date of the return until paid. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the delinquency first arises whether or not such date precedes the enactment of this section 787.99(a). 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Failure to account for, and pay over tax, or attempt to defeat or evade tax. Any person required to account for and pay over the tax administered under this article, who willfully fails truthfully to account for and pay over such tax, and any person who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a money penalty equal to the total amount evaded, or not collected, or not accounted for and paid over. 
(2)  Fraudulent claim for refund or credit. In the case of the filing of a false or fraudulent claim for refund or credit with the intent to defraud this city, there shall be added to such amount erroneously refunded or credited a penalty equal to 50% thereof. 
(3)  The failure to timely remit taxes due under this article absent evidence of willfulness or fraud shall result in a penalty equal to the amount of 5% of the tax due one month after the quarter ending date, plus 1.5% for each succeeding month, or fraction thereof, said tax debt remains unpaid. 
(c)  Collection of interest and penalty. Any interest or money penalty may be collected in the same way as the tax imposed by this article. 
(d)  Criminal penalties. Willful or fraudulent violation of the provisions of this article is declared to be a criminal violation. Notwithstanding the penalty provisions contained in subsection (a) hereof, any person violating any provisions of this article may also be imprisoned for up to 30 days and/or fined not more than $500. 
(Ord. 5-23-05) 
ARTICLE 788 - TAX INCENTIVES FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES 

788.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the tax incentive program is to attract new and existing firms to the Kinetic Park Business and Technological Community developed by the Huntington Municipal Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as "Kinetic Park") and to promote expansion of existing businesses and industry. It is the intent of the city to provide and create jobs for local and area residents; to create long-term tax base growth through the replacement, reconstruction and expansion of existing business and technological facilities, where appropriate and environmentally sound; to encourage the construction of new facilities, when necessary; and to create the potential for generating new demands for existing local businesses. It is further the intent of the City of Huntington to encourage substantial investment in new equipment and other personal and real property subject to taxation within Kinetic Park. 
(Ord. 6-14-04) 
788.02 - QUALIFYING BUSINESSES. 
(a)  The following types of businesses, consistent with city codes, shall receive priority consideration for development incentives: 
(1)  Facilities designed for the management and administrative support of business activity located elsewhere. 
(2)  Technology based businesses. 
(3)  New retail and services businesses. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the listing of priority businesses, all companies should meet the following standards: 
(1)  Investment of $2,000,000 or more in new real estate and structure, equipment and corporate property. 
(2)  For new business, the creation of at least five new jobs and/or a 20% increase in employees for existing businesses relocating to Kinetic Park. 
(3)  Provision of a solid financial base and growth potential through the preparation of a business plan which demonstrates possessing the capital necessary for reasonable business growth. 
(Ord. 6-14-04) 
788.03 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
    Applications for tax incentives under this program will be considered under the following circumstances: 
(a)  The proposed project is located in Kinetic Park. 
(b)  There is no delinquency in any taxes or service charges due the City of Huntington. 
(c)  The project should have a clear economic benefit to the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. 6-14-04) 
788.04 - LOCAL EMPLOYMENT CONSIDERATIONS. 
    To the extent feasible, the applicant shall commit to the utilization of city-based businesses and city residents during both the construction and operation phases. The following guidelines are offered to assist in achieving these goals: 
(a)  To the extent feasible, the applicant shall commit to hire city residents for new positions created as a result of the development project. 
(b)  Applicant shall estimate the number of anticipated new hires, skills required and the timing of such new hires. 
(c)  Applicant shall provide a copy of its affirmative action/hiring statement or plan. 
(Ord. 6-14-04) 
788.05 - APPLICATION PROCEDURE. 
    All tax abatement requests shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the City of Huntington. The applicant must certify that the new investment would not occur within the City of Huntington without the tax incentive requested. Two copies of the application must be submitted simultaneously, one to the mayor and the other to the department of development and planning. 
    The application for tax abatement shall first be referred to the department of development and planning. The department of development and planning shall review the application to determine if the application conforms to and complies with the city's requirements. Each complete application shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Within 30 days of receipt of the proposed incentive package, the department of development and planning shall report its findings to the mayor and/or his designee, which shall, within 30 days, act upon the application. 
    All approvals shall be granted by the mayor and/or his designee. In the event of unusual or extraordinary circumstances, the mayor and/or his designee may alter or waive any requirements contained herein. All approvals, alterations or waivers shall be subject to city council approval by resolution. 
(Ord. 6-14-04) 
788.06 - TAX ABATEMENT AGREEMENT. 
    Any new or existing business that locates or relocates at Kinetic Park and satisfies the requirements as a qualifying business pursuant to section 788.02 of this article, shall be granted a partial exemption on their retail sales or services from the business and occupation tax set forth in this article. 
(a)  Tax credits granted under this subsection shall be granted to new or relocating businesses solely on their retail sales as follows: 
(1)  Seventy-five percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article during the first full year, or portion thereof, of the new or relocating business' operations. 
(2)  Fifty percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article during the second full year, or portion thereof, of the new or relocating business' operations. 
(3)  Twenty-five percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article during the third full year, or portion thereof, of the new or relocating business' operations. 
(4)  Twenty-five percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article during the fourth full year, or portion thereof, of the new or relocating business' operations. 
(5)  Twenty-five percent of the amount of tax computed under the provisions of this article during the fifth full year, or portion thereof, of the new or relocating business' operations. 
(6)  There shall be no further tax credits under this section for the sixth full year, or portion thereof, and for each successive year thereafter, of the new or relocating business' operations. 
(Ord. 6-14-04.) 
788.07 - ADDITIONAL TAX ABATEMENT. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 788.06 of this article, any prospective business locating within Kinetic Park who invests $10,000,000 or more in new real estate and structure, equipment and corporate property, and who has a minimum of 150 employees and increased their employment by 20% shall be entitled to a 50% reduction of the amount computed under the provisions of this article during the first full year or portion thereof, of the new or relocating business operations and for 19 successive years thereafter. 
(Ord. 6-14-04) 
788.08 - OTHER DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES. 
(a)  In addition to, or in lieu of, tax abatements, the city will consider on a case-by-case basis other financial/development incentives. Such incentives include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Waiving of building permit fees, in whole or in part. 
(2)  In-kind services such as infrastructure improvements by the city related to the development project, for example, road widening, storm drainage improvements and sidewalk construction. 
(3)  Extension of water and/or sanitary sewer lines; waiving of hookup charges. 
(4)  Direct grants to the applicant for infrastructure improvements. 
(b)  Any and all decisions to grant an incentive, pursuant to the terms of this section, shall be granted by the Mayor of the City of Huntington and/or his designee subject to approval of the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 6-14-04) 
ARTICLE 790 - TAX AND FEE APPEAL BOARDS 

790.01 - APPEAL BOARD. 
    The appeal board shall sit under the authority of section 773.08 entitled Municipal Service Fee Board and section 772.08 entitled city service fee appeal board. 
(Ord. 3-24-03) 
790.2 - PROTEST AND APPEAL. 
    Any user who feels aggrieved by any charge to his municipal service fee account, refuse service fee account or city service fee account may protest the same by filing written notice of such protest with the director of the division of finance, setting forth his objections thereto and the reasons therefor, on or before the due date of his next quarterly installment payment. The director shall review such citizen's account, render a decision on the protest and forthwith notify the user of such decision in writing within 15 days of the filing of the protest. If the user is still aggrieved, he may, within 15 days of the date of the director's decision, petition the appeal board which shall set a date and time for hearing on the protest, which hearing shall be held within 30 days from the filing of such appeal. 
    The appeal board shall hear evidence relevant to the protest and shall render its decision on the issues raised at such hearing within 20 days after the hearing, giving notice of its decision in writing to the user and to the director. The user may, within 30 days from the date of the decision of the appeal board, file a petition, duly verified, with a court of competent jurisdiction, requesting a review of the board's decision. If no such petition is filed within 30 days, the decision of the appeal board shall become final and conclusive. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the accrual during the course of the appeal process of any penalty upon the balance of any account ultimately found to be properly charged. A user's appeal shall not be deemed to be upheld if the city or board fails to meet a deadline contained herein. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
790.03 - MEMBERS. 
    The board shall consist of five members: three members chosen by the mayor and two chosen by city council. The terms of the board members shall be for a period of two years. Once a member's term is ended, the individual shall not be considered a member of the board unless reappointed and shall not be eligible to vote upon any issue before the board. Members may serve additional terms in accordance with the provisions of state law and the Charter of the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
PART NINE - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE 
CHAPTER ONE - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS 
ARTICLE 905 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Street obstructions, § 311.01. 
State Law reference- General power to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(1); special charges for street cleaning, etc., W. Va. Code, § 8-13-13; connection to state road system, W. Va. Code, § 17-4-26 et seq.; action for damages occasioned by defective streets, etc., W. Va. Code, § 17-10-17. 

905.01 - PERMITS TO PLACE BUILDING MATERIAL IN STREETS. 
    Any person desiring to place any building material in any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city for the purpose of erecting a building or repairing the same shall make an application in writing to the director of public works, setting forth what part of the street, alley or sidewalk is to be used, and for what purpose and how long. If the director finds that the application is reasonable, and that the use is proper under the circumstances, a written permit shall be given by the director to the applicant to use the street, alley or sidewalk, or adjacent thereto as set out in the written permit, in the manner and for the period therein prescribed. Such written permit shall not be of any effect or force until the applicant signs a contract agreeing to make the street, alley or sidewalk so used in as good a condition as it was before, and to erect, at the applicant's expense, barriers by day and lights and barriers by night, to prevent injuries to the public while such obstruction is in the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city, and agreeing to indemnify the city for all damages that anyone injured by reason of such use made by the applicant may recover against the city. 
    The director shall cause all such applications to be numbered and filed and a record kept of every such permit granted, numbered to agree with the application; and the contract shall be numbered to agree with the application and consent, and shall be filed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-1) 
905.02 - DUTIES OF OFFICERS SEEING BUILDING MATERIAL IN STREETS. 
    The director of public works or any police officer seeing anyone placing any building material in any street, alley or sidewalk shall immediately ascertain whether the person has the authority to do so. The person so placing building material in the street, alley or sidewalk shall show his authority for so doing to the director or the police officer when demanded. All persons without authority for so using the streets shall be stopped by the director or any police officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-2) 
905.03 - PLACING BUILDING MATERIAL SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH ONE-WAY TRAFFIC. 
    Nothing contained in these Codified Ordinances shall be construed to permit any person to place any building or other material in any street or alley of the city in such a manner as to interfere with or prevent one-way vehicular traffic. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-3) 
905.04 - REMOVAL OF DEBRIS BY BUILDING CONTRACTOR. 
    Within ten days after the roof is placed upon any building, the contractor or builder thereof shall cause the removal of all dirt, rubbish or material remaining upon any street, avenue, alley or public place caused by or belonging to any bricklayer or stonemason; and within ten days after the completion of any building, the contractor or builder shall cause the removal of all other dirt, rubbish or material caused by or belonging to any other mechanic or person who may have been engaged in the construction of such building. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-4) 
905.05 - PERMIT FOR STORING CONSTRUCTION MACHINERY ON STREET. 
    Machinery used in connection with the construction of buildings shall not be stored or placed on any street, sidewalk or parkway if there is room therefor upon the lot on which the building is being erected, or upon any adjoining lot belonging to the same owner, without a permit from the director of public works. No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with this section. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-5) 
905.06 - PLACEMENT OF GOODS AND MERCHANDISE UPON SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND ALLEYS. 
    No person shall place upon the city sidewalks, streets or alleys, any goods or merchandise for the purpose of exposing them for sale, or for the purpose of advertising or attracting the attention of the general public. 
    Provided, however, that all property owners or their lessees shall have the right to place their goods and merchandise, which shall mean all things commonly sold in retail business establishments, immediately in front of their respective businesses after complying with the provisions of this section. Provided, however, that in no case may a merchant's display occupy more than 50% in length of the total front footage of his respective business. Provided further, that no display shall operate to disrupt the free flow of pedestrian traffic; block designated sidewalks as designated by the director of public works; or cause congestion of designated fire lanes as designated by the city's fire chief. 
    All property owners or their lessees who desire to make displays of their goods and merchandise in front of their businesses shall first secure a permit from the mayor and furnish evidence of insurance coverage by submitting a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured party with a minimum of $100,000 property damage/$300,000 bodily injury; however, the city reserves the right to require greater insurance coverage depending upon the type of display offered. In no case may the mayor issue a permit until such is approved by a majority of the sidewalk display review board. There shall be no fee charged for permits to merchants displaying in front of their own businesses. 
    There shall be a sidewalk display review board consisting of a council member, a downtown merchant and a business person, all of whom shall be city residents and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of council for a term of three years. This board shall have the authority to: 
(a)  Deny or revoke permits to merchants whose proposed or current displays impede pedestrian traffic, block designated sidewalks and fire lanes or do not supply adequate insurance coverage; 
(b)  Approve permits for special events lasting no longer than five days; 
(c)  Approve permits to merchants whose displays will not be in front of their own businesses; and 
(d)  Establish written rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of this section, all of which must first be approved by council. 
    Permits shall also be issued to special events groups and to merchants whose displays will not be in front of their own businesses, provided that the board shall approve such permit and adequate insurance coverage is provided naming the city as an additional insured. There shall be no fee charged for permits to special events groups. There shall be a $50 permit fee per year for merchants whose displays will not be in front of their own businesses. 
    The city reserves the right to determine the exact location of any display permitted; and the right to determine the exact number of permits issued to special events groups. All merchants shall have the right to file written objections with the board objecting to any display within the immediate vicinity of their businesses, which objections shall thereafter be acted upon by the board. 
    Provided further, that no penalty shall be imposed upon any person in the immediate act of moving or removing merchandise or any other commodity in the way of his trade or business or for the use of his family, if the same shall not at any time be so placed as to obstruct free passage along and over any street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 2-28-84) 
905.07 - DISTURBING BARRIERS ON CLOSED STREETS. 
    When any street or alley in the city has been closed for the purpose of constructing, repairing, paving, sewering or otherwise improving it no unauthorized person shall take down or disturb any barriers that may have been erected on any such streets or alleys. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-7) 
905.08 - LANTERNS AND GUARDS FOR VAULT AND CELLAR OPENINGS. 
    The owner or occupant of any house or lot before which any vault or opening for cellar doors, areas or steps is being constructed shall fence off the pavement on the right and left, and the street in front of the construction, and, during the whole of every night while such vault or opening is not securely covered, shall cause a lighted lamp or lantern to be placed at some convenient spot, so as to cast its light upon such vault or opening. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-8) 
905.09 - KEEPING DOORS IN SIDEWALK CLOSED. 
    Doors in sidewalks shall not remain open except when in actual use. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-9) 
905.10 - LIGHT OR GUARD AT OPEN CELLAR DOOR DURING THE NIGHT. 
    No person occupying or using any cellar the door of which is in any street, alley, walk or public square shall allow such door to remain open at any time from twilight in the evening until daylight in the morning without having a light at such door unless the same is properly guarded by a railing. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-10) 
905.11 - OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in these Codified Ordinances or other city ordinances, no person shall encumber or obstruct a free passage along any sidewalk in the city by placing any object thereon or by moving snow or ice onto the right-of-way so as to obstruct sidewalks or any ramps leading from the roadway to sidewalks. This provision does not alter any obligation of a property owner with respect to the clearing and removal of snow and ice from sidewalks adjacent to his or her property existing under common law, any ordinance or any state statute. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsection (a) above, the following will not be considered to be violations of this ordinance: 
(1)  The placement of freight or other objects on sidewalks with the intention of immediate loading or unloading; 
(2)  The placement of tables, chairs and related objects for the purpose of outdoor dining when the property owner has obtained the necessary permit from the City of Huntington; 
(3)  The placement of obstructions for legitimate emergency purposes. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions set forth herein shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 for the first offense and not more than $500 for the second and subsequent offenses. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-11; Ord. of 4-13-15(1) ) 
905.12 - SIGNS OBSTRUCTING STREET INTERSECTIONS. 
    No portable sign, parasite sign or other device of such a nature as to obstruct vision may be located within a 50-foot triangular space at any street intersection; it being understood that such triangular space shall be determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured 50 feet along each of the projected street curblines, or approximation thereof, equidistant from the projected and intersecting curblines at the street corner; it being further understood that this section shall not include alley intersections. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-11.1) 
905.13 - OBSTRUCTING GUTTERS. 
    No person shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed in any way whatever the gutters of any street or public alley so as to prevent the free passage of water along the same. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-12) 
905.14 - OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE DITCHES. 
    No person shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed, in any way whatsoever, the drainage ditches of any street, avenue, road or alley or other public place so as to prevent the free passage of water along the same. When it is found that any such drainage ditch is obstructed so as to interfere with the drainage of water, then the obstruction shall be immediately removed or altered as the case may be by the person obstructing the same; and unless the same is so removed or altered as the case may require, then the city shall remove or alter the same and the cost thereof shall be charged to the owner abutting thereon. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-13) 
905.15 - WATER, GAS AND SEWER CONNECTIONS WHEN STREET IS TO BE PAVED. 
    When any street, alley or public place of the city is about to be improved by paving, macadamizing or by any other method, the director of public works shall give ten days' notice thereof to the owners or the agents of the owners of any lots or pieces of ground on which buildings have been erected on the line of such street, alley or public place, or adjacent thereto, directing them to make connection with the water and gas mains and public sewers, if any exist and underlie the street, avenue, alley or public place, for the purpose of conducting water or gas into the buildings or drawing the wastewater therefrom. Such connections shall be made and completed within 20 days after the giving of the notice. Upon the failure of the owner to comply with such notice, the city shall do the work and the expense thereof shall be charged to such owner. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-14) 
905.16 - REPAIR OF RAILROAD TRACKS AND ADJACENT PAVING. 
    Railroad companies shall make such repairs to their tracks which cross or are located in public ways and the paving adjacent thereto as may be required by the director of public works, within 30 days of receipt of notice from the director. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-15) 
905.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 907 - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Street obstructions, § 311.01; loads dropping or leaking, § 347.04; disturbing barriers, § 905.07. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate street excavations, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(2). 

907.01 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR. 
    In order to expedite the opening and closing of public ways and to protect the traveling public from inconvenience or injury, the mayor is authorized to promulgate such rules, regulations and orders on behalf of the city relating to the opening of the public right-of-way, use of the public way during the duration of such opening and closing of openings in the public right-of-way. Such rules and regulations without limitation on the generality thereof shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this article. 
(Ord. 6-28-82) 
907.02 - PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS. 
    No person shall open the surface of any street, alley or way of the city or shall make an excavation so near the line of any street, alley or sidewalk so as to endanger public travel, unless a permit is obtained for that purpose in the manner described in this article; provided, that it shall not be necessary for the corporate authorities of the city to obtain a permit or for any railway company to obtain a permit for the purpose of repairing the roadbeds of its railway or the pavements between its tracks and one foot outside thereof, where such railway company shall repair and keep in repair that portion of the highway. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-16) 
907.03 - PERMIT APPLICATION. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by section 907.02 shall file with the director of public works a written application for each and every opening, which application shall be signed by the person desiring such permit. Such application shall set forth the purpose for which such opening or excavation is to be made, the extent, size, and location of the same, the dates during which such opening or excavation is to be permitted and shall provide that the applicant will faithfully comply with each and every provision contained in this article. 
(b)  Such application shall also specify the name of the owner of the property served or to be served by the facility located in the street opening. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall in no event apply to the repair of a sidewalk by any adjoining property owner. The repair, opening or excavation of any public sidewalk shall be governed by the provisions of article 909. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-17; Ord. 6-13-83) 
907.04 - PERMIT FEES. 
    The following permit fees are to be paid for the issuance of a street opening permit: $10 and $0.25 per square foot of opening. 
(Ord. 6-28-82) 
907.05 - BOND PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE. 
    No permit required by section 907.02 shall be granted until the applicant therefor shall have executed and delivered to the city a bond in the amount hereinafter fixed, with good surety, which surety shall be an approved surety or indemnity company licensed to do business in the city. The amount of such bond shall be $1,000 for each opening or $5,000 for an indefinite number of openings for a 12-month period. The bond shall be given upon the condition that the principal will indemnify and save harmless the city from any loss, damages or expenses whatsoever, in any manner occasioned by or arising from the opening of any street, or way, or the work done in consequence thereof, or the manner of doing such work, and the bond shall remain in force for a period of 12 months after the permanent resurfacing of each opening. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-19) 
907.06 - PAYMENT OF MONEY DUE CITY PREREQUISITE TO PERMIT ISSUANCE. 
    No permit required by section 907.02 shall be granted to any applicant therefor unless such applicant pays to the city all money then due to the city from such applicant for prior openings or excavations made or for any loss, damage or expense in any manner occasioned by or arising from the opening or excavations under prior permits issued to such applicant. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-20) 
907.07 - PERMIT ISSUANCE. 
    A permit required by section 907.02 shall be issued by the director of public works when the person applying for such permit shall have complied with sections 907.03 to 907.06. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-21) 
907.08 - SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION OF WORK; STREET REPAIR. 
    All work done under the authority of any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be supervised and inspected by the director of public works. The director shall have the right to inspect all work done under any permit issued pursuant to this article. All questions arising under any of the provisions of this article as to the amount of work reasonably required to be done to insure a permanent repair shall be determined by the director, his agents or employees, and such work shall at all times be under his supervision, inspection and direction. 
    In the event the opening is not closed to the satisfaction of the director, the city may replace the surface in a satisfactory manner and charge the costs to the person who obtained the permit. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-22) 
907.09 - DUTIES OF OFFICER OBSERVING EXCAVATING IN OR NEAR STREETS. 
    The director of public works or any police officer seeing anyone making any excavation in the street, alley or sidewalk, or so near thereto as to endanger the traveling public, shall immediately ascertain whether the person has the authority to do so. The person so making an excavation in or near the street, alley or sidewalk shall show his authority for so doing to the director or the police officer when demanded. All persons without authority for so excavating shall be stopped by the policeman or the director. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-23) 
907.10 - TUNNELS. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to permit the issuing of a permit for the making of a tunnel under any street, alley or way in the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-24) 
907.11 - INTERFERENCE WITH ONE-WAY TRAFFIC. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit any person to excavate within any street or alley in the city in such a manner and to such an extent as to interfere with or prevent one-way vehicular traffic at all times. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-25) 
907.12 - ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE. 
    The director of public works shall see that all the provisions of this article are strictly enforced, and shall prosecute every person violating any of the provisions of this article and shall bring suit to restrain any person from opening the surface of any street or way of the city in violation of the provisions of this article, as well as any person making an excavation so near the line of any street, alley or sidewalk as to endanger public travel. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-26) 
907.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalties. 
ARTICLE 909 - CURB TO PROPERTY LINE IMPROVEMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- General powers relative to curbs, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(1) et seq.; powers generally, W. Va. Code § 8-12-5(1) et seq.; low cost improvements, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-17; street assessment, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-18. 

909.01 - SIDEWALK REPAIRS; PERMIT; APPLICATION; FEE. 
(a)  No person shall make a repair, opening or excavation to any public sidewalk for any purpose without first making application to the director of public works for a sidewalk repair permit. Such application shall specify the exact location of the proposed repair and the adjoining property owners to be served by such repair. 
    Fees for sidewalk repair permits shall be paid in the amount specified in section 909.02, and in accordance with the procedure established in section 909.02. 
(b)  All repairs or additions to any sidewalk within the City of Huntington shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Failure to comply with the ADA shall be viewed as a criminal act by the owner, lessor and/or contractor and shall be cited and subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(c)  No person shall destroy, deface, pave over, use for parking any sidewalk within the City of Huntington. Violators shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(d)  No city official or employee shall approve any work on any sidewalk that is not in compliance with section 909.01(a), (b) and (c), and if such approval is given it shall constitute malfeasance in office. The city official or employee approving such work may be removed from office by council and shall be personally subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.02 - SIDEWALK REPAIR APPLICATION FEE. 
    The following permit fee is to be paid for the issuance of a permit required by the provisions of this article: 
Sidewalk repair permit: $25. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.03 - LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS. 
    All sidewalks in the city shall be located as required by the director of public works and constructed in accordance with his specifications; provided, that no sidewalk shall be constructed of asphaltic concrete. No sidewalk shall be constructed except upon notice to the director. The director shall set stakes and give grades for all sidewalks. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.04 - PAVING BETWEEN CURB LINE AND PROPERTY LINE WHEN CURB CUT IS MADE. 
    All persons who have obtained permits for the purpose of making curb cuts shall pave with concrete between the portion of the curbing removed and the property line adjacent thereto. Such paving shall be made in such manner and in accordance with specifications approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.05 - FUNDING CURBS AND SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  The director of public works and the director of development and planning shall aid residents to secure a method of funding curb and sidewalk repairs using federal and state funding sources, when available. 
(b)  When other outside funding is not available, the mayor, upon recommendation of the director of public works shall provide a resolution to council in compliance with W. Va. Code, § 8-18. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.06 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.07 - RESOLUTIONS REQUIRING PLANTING AND CARE OF SHADE TREES. 
    Council may, by resolution, require the owners or occupiers of the land, lots or parts of lots abutting or facing upon any street or alley in the city, to plant, replant and care for shade trees along such street or alley, at such points, and in such manner, as council may determine by such resolution and may require the owners or occupiers of such land, lots or parts of lots facing or abutting upon such streets or alleys to keep the sidewalks clean and in good repair, to grade the plot of ground on either side of the sidewalk between the street curb and the property otherwise in good condition and repair, and may require such owners or occupiers of the land, lots or parts of lots abutting or fronting upon such streets or alleys, to keep the same free from foregoing requirements served, as provided by this article, shall be served upon the owners or occupiers of such land, lots or parts of lots. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.08 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.09 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.10 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.11 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.12 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.13 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.14 - SUPERVISION OF WORK DONE BY CITY OR BY CONTRACTOR. 
    All work done under section 909.01 whether done by the city directly or through contractors, shall be under the supervision of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.15 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- This section is saved for future use. 
909.16 - DUTY OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER/OCCUPIER/LESSEE. 
    It shall be the duty, responsibility and obligation of the owner, occupier and/or lessee of property to maintain, repair and keep all adjacent sidewalks in good order and free and clear of any and all encumbrances and obstructions, to include snow, ice and leaves. Any property owner, occupier and/or lessee who fails to keep any such sidewalk in repair shall be liable to reimburse the city for any and all losses it may sustain, or any damages, costs or expenses that may be imposed on or incurred by the city by reason of the failure to perform this duty and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.20 - ADOPTION OF WEST VIRGINIA CODE 8-18. 
    The Municipality of the City of Huntington adopts W. Va. Code, § 8-18 in its entirety as to the authority, funding and assessment of costs to improve streets and sidewalks. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.21 - PER SAY DISREPAIR. 
    Any sidewalk which has a two-inch deviation in height at any point shall be in disrepair and must be repaired by the abutting property owner or the director of public works shall take action in accordance with article 909, city ordinances and W. Va. Code, § 8-18 causing the repair and assessing cost to the abutting property owner. 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
909.99 - PENALTY. 
    If any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to put down a suitable curb of concrete or other material along and for the footways and sidewalks of any of the avenues, streets, roads or alleys of the city, or to lay, relay or repair any sidewalks and gutters in, on or along any of such streets or alleys, or to plant, replant and care for shade trees along any of such streets or alleys at the points and in the manner as council may have determined, or shall fail to keep such sidewalks clean and in good repair, or to grade the plot of ground on either side of such sidewalks between the street curb and property line, and to keep the same sodded with grass and free from weeds and obstructions and otherwise in good condition and repair, or keep any land, lots, or parts of lots abutting or fronting upon such streets or alleys of the city free from weeds and other vegetation which may be unsightly or noxious, within 20 days after service of any notice to do so, as provided for in sections 909.05 to 909.07, such person shall be punished and subject to fine of not more than $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail 
(Ord. 11-13-01) 
ARTICLE 911 - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

911.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
    Every owner or lessee of a house or building on any street or avenue within the city shall place the proper number of such house or building in a conspicuous place in the front of the house or building. The figures of such numbers shall be not less than three inches in length and shall be painted or shall be made of metal, porcelain or other durable material. The numbers shall be maintained upon such house or building at all times and no number other than the one assigned thereto shall be placed or permitted to remain upon any such house or building. All broken or defective figures shall be promptly replaced or restored to their proper condition so that they may at all times be distinctly read. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-41) 
911.02 - ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS; DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. 
    The director of public works shall assign the proper numbers to each lot, house or building within the city, in accordance with the provisions of this article, and with the general plan or map of block numbers now on file in the office of the director, and the director shall from time to time cause detailed maps or other suitable records of houses, buildings or lot numbers to be placed and kept on file in his office. The director shall require such numbers to be affixed as provided by this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 31-42) 
911.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 913 - FRANCHISES AND SPECIAL PRIVILEGE PERMITS[4] 
DEFINITIONS 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Curb cuts, § 909.04. 
State Law reference- Granting of franchises, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-31. 

913.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following terms, when used in any of the sections of this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
(a)  "Area charge" means a charge based on the square feet area of the city property used. 
(b)  "Building encroachment" means the occupancy of a public street, sidewalk, alley, way or other public place on, under or above the street surface by a construction constituting a part of a building, such as a stairway, vault, loading platform, balcony, bay window, marquee or similar construction. 
(c)  "Council" means the council of the city. 
(d)  "Franchise" means an exclusive or nonexclusive right granted by the city for the use of any part of a street, sidewalk, alley, way or other public place within the city for the rendering of a public service. 
(e)  "Permittee" means a person to whom is granted a special privilege. Where the special privilege granted is directly appurtenant to the abutting real estate, "permittee" means the owner of such real estate or the lessee thereof whose lease term extends in time beyond the term of the special privilege. 
(f)  "Privileged premises" means the lot or parcel of real estate to which a special privilege is appurtenant. 
(g)  "Public utility" means a person engaged in any business for the rendering of a public service. 
(h)  "Special privilege" means a private use, other than for the rendering of a public service, of any part of a street, sidewalk, alley, way or other public place within the city separate and distinct from the general public use thereof. 
(i)  "Vault" means any open space below the surface of a street, sidewalk, alley, way or other public place that is covered over and used or available for use, for private purposes. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-17) 
FRANCHISES 
913.02 - APPLICATIONS. 
    Application for franchises under this article shall be made in the manner prescribed by the laws of the state relating thereto, including the publication of notice, public hearing and other preliminaries required by such laws. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-1) 
913.03 - GRANTING. 
    Following the public hearing on an application for a franchise, council shall grant the franchise upon such conditions and upon payment of such annual fees as to it seem proper and to which the applicant shall agree, or shall deny such application, no later than the next regular meeting of council unless consideration thereon is deferred by motion of council to a subsequent regular or special meeting. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-2) 
SPECIAL PRIVILEGE PERMITS 
913.04 - HOW APPLICATIONS TO BE MADE. 
    Application for special privilege permits under this article shall be made by the prospective permittee in the manner prescribed by regulations promulgated by the mayor and approved by resolution of council. Copies of such regulations, as amended from time to time, shall be filed in the city clerk's office and copies shall be available to interested parties at all reasonable times. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-3) 
913.05 - INVESTIGATION AND REPORT OF APPLICATIONS. 
    All applications for special privilege permits shall be referred to the director of public works for investigation and report and to determine the annual fee payable if the special privilege should be granted. The application, with the recommendation of the director shall be referred to the mayor for authorizing or refusing the special privilege permit if it is in compliance with the then existing requirements. If the special privilege applied for is not in compliance with the then existing requirements, the mayor shall refer the application, together with his recommendation thereon, to council for authorizing or refusing the special privilege. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-4) 
913.06 - APPEALS FROM ADVERSE RULINGS. 
    Any applicant for a special privilege permit may appeal to council from an adverse ruling by the mayor. Any applicant for a franchise or special privilege permit may proceed by certiorari to the Circuit Court of Cabell County from an adverse ruling by council. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-5) 
913.07 - PERMITS TO PROVIDE FOR PAYMENT OF ANNUAL FEE. 
    Every permit granting and conveying any special privilege in, under and over any street, sidewalk, alley, way or other public place within the city shall provide for the payment of an annual fee as set forth in this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-6) 
913.08 - PERMIT FEES TO BE IN ADDITION TO OTHER FEES. 
    All fees, established by this article for the enjoyment of special privileges by permits granted pursuant to the provisions hereof, shall be separate from and in addition to all other fees required by law. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-7) 
913.09 - SCHEDULE OF FEES. 
    The annual fees for special privileges granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  Vaults: Area charge of $0.02 per square foot. Minimum fee: $10. 
(b)  Covered street or sidewalk openings ten square feet or less in area: $10 for ten square feet or less, $15 for more than ten square feet. 
(c)  Stair or steps leading up or down from sidewalk level excluding covered cellar steps classified under subsection (b) hereof: Area charge of $0.15 per square foot. 
(d)  Open areaways, light wells and similar construction: Area charge of $0.05 per square foot. Minimum fee: $10. 
(e)  Balconies: $10 each for one floor, plus $5 for each additional floor. 
(f)  Bays: $10 each for one floor, plus $5 for each additional floor. 
(g)  Marquees: Area charge of $0.05 per square foot. Minimum fee: $10. 
(h)  Fire escapes: $1 each for first floor, $0.50 for each additional floor. Minimum fee: $5. 
(i)  Projecting show windows or showcases: Area charge of $0.15 per square foot. Minimum fee: $25. 
(j)  Curb cuts: The fee for all curb cuts used for access to commercial, industrial and apartment properties, and for all access other than one- and two-family residences, shall be an annual franchise fee charged as follows: First ten feet, no charge except the minimum as prescribed below. 
Over ten feet, $0.75 per foot of curb. Minimum fee: $5. 
The measure of the curb cut shall be the beginning of the approach radius; that is, at the point at which the curb is disturbed; provided, that in the event that two or more curb cuts are granted for the benefit or use of the same property abutting on more than one street, the first ten feet of such curb cut on each street shall be free. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to private driveways providing access to single or double family residences involving curb cuts of not more than 20 feet in width. 
(k)  Loading platforms: Area charge of $0.15 per square foot of space occupied, including steps and ramps. Minimum fee: $25. 
(l)  Sidewalk loading space: A franchise for sidewalk space to be regularly used by vehicles for loading and unloading shall provide for the payment of such license fee as may be fixed by council after consideration of all facts involved. No sidewalk space shall be regularly used by vehicles for loading or unloading without a franchise therefor. 
(m)  Street scales: $10 each. 
(n)  Poles used to carry or support wires, etc: $1 each. 
(o)  Tunnels, including conduits or pipes more than two feet in diameter: $0.10 per cubic foot in the central business zone, $0.05 per cubic foot elsewhere. Minimum fee: $10. 
(p)  Underground pipelines or conduits two feet in diameter or less: $0.05 per running foot in the central business zone, $0.02 per running foot elsewhere. Minimum fee: $10. 
(q)  Driven wells for water supply purposes: $25 for the first year or part thereof and $10 for each year thereafter. 
(r)  Railroad switch tracks: $0.10 per lineal foot. No railroad switch tracks shall hereafter be constructed, maintained, operated or used without a franchise therefor. Minimum fee: $10. 
(s)  Overhead pipe, conduits, beams and other overhead construction: $0.10 per lineal foot for each overhead pipe, conduit, beam or other overhead construction. Minimum fee: $10. 
(t)  Planters: Area rate of $0.15 per square foot. Minimum fee: $10. 
    Where no other minimum fee is specified for a franchise, a minimum fee of $10 shall be charged. 
    Any special privilege not specifically covered by the foregoing provisions of this section shall be classified by the director of public works according to the classification it most resembles and shall be subject to a special privilege fee accordingly. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-8) 
913.10 - WHEN FEE IS PAYABLE; PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY. 
    All initial fees for special privileges shall be payable on or before the date the permit is effective. Thereafter, those desiring to renew such privilege whose permit was granted between January 1 and June 30 shall make each yearly fee, and such is due on or before April 1. Permits granted between July 1 and December 31 shall make each yearly fee, and such is due on or before October 1. Permits initially granted between April through June or October through December shall be given credit for such period of time remaining upon their initial permit when applying for renewal. Additionally, permits initially granted between January through March or July through September will be required to pay an extra fee to compensate for the period of time which exceeds their anniversary date upon applying for renewal. 
    Failure to pay the required permit fee within 60 days after the date on which such fee is due and payable shall subject the permittee to a penalty charge of 10% of the annual fee for each month or fraction of a month that such fee is delinquent. 
(Ord. 12-13-82) 
913.11 - TERM. 
    No special privilege permit shall be granted for a term of more than ten years; except, that permits granted under the provisions of section 913.09(l), (r) and (s) may be granted for such term as council, in its discretion, may determine. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-10) 
913.12 - INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY; LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED. 
    It shall be a condition to the use or enjoyment of any special privilege which is granted pursuant to the provisions of this article that the permittee shall save and hold the city harmless from any and all liability, claims or expenses of any kind, caused by or growing out of the construction maintenance, operation, relocation, discontinuance or abandonment of such special privilege. 
    Whenever the city grants or renews a permit for a special privilege over, along, above or below a street, sidewalk, alley, way or other public place within the city, the permittee shall deposit with the city a policy of insurance conditioned to indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all liability, claims or expenses of any kind, by reason of injury to any person or property caused by or growing out of the construction, maintenance, operation, relocation, discontinuance or abandonment of such special privilege. The minimum liability of such policy of insurance shall be $100,000 for injury to one person, $300,000 per occurrence and $25,000 for damage to property. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-11) 
913.13 - RIGHTS EXTEND TO PERMITTEE; ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER. 
    The special privilege granted by any permit issued under the provisions of this article shall extend only to the permittee in whose name such permit is granted; however, all permits shall be subject to transfer and assignment in the discretion of the mayor upon application by the permittee or the person to whom he proposes to assign or transfer the permit. When any assignment or transfer has been approved by the mayor, the assignee or transferee shall succeed to all rights and obligations of the original permittee. There shall be no charge for assignments or transfers authorized pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-12) 
913.14 - DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT. 
    Any permittee may at any time discontinue any special privilege by giving at least 30 days' notice in writing to the mayor and by providing for all necessary street and sidewalk restorations and other adjustments, subject to the supervision and approval of the director of public works. When all necessary steps as to discontinuance or abandonment have been completed, the director shall report such fact to council, who shall instruct the director of the division of finance to refund to the permittee 50% of the unused portion of the permit fee paid; provided, that no refund shall be paid for a fraction of a month. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-13) 
913.15 - USE OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGE WITHOUT PERMIT; PENALTY. 
    No person shall exercise a special privilege, as defined in this article, unless and until such use is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
    When a special privilege is used or exercised without obtaining a permit or renewal of an expired permit, the person unlawfully exercising such special privilege shall be required to pay twice the amount of the fees specified for the legal exercise of such privilege, but the payment of such double fees shall not entitle the person to exercise the special privilege and shall not relieve the person from fully complying with the requirements of this article and from any other penalties prescribed in these Codified Ordinances. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-14) 
913.16 - NOTICE TO PERSONS EXERCISING SPECIAL PRIVILEGES WITHOUT PERMITS. 
    The mayor shall cause notice to be sent to all persons exercising special privileges who do not have permits therefor, advising them of the necessity of applying for permits or renewal thereof as a condition to continuing such special privileges. The failure of any user to receive such notice shall not excuse noncompliance with the terms of this article or otherwise confer any right on such user. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-15) 
913.17 - SERVICE OF NOTICE. 
    All notices required by this article to be given by the city shall be served upon the permittee or his agent in charge of the privileged premises, and all notices to be given by the permittee shall be served upon the mayor, in any one or more of the following ways: 
(a)  By personal service as provided by law for service of legal process. 
(b)  By registered letter addressed to the last-known place of business or residence of the person to be served. 
(c)  By notice published once a week for two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-16) 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
913.18 - AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF MAYOR. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the mayor shall have full control of the supervision, inspection and enforcement of franchises and special privilege permits authorized and granted pursuant to the provisions of this article, and when the public safety or welfare requires the temporary or permanent discontinuance or modification of a revocable franchise or special privilege permit, he shall take all action necessary for the public safety and welfare. If action by council is required, the mayor shall advise council and instruct the city attorney to prepare the necessary legislation. The mayor shall promulgate and submit to council for approval reasonable rules and regulations to govern the carrying out of the provisions of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-18) 
913.19 - STREET AND SIDEWALK RESTORATION; OTHER ADJUSTMENTS. 
    All street and sidewalk restoration and other adjustments made necessary by the construction, maintenance, operation, relocation, discontinuance or abandonment of any franchise or special privilege shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of existing ordinances, by the franchise holder or permittee at whose instance the adjustment is made or, at the option of the mayor, by the city, but at the expense of the franchise holder or permittee for whom such adjustment is made. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-19) 
913.20 - CHANGES IN CONSTRUCTION OR LOCATION REQUIRED BY CHANGES IN STREETS OR UTILITY LINES. 
    A franchise holder or permittee may be required at any time by the mayor to make any necessary change in the construction or location of a franchise or special privilege which may be required in connection with any change of street by the city, or in connection with the authorized location or change of location of public utility service lines, pipes, poles or other equipment. Any change in construction or location required by the city shall be paid for by the city, and any change in construction or location required by a public utility shall be paid for by the public utility for whose benefit such change is required. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-20) 
913.21 - ENCROACHMENTS REGULATED BY BUILDING CODE. 
    Encroachments by building structures on public streets, sidewalks, alleys, ways and other public property shall continue to be regulated in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code and other applicable provisions of law. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-21) 
913.22 - EFFECT OF ARTICLE ON EXISTING FRANCHISES OR PERMITS. 
    The provisions of this article shall not in any way alter, amend or change the provisions of existing franchises or special privilege permits heretofore designated as franchises. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-22) 
913.23 - CERTAIN PUBLIC UTILITIES EXEMPTED. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any public utility whose rates are regulated by the Public Service Commission of the state and who has heretofore been, or may hereafter be, granted by separate ordinance a franchise for a period in excess of ten years under which there is a stipulated annual or monthly franchise fee. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-23) 
913.24 - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; FLASHING SPOTLIGHT SIGNS PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation within the city limits shall use or utilize any city-owned property or city right-of-way, or any state-owned property or state right-of-way located within the city limits, in any manner to advertise or otherwise conduct any private business, or display any insignia or signs relating thereto, except to the extent that such use is authorized under applicable city ordinances and provided that the requirements of such city ordinances are met. 
(b)  No franchise shall be granted or issued to any person, firm or corporation which shall in any way authorize any signs of the flashing spotlight type, however mounted, to be located between the sidewalk and curb, regardless of its size and shape, and any person, firm or corporation so doing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the fine and penalties prescribed by section 101.99. 
(1964 Code Sec. 15-24; Ord. 9-26-94) 
913.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 915 - TREES AND SHRUBS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Shade trees, § 909.07. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(29). 

915.01 - PERMIT FOR PLANTING IN PUBLIC PLACE. 
    No person shall plant or set out any tree, shrub or vine, or cause, authorize or procure any person to plant or set out any tree, shrub or vine in or upon any part of any public street or public place, without first obtaining from the director of public works a written permit to do so and without complying in all respects with such conditions as are set forth in such written permit. 
    All applications for the permits required by the provisions of this section shall be made on blanks furnished by the city and shall describe the work to be done and shall state the variety, size and exact location of each tree, shrub or vine. After the receipt of such an application, the director shall investigate the locality where the tree, shrub or vine is to be placed and shall take into consideration, in considering the application, the normal growth and development of such tree, shrub or vine. Each permit issued by the director shall specify the location, variety and size of each tree, shrub or vine and method of planting, and shall be good only for the period stated therein. There shall be no charge for such permits, but before any permit is issued for planting more than ten trees, shrubs or vines, the director may request from the applicant a detailed declaration of intentions, either in the form of a planting plan or a written statement containing such information as the director may require. 
(1964 Code Sec. 36-1) 
915.02 - TRIMMING. 
    Trees, vines, bushes, shrubbery or flowers standing in or upon any public street or public place, or on any lot or land adjacent to any public street or public place, and having branches, limbs, trunks or other parts projecting into the public street or place shall, under the supervision of the director of public works, be kept trimmed by the owner or occupant of the adjoining property so as not to interfere with the free and safe passage along such public way by pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(1964 Code Sec. 36-2) 
915.03 - PLANTING IN PUBLIC PLACES. 
    The following regulations are hereby established for the planting of trees, shrubs or vines in or upon the public streets and public places of the city: 
(a)  No tree shall be planted at the intersection of two or more streets or within 20 feet of such intersection. 
(b)  No tree, shrub or vine shall be planted where the clear space between the curb and the sidewalk is less than three feet. 
(c)  No tree, shrub or vine shall be planted nearer than two feet from the curb line or outer line of the sidewalk. 
(1964 Code Sec. 36-3) 
915.04 - POWER OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO TRIM OR REMOVE. 
    The director of public works shall have the right to trim or remove such trees and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, lands and public grounds as may be necessary to insure safety to pedestrians and vehicular traffic and he, under the power granted by this section, may remove, cause or order to be removed any tree, shrub or part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its location, may be hazardous to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. The director shall have the power to enter upon any private grounds for the purpose of trimming or removing trees and shrubbery in order to prevent danger therefrom to person or property, in the event the owner or occupant of such premises does not comply with the orders of the director relative to the trimming or removal of trees or shrubbery which, in his opinion, are hazardous to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(1964 Code Sec. 36-4) 
915.05 - INJURING SHADE TREES. 
    No person shall cut, saw, tear or break down any ornamental or shade trees, along the sidewalk or in any other public place in the city, or injure the same in any manner. 
(1964 Code Sec. 36-5) 
915.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 917 - URBAN FORESTRY REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(29). 

917.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. 
(a)  "Municipality" means the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia. 
(b)  "Urban forestry advisory committee" means the body which advises the city on matters affecting the Urban Forest. 
(c)  "Urban forester" means the person designated within the department of public works who administers the provisions of this article under the supervision and direction of the mayor. The urban forester shall have experience in urban forestry. 
(d)  "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(e)  "Street" or "highway" means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and extending from property line to property line. 
(f)  "Park" includes all public parks, the ownership and control of which are vested in the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia. 
(g)  "Public places" includes all grounds owned by the City of Huntington, the County of Cabell, the County of Wayne and the State of West Virginia, situated within the City of Huntington. 
(h)  "Tree or street tree" includes any tree or other plant in a public place as indicated by subsequent provisions of this article. 
(i)  "Public trees" are all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street or any public right-of-way or in any other public areas. 
(j)  "Principal thoroughfare" means any public street upon which trucks are not prohibited. 
(k)  "Property owner" means the person(s) owning designated property as shown by the county assessor's plat of Cabell or Wayne County, as the case may be. 
(l)  "Remove" means the cutting down or damaging, whether by deliberate or negligent act or omission, or any act which causes the tree to die within three years. 
(m)  "Tree" means: 
(1)  Any self-supporting woody plant which has a well defined stem with a diameter of at least four inches at 4.5 feet from the ground; 
(2)  Any conspicuously flowering woody plant as designated by the urban forester which has a well defined stem at least two inches diameter at 4.5 feet from the ground; or 
(3)  Any small seedling or sapling planted or protected specifically to become a large tree as described in subsections (m)(1) or (2) above. 
(n)  "Urban forest" means trees located on city-owned or controlled property. 
(o)  "Urban forest regulations" means regulations promulgated by the mayor or enacted in ordinance form by council and regulating or dealing with the urban forest. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.02 - URBAN ADVISORY FORESTRY COMMITTEE. 
    There is hereby created an urban forestry advisory committee consisting of seven members. One of these members shall be the president of the Huntington Council of Garden Clubs. One member shall be appointed by the president of Marshall University. One member shall be appointed by the Greater Huntington Parks and Recreation District and one member shall be the Cabell County Extension Service Agent. Two members shall be appointed by the mayor and one member shall be appointed by council. All such members shall be appointed for three-year terms, except that the initial appointments shall as follows: 
Years Huntington Council of Garden Clubs 1 President of Marshall University 2 Greater Huntington Parks and Recreation Board 2 Cabell County Extension Agent 3 Mayor's representatives 3 Council's representative 3  
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.03 - DUTIES OF THE URBAN FORESTER. 
    The urban forester shall assist in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and for recommending new or modified rules and regulations governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning and bracing of public trees, emergency procedures, stump removal and sale/disposal of wood products on the streets or other public sites, and shall oversee the planting, maintenance and removal of trees growing now or hereafter planted in any public area of the city. The urban forester shall work at the direction of, and report to the mayor. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.04 - AUTHORITY OF THE URBAN FORESTER. 
    The urban forester shall: 
(a)  Supervise or inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Coordinate the formulation of a Master Urban Tree Plan, in cooperation with the urban forestry advisory committee, the mayor and council. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.05 - PERMITS REQUIRED. 
(a)  No person shall commence or proceed with any operation involving a public tree without first obtaining a permit from the city. Activities covered by this section include, but are not necessarily limited to, planting, spraying, preserving, pruning, removing, cutting above ground or otherwise disturbing any street or municipally-owned property. 
(b)  Application for a permit shall be made in the form prescribed by the city by: 
(1)  The public utility company or its authorized agent, if the work is to be done by a public utility company pursuant to its regular operations; and 
(2)  The abutting property owner, or such owner's agent, if the work is to be performed within a street on behalf of the abutting property owner. 
(c)  Application for permits shall be made at the public works office not less than 48 hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
(d)  The director of public works shall cause the permit to be issued if, in the judgment of the urban forester, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein described. Any permit may be revoked if its terms are violated. The city may charge a fee to cover the cost of printing and processing the permits referred to in this section. 
    Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the department of public works for inspection by the urban forester. 
(e)  Planting: 
(1)  Application data: The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting, and such other information as is reasonably necessary for a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(2)  Improper planting: Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this section, the city shall remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to and paid by the owner responsible for the improper planting of such tree. 
(f)  Maintenance. Application data: The application required herein shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and such other information as shall be reasonably necessary for a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(g)  Removal, replanting and replacement: 
(1)  Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, whenever possible, the city shall replant such trees or replace them. Provided that when conditions prevent planting between the curb and the sidewalk, any equivalent number of trees of the same size and species as provided for in the arboricultural specifications may be planted in an attractive manner on the adjoining property with the consent of the adjoining property owner. 
(2)  No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the city right-of-way for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the city, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural specifications. Such replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the city. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees so removed and replaced. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.06 - OBSTRUCTION-TREES PRUNED. 
    Any person or persons owning or occupying real property abutting on any street upon whose property there may be trees, shall prune such trees in such a manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs or obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection. Public utilities shall have the right to properly trim and prune trees interfering with utilities that extend services and/or construct lines for the benefit of the general public. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet over sidewalks, and 14 feet over all streets. 
(a)  Notice to prune. Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as provided above, the city shall order such person or persons, within 45 days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees, except that, in the case of an emergency situation, the city shall order such person or persons, within five days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees. 
(b)  Order required. The order required herein shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified mail. 
(c)  Failure to comply. When a person to whom a lawful order, as provided above, is directed fails to comply with the terms thereof within the specified time, the city shall prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to, and paid by, the abutting property owner to whom such order was issued. 
(Ord. 9-14-92) 
917.07 - ORDERS. 
    Any tree or shrub located on private or public property which obstructs a street or sidewalk, or which suffers from a communicable disease or insect infestation, as determined by the city, which threatens the public welfare or the health of public trees, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
    When such a public nuisance exists as to a tree or shrub located on private property, the city may cause a notice to be mailed by certified mail to the owner of the property on which the tree or shrub is located specifying what corrective work is necessary and directing the owner to perform such corrective work to eliminate the nuisance. 
    Should any ordered correction not be made within 45 days of the date such notice is received, the city shall cause such tree to be pruned, treated or removed as necessary to eliminate the public nuisance. All expenses involved in such work shall be recorded by the city and collected from the owner of the property on which the tree or shrub is located. Payments for noncompliance with such orders shall be made to the finance department. 
    The city may revoke for cause any permit previously approved and no refund of the permit fee shall be made. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.08 - ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the city, no person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any public tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any trees, allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees, to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.09 - APPEALS. 
(a)  Any person affected by an order, grant or denial of a permit, or other decision of the city when such decision is based upon the provisions of this article, may appeal such order, grant, denial or revocation of a permit, or other decision to the urban forestry appeals committee. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the urban forester within 15 days of the date of notification of the ruling. 
(c)  Unless continued at the request of the applicant, any appeal shall be heard and decided by the urban forestry appeals committee. Action by the city shall be stayed until the decision is rendered and the applicant notified. 
(d)  The urban forestry appeals committee may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse, affirm or modify wholly or partly the order, grant, denial or revocation of any permit, or other decision of the city. The decision of the urban forestry appeals committee shall be final, unless appealed to council. The action taken by council on any such appeal shall be final. All appeals shall be taken in writing and shall state clearly the factual basis for such appeal. 
(e)  The right of appeal shall be clearly stated on all permits. 
(f)  The urban forestry appeals committee shall consist of three members, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by council and one appointed by the urban forestry advisory committee. Each member shall serve for three years with the term beginning December 1 of the year in which the appointment is made. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.10 - INTERFERENCE WITH URBAN FORESTER. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the city in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this article; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the municipality. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.11 - PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public property of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the city. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.12 - EMERGENCIES. 
    No permit shall be required to remove any tree or part thereof which by reason of damage by fire, windstorm or other calamity poses a threat to the public health or safety or which obstructs any public way. 
    In the event of windstorm, fire, flood or other calamity, the mayor may declare a state of emergency and exempt operations necessary to remove threats to public safety from the permit requirements imposed by this article. 
    The city may determine that a public tree is hazardous and order that it be treated or removed immediately to protect the public health or safety or that any other tree poses a threat to the public health or safety within or obstructing any public way and shall be removed or treated immediately. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.13 - COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS. 
    No person shall remove any public tree without first securing a permit as provided by this article or without being required to replace such tree(s) with tree(s) of equivalent dollar value in the vicinity of the removed tree(s) taking into consideration the circumstances. The value of trees shall be determined by the city in accordance with published guidelines of the International Society of Arboriculture (Guide For Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants, Sixth Edition). If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree removed or if the replacement tree is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city equal to the difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement tree. Any public tree that is determined by the city to be damaged, but not sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be considered to be devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the city by the person causing the damage. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.14 - DISPOSAL OF WOOD PRODUCTS. 
    The city may sell without competitive bidding, wood and other forest products generated during urban forestry operations on public property. Proceeds from such sales shall be paid in within 24 hours to the finance department. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
917.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be fined a sum of up to $500 and imprisoned for up to a maximum of 30 days. 
(Ord. 11-14-88) 
CHAPTER THREE - UTILITIES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Article 933 was revised and reenacted by an Ordinance passed March 10, 1997. Subsequent amendments to Article 933 will be indicated by legislative histories at the end of the affected sections. 

ARTICLE 930 - HUNTINGTON WATER QUALITY BOARD 

930.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Huntington, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water supplies located in or running through the city by establishing the Huntington Water Quality Board whose duty it will be to supervise and manage the Huntington Sanitary Board established under the provisions of Article 169 and the Huntington Stormwater Utility established under the provisions of Article 935 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
930.02 - CREATION; MEMBERS. 
(a)  Upon the effective date of this ordinance [June 23, 2014], control and operation of the Huntington Sanitary Board established under the provisions of Article 169 and article 933 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, and control and operation of the Huntington Stormwater Utility established under article 935 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, shall be vested in the Huntington Water Quality Board (the "board"), created as of the effective date of this ordinance [June 23, 2014], and appointed and functioning as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The board shall consist of the three members of the Huntington Sanitary Board established under the provisions of article 169 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, and W. Va. Code § 16-13-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
930.03 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The board shall have full and complete supervision, management and control of the stormwater collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal system (the "stormwater system") and the sanitary sewage collection, transportation and treatment system (the "sanitary sewer system") of the city, including the maintenance, operations, improvements and extensions of each respective system, which shall be combined for operational purposes as a single water quality system (the "system"). Bills for stormwater service and sanitary sewer service may be rendered on the same form where appropriate but revenues and expenses shall be collected and accounted for separately by the board in the manner and form required by law, the Public Service Commission of West Virginia and/or the ordinances of the city. All disbursements and accounts of the system shall be ordered paid out only upon approval of the board from the appropriate separate account maintained for the stormwater system or the sanitary sewer system; provided however, that all supervision, management and control of the respective systems and the collection and accounting for bills for stormwater service and sanitary sewer service shall be consistent and in accordance with any ordinance pursuant to which the city may have authorized and issued any bonds from time to time which are outstanding, and which by their terms are payable from and secured by the revenues of either the stormwater system or the sanitary sewer system. The board shall have the power and authority to make all contracts and agreements, and to take any and all other actions necessary or proper for the full and complete supervision, management and control of the system. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
930.04 - EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND OTHER EMPLOYEES. 
    The board shall have power to employ, fix the compensation of and discharge an executive director of the system and shall direct, employ, fix the compensation of and discharge all other employees of the system. The executive director, upon his appointment and taking office, shall furnish and file with the city clerk, a bond in the amount of $50,000, the cost of such bond to be payable from revenues of the system and such bond shall be payable to the board and conditioned as to the faithful performance of the executive director's duties as are fixed by the board. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
930.05 - STORMWATER SYSTEM AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM ACCOUNTS; PERSONNEL POLICIES. 
    All assets and liabilities of the system, including accounts receivable and accounts payable, shall be under the management and control of the board. Personnel policies and practices and other matters affecting employees of the board, except pensions, shall be determined by the board. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
ARTICLE 933 - SEWER REGULATIONS AND CHARGES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Article 933 was revised and reenacted by an Article passed March 10, 1997. Subsequent amendments to Article 933 will be indicated by legislative histories at the end of the affected sections. 
Cross reference- Sanitary board, Art. 169; Plumbing Code, Art. 1735. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate utility systems, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(32); sewer connections, W. Va. Code, § 8-18-22; power to collect charges, W. Va. Code, §§ 8-12-5(32), 16-13-16; review by Public Service Commission, W. Va. Code, § 24-2-4(b); deposit limitations, W. Va. Code, § 24-3-8. 

GENERAL PROVISIONS 

933.01 - PURPOSE AND POLICY. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirement for users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the City of Huntington and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [U.S.C.] section 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403). 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(c)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(d)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(e)  To provide for fees for equitable distribution of the cost of the operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(f)  To enable the City of Huntington to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and the disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
    This article applies to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of individual waste discharge permits or general permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
    This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of Huntington's Publicly Owned Treatment Works. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Huntington Sanitary Board shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.02 - DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meaning hereinafter designated. 
(1)  The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand Board Huntington Sanitary Board BMP Best Management Practice BMR Baseline monitoring report CFR Code of Federal Regulations CIU Categorical industrial user COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency FDF Fundamentally different from gpd gallons per day IU Industrial user L Liter mg Milligrams mg/L Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NSCIU Non-significant categorical industrial user POTW Publicly owned treatment works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC Standard industrial classification SIU Significant industrial user SNC Significant noncompliance U.S.C. United States Code SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq. USC United States Code TSS Total suspended solids WVDEP West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection  
(2)  Abnormal industrial waste. Any industrial waste having a suspended solids concentration, a five-day biochemical oxygen demand or a chlorine requirement appreciably in excess of that normally found in municipal sewage. For the purposes of this article, any industrial waste containing more than 350 or 300 parts per million of total suspended solids or five-day biochemical oxygen demand respectively, or having a chlorine requirement in excess of twenty-five parts per million, shall be considered an abnormal industrial waste regardless of whether or not it contains other substances in concentrations differing appreciably from those normally found in municipal sewage. 
(3)  Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
(4)  "Approval authority" means the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. 
(5)  Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
(a)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(b)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the board. 
(6)  Best Management Practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 933.11 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
(7)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days, at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in terms of concentration, milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
(8)  Board means the Huntington Sanitary Board or their duly authorized representative. 
(9)  Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
(10)  Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
(11)  Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
(12)  Chlorine requirement of sewage or industrial waste. The parts per million of chlorine required to be added as chlorine solution to produce a residual chlorine content of 0.1 parts per million after 15 minutes of contact of the chlorine with the sewage or industrial waste. It shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods described in the current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association or other alternate methods as approved by the board or its duly authorized representative. 
(13)  City means the City of Huntington or City Council of Huntington. 
(14)  Chemical oxygen demand or COD. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
(15)  Combined sewer. A sewer designed to receive both sewage and storm water runoff. 
(16)  Compatible pollutant. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria, oil and grease, plus any additional pollutants identified in the publicly-owned treatment work's NPDES permit, where the publicly-owned treatment work is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the POTW's NPDES permit. 
(17)  Control authority. The Huntington Sanitary Board. 
(18)  Cooling water or non-contact cooling water. The water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
(19)  Current edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association. The latest edition adopted by the State of West Virginia at the time the determination of any analysis required is to be made. 
(20)  Daily maximum. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
(21)  Daily maximum limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
(22)  Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
(23)  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
(24)  Executive director. The person designated by the sanitary board to supervise the operation of the publicly-owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the executive director. 
(25)  Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
(26)  Expansion. An increase in hydraulic capacity. 
(27)  Garbage. Solid or viscous wastes containing particles or solids greater than one quarter inch(es) in any dimension from such sources as but not limited to the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
(28)  Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(29)  Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(30)  Huntington Sanitary Board. The board created under the authority of W. Va. Code, § 16-13-1 et seq. and the subsequent article adopted by council on March 11, 1935. 
(31)  Incompatible pollutant. All pollutants other than compatible pollutants. 
(32)  Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source. 
(33)  Industrial waste discharge permit. The document as set forth in sections 933.33 to 933.46 of this article. 
(34)  Industrial wastes. Any liquid, gaseous or waterborne wastes from industrial processes or commercial establishments as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
(35)  Infiltration. The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
(36)  Inflow. The water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such source as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface run-off, street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
(37)  Instantaneous limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
(38)  Interference. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations of its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the board's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
(39)  Local limit. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the board upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a) (1) and (b). 
(40)  Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
(41)  Monthly average. The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
(42)  Monthly average limit. The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
(43)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or "NPDES permit" means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
(44)  "New source". 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(b)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an Existing Source; or 
(c)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an Existing Source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of section 933.01(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(a)  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(b)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
(45)  Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
(46)  Occupied building. Any structure erected and intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals, and from which structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, or either thereof, is or may be discharged. 
(47)  Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the board's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
(48)  Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
(49)  pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
(50)  Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
(51)  Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
(52)  POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
(53)  Premises accessible to the sanitary sewerage system. Any real estate which adjoins, abuts or is adjacent to the public sanitary sewerage system, or any real estate which might be connected to that system by construction of a private sewer of not more than 100 feet in length. 
(54)  Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into a POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
(55)  Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
(56)  Pretreatment standard or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
(57)  Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 933.11 of this article. 
(58)  Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by the City of Huntington. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
(59)  Sanitary sewage. The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, industries and commercial establishments, exclusive of storm water runoff, surface water, groundwater and industrial waste. 
(60)  Sanitary sewer. A sewer intended to carry only sanitary, or sanitary and industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions and to which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
(62)  Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
(63)  Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
(64)  Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or other waste liquids. 
(65)  Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
(66)  Significant industrial user (SIU). Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section, a significant industrial user is: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
(a)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(b)  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
(c)  Is designated as such by the board that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  The board may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The industrial user, prior to board's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(b)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in section 933.41(n)(2)G. [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(c)  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the board may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
(67)  Slug load or slug discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 933.11 of this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
(68)  Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
(69)  State means the State of West Virginia. 
(70)  Storm sewer. A sewer which is intended to carry storm water runoff, surface waters, groundwater drainage, etc., but which is not intended to carry any sanitary sewage or industrial waste. 
(71)  Reserved. 
(72)  Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
(73)  Storm water runoff. That portion of the rainfall which reaches a drain. 
(74)  Total suspended solids or suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
(75)  Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency under the provision of the Clean Water Act 307(a). 
(76)  Unpolluted water. Any water or waste containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols; or other substances imparting taste and odor to receiving water; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; obnoxious or odorous gases. It shall contain no more than 10,000 parts per million by weight of dissolved solids of which not more than 2,500 parts per million shall be as chloride and not more than ten parts per million each of suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand. The color shall not exceed 50 parts per million. Analyses for any of the above-mentioned substances shall be made in accordance with the current revision of Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations. 
(77)  Upgrading. An increase in the level of treatment provided to improve the quality of the effluent water. 
(78)  Upset. Any exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or local standards adopted pursuant to this article because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(79)  User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
(80)  Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
(81)  Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(82)  Waters of the State. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(83)  West Virginia Division of Environmental Protection" (WVDEP) means the state division of environmental protection, or, where appropriate, the director or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
(84)  This article or this article means the article passed March 10, 1997, as amended. 
    The definition of any terms that are not specified herein shall be that definition specified in 40 CFR 403. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
DISCHARGE OF SANITARY SEWAGE TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED 

933.03 - REQUIRED CONNECTIONS. 
    All persons owning any occupied building now erected within the city upon premises accessible to the public sanitary sewerage system shall, if not already connected, at their own expense, make connection with the sanitary sewerage system within three months after the effective date of this article. 
    All persons owning any premises within the city accessible to the public sanitary sewerage system upon which a building is hereinafter erected shall, at the time of the erection of such building, and at their own expense, make the connection with the public sanitary sewerage system. 
    All persons owning any occupied building within the city upon premises which hereinafter become accessible to the public sanitary sewerage system shall, at their own expense, make the connection with the public sanitary sewerage system within three months after notice to do so from the sanitary board or its authorized representative. 
    Any industrial user with an approved NPDES permitted treatment facility capable of adequately treating sanitary sewage in accordance with the requirements of the state DEP may be exempted from the mandatory connection provisions of sections 933.03 to 933.05. 
    No person, property owner or occupant shall connect into a city sanitary or combination sewer, either directly or indirectly, without first having obtained a permit from the city plumbing inspector and the sanitary board in accordance with the City Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.04 - PROHIBITED FACILITIES. 
    No owner or occupant of any occupied building within the city, on premises accessible to the public sanitary sewerage system, shall erect, construct, use or maintain, or cause to be erected, constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or other receptacle on such premises for receiving sanitary sewage. 
    Any owner or occupant, who erects, constructs or maintains a privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or other receptacle for receiving sanitary sewage on any property within the city accessible to the public sewerage system in violation of this article shall be punished by fine or imprisonment. The erection, construction or maintenance of any such privy, cesspool, sinkhole or septic tank or other receptacle for receiving sanitary sewage on any such property within the city shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which nuisance may be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.05 - BUILDING SEWER CONNECTIONS. 
    No person shall establish, repair, or discontinue any sewer or drain connection to the public sanitary sewerage system without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the City Plumbing Code. 
    All building sewer permits for residential and commercial service shall be obtained by filing an application with the city plumbing inspector in accordance with the procedures and fees set forth in the City Plumbing Code and this article. 
    The board shall provide, where and when possible, access to the public sewerage system in the form of a pipe, of adequate size and slope. This shall be furnished by the board, in accordance with the fees set forth in this article, at that point adjoining the property to be serviced which is closest to the board's existing facilities. The property owner shall be responsible for all plumbing, connections, and repairs on his/her property. No person shall establish, repair, or disconnect any sewer or drain connection the public sanitary sewerage system except as shall be performed on his/her property as provided in this article. 
    All building sewer connections shall be subject to inspection and testing by the city plumbing inspector in accordance with the provisions and fees established by the City Plumbing Code. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the public sewerage system shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s). The property owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damages that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer connection. 
    A separate and independent building sewer connection shall be provided for every building. 
    An old building sewer may be used in connection with a new building only if the old building sewer has been inspected and approved by the city plumbing inspector. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, and the connection of the building sewer to the public sewerage system, shall all conform to the requirements and specifications of the City Plumbing Code and other applicable rules and regulations. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials shall be approved by the city plumbing inspector before installation. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. No person shall make any opening or excavation in any public street or alley for any purpose without first obtaining a permit from the city plumbing inspector and providing the city with a surety bond in accordance with the requirements of the City Plumbing Code. Any street, sidewalk, parkway, or other public property disturbed in the course of the building sewer installation shall be permanently restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
EXCLUSION OF STORM WATER RUNOFF 

933.06 - SANITARY SEWERS. 
    The discharge of storm water runoff to sanitary sewers is hereby prohibited and persons presently discharging storm water runoff to sanitary sewers shall cease and desist such practice within three months after the effective date of this article. 
    All persons connecting to the public sanitary sewerage system shall provide adequate means for excluding storm runoff in the event connection is made to sanitary sewers. 
    Where it has been established by smoke testing, dye testing, or on-site inspection that rain or surface water is being introduced into the sanitary sewer, and the customer has had 30 days to divert this discharge from the sanitary sewer, the volume of the resulting rain and/or surface water shall be measured or estimated from the total monthly rainfall times the total drainage area in square feet. The customer shall pay a surcharge for the resulting volume of discharge at the current base service rate. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.07 - COMBINED SEWERS. 
(a)  The provisions of this article do not prohibit the present or future discharge of storm water runoff to combined sewers. 
(b)  No person shall permit storm water runoff to be discharged into sanitary sewers of the city. In situations where persons now direct storm water into combination sewers that are also used for sanitation, nothing in this article shall be construed to require these persons to cease directing storm water to the combined sewer until such time as deemed necessary by the sanitary board. Structures built prior to 1980 shall be exempt from the stormwater runoff combined system separation requirements until such time as is required by federal law regulation or state law, and modified in fact by city council. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES INTO THE POTW 

933.08 - GENERAL WASTES. 
    In general, any and all industrial wastes may be discharged to the public sanitary sewerage system except those which are deemed harmful to the system or are specifically prohibited by this article. However, it is also recognized that the treatment of abnormal industrial wastes may add to the cost of operating and maintaining the public sanitary sewerage system. Such additional cost shall be borne by the persons receiving benefit therefrom. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.09 - DELETERIOUS WASTES. 
    The sanitary board reserves the right to refuse connection to its public sanitary sewerage system, or to compel discontinuance of the use of such system for deleterious industrial wastes or to require pretreatment of such wastes in order to prevent a harmful or adverse effect upon the system. 
    In general, any industrial waste shall be considered harmful to the public sanitary sewerage system if the waste is a prohibited waste as defined in sections 933.10 to 933.11. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
PROHIBITED WASTES 

933.10 - UNPOLLUTED WATER. 
    The discharge of excessive amounts of unpolluted water or waste to a sanitary sewer is expressly prohibited. However, such discharges to combined sewers or storm sewers shall be permitted wherever such sewers are of adequate capacity. The sanitary board reserves the right to define the amount it deems excessive in each particular instance. Discharges to combined sewers shall be subject to the service charges hereinafter set forth in sections 933.20 to 933.27. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

933.11 - PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS. 
    General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
    Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(a)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flash-point of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(b)  Any solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or which cause mechanical action which will destroy the sewer structures or cause other interference with the operation of the POTW such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from the refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes; 
(c)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(d)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are, in the opinion of the board, sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; 
(e)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamations and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; 
(f)  Any substance which causes the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards; 
(g)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the board's then current treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, so as to violate the board's NPDES permit; 
(h)  Any wastewater having a temperature which inhibits biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater that causes the temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant to exceed 40 degrees Centigrade (104 Fahrenheit); 
(i)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the board in compliance with applicable state or federal regulation; 
(j)  Any wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 10.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment, or personnel of the POTW. Where the sanitary board deems it advisable, it may require any person discharging industrial wastes to install and maintain, in approved manner, a suitable device to continuously measure and record the pH of the wastes so discharged; 
(k)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(l)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations that will cause interference or pass through; 
(m)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the board in accordance with article 941; 
(n)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the board; 
(o)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes, including but not limited to any solid, semi-solid, residue or precipitate, separated from or created by a municipal, commercial or industrial waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, or any other such waste having similar origin; 
(p)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the board in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit; 
(q)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(r)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(s)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than 5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit of the meter. 
    Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS 

933.12 - FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED. 
    Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standards, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The board shall notify all affected users of the applicable federal standards and the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12, such as the Baseline Monitoring Report. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from (FDF) the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. The board maintains the authority to incorporate or recognize a revised standard if the user has obtained an FDF variance from EPA on the basis of 40 CFR 403.13. That CIU's standards would be replaced by the revised FDF variance standard. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the board may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with section 933.12(e) and (f). See 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(b)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the board may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2). 
(c)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the board shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(d)  A CIU may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with the following paragraphs of this section and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(1)  Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake pollutants must make application to the board. Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a "net" basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of paragraph (2) of this section are met. 
(2)  Criteria. 
A.  Either (i) the applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net basis; or (ii) the industrial user demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters. 
B.  Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should not be granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in the user's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere. 
C.  Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this section. 
D.  Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW discharges. The board may waive this requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will result. 
(e)  When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the board convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the board. The board may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in sections 933.12 (e)(1)(A) through 933.12 (e)(1)(E) below. 
(1)  To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must: 
A.  Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit; 
B.  Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment; 
C.  Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions; 
D.  Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and 
E.  Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits. 
(2)  An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must: 
A.  Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits; 
B.  Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device; 
C.  Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the board whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates determined in section 933.12(e)(1)(C). Upon notification of a revised production rate, the board will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
D.  Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to paragraphs 933.12(e)(1)(A) of this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit. 
(3)  When developing equivalent mass limits, the board: 
A.  Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor; 
B.  Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
C.  May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the industrial user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to section 933.16. The industrial user must also be in compliance with section 933.502 regarding the prohibition of bypass. 
(f)  The board may convert the mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the board. 
(g)  Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section 933.12 in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(7). 
(h)  Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(8). 
(i)  Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the board within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the board of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(9). 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.13 - SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS. 
    No person shall discharge wastewater containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that the concentration measured in the composite discharge to the POTW for any one day, the normal operating period, exceeds the following daily maximum allowable discharge limits, as assessed utilizing composite samples, grab samples, or a series of grab samples, at the discretion of the board. 
(a)  The board is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). 
(b)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum limits: 
Individual mass limits for Total Mercury 
5 mg/L Total Phenolics 
Individual mass limits for Total Zinc 
160 mg/L total oil and grease 
2.13 1 [] mg/L Total Toxic Organics (TTO) = Summation of all priority organic pollutant concentrations which are greater than 0.010 mg/L. 
or any other element or compound which will, in the opinion of the board, result in a condition of pass through or interference, damage collection facilities, or be detrimental to the treatment processes. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metals unless indicated otherwise. The board may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations above. The limits and pollutants set forth above may be amended, either in the article or in a significant industrial users permit, from time to time as deemed necessary by the board to protect the facilities and ensure the POTW's compliance with applicable NPDES Permit conditions and water quality standards. 
(c)  The board may develop Best Management Practices (BMPs), by article or in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of section 933.11. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1); Ord. of 4-11-16(2) ) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
The TTO limit of 2.13 mg/L remains in effect unless a specific industrial user can more technically evaluate a limit for each and every TTO constituent. The industrial user must be able to demonstrate that the proposed limit will comply with ALL of the requirements of Title 40 CFR 403.5. The industrial user must be able to demonstrate that concentrations of an individual pollutant(s) above 2.13 mg/L will not cause pass through or interference and will not result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, and fumes in the POTW in amounts that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. All proposals shall be subject to the board's approval. The Board also reserves the right to impose limits on individual compounds more stringent than 2.13 mg/L in order to fulfill the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.5. 

933.14 - STATE REQUIREMENTS. 
    State requirements and limitations (WV 47 CSR) on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.15 - RIGHT OF REVISION. 
    The board reserves the right to establish by article or in individual wastewater discharge permits or in general permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.16 - DILUTION. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The board reserves the right to impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.17 - ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLAN. 
    The board shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The board may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the board may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the board of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 933.41(f) of this article; and 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
Review and acceptance of such plans and operations procedures shall not relieve the industrial user form the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.18 - WRITTEN NOTICE. 
    Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the board a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.19 - NOTICE TO EMPLOYEES. 
    A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
FEES AND CHARGES 

933.20 - CHARGES AND FEES; PURPOSE. 
    It is the purpose of sections 933.20 to 933.27 to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the wastewater disposal system. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the sanitary board's schedule of charges and fees. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.21 - CHARGES AND FEES; ADOPTION. 
    The sanitary board may adopt charges and fees which may include; 
(a)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(1)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users; 
(2)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(3)  Fees for permit applications; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in section 933.21(a)(1) associated with the enforcement activity taken by the board to address users noncompliance; and 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal, by the POTW, of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards. 
(b)  "TAP" fees for connection of privately owned sewer lines to the board's existing collection system; 
(c)  Other fees as the board may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
    These fees shall be based on the actual cost to the board for such services as are rendered and will be assessed using the average actual cost of providing such services during the previous fiscal year. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the board. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.22 - SERVICE CHARGE. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed against all persons, firms or corporations having any active connection with the city's POTW or otherwise discharging sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids either directly or indirectly into such POTW or any part thereof, a service charge payable as hereinafter provided and in the amount hereinafter provided. 
    The service charge for any person, firm or corporation situated within or outside the corporate limits of the City of Huntington having any connection with the city's POTW and discharging sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into such POTW, shall be based upon the quantity of water used on or in the premises as the same is measured by the West Virginia-American Water Company meter or meters there in use. The following schedule of sewer rates, disconnection charge, reconnection charge and late payment penalty are hereby fixed and determined as the sewer rates, disconnection charge, reconnection charge and late payment penalty available for general domestic, commercial and industrial service and shall be charged per quarter year or monthly at the following rates: 
PHASE I
SCHEDULE I (Effective February 10, 2017) 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable within the entire territory served except for the territory formerly served by Citco Water and Sewerage Company. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for domestic, commercial and industrial sewer service (except unusual industrial waste). 
RATES 
First 2,000 gallons of water used per month $8.30 per 1,000 gallons. 
All Over 2,000 gallons of water used per month $4.30 per 1,000 gallons. 
FLAT RATE CHARGE (Non Metered Water Supply) 
Equivalent of 4,500 gallons of water usage $27.35 per month. 
MINIMUM CHARGE 
No bill will be rendered for less than $16.60 per month which is the equivalent of 2,000 gallons of usage. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge equal to the actual bank fee assessed to the sewer utility or $25, whichever is greater, will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DISCONNECT/RECONNECT/ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 
Whenever water service has been disconnected for non-payment of sewer bills in conjunction with a water service termination agreement with West Virginia American Water Company, a disconnection fee of $25 shall be charged; or in the event the delinquent sewer bill is collected by the water company, an administrative fee of $25 will be charged. 
Whenever water service, which has been previously disconnected or otherwise withheld for non-payment of a sewer bill in conjunction with a water service termination agreement with the West Virginia American Water Company, is reconnected a reconnection fee of $25 shall be charged. 
Any increase in West Virginia American Water Company's disconnection, reconnection and administrative fees charged to the Sanitary Board will be billed by the Sanitary Board under the same terms set forth above. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
TAP FEE 
A tap fee of $900, or the actual cost of the connection (solely determined by the Sanitary Board), whichever is greater, will be charged to all customers who apply for service for each new tap to the system. 
LEAK ADJUSTMENT 
An amount not to exceed $2 per 1,000 gallons is to be used when a bill reflects unusual water consumption which can be attributed to eligible leakage on customer's side of meter. This rate shall be applied to all such consumption above the customer's historical average usage. The Huntington Sanitary Board shall establish a nondiscriminatory policy regarding this provision for leak adjustments. 
SECURITY DEPOSIT 
Not to exceed $50 or two-twelfths of the average annual usage of the applicant's specific customer class, whichever is greater. 
After the customer has paid bills for sewer service for 12 consecutive months without a delinquency, the deposit with interest will be returned to the customer. If the customer is a tenant, the deposit will not be refunded until the customer discontinues service with the Sanitary Board. The rate of interest will be determined in accordance with 4.2.a.5. of the Rules For The Government of Sewer Utilities. 
INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE RATES 
Rate applicable to Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD). 
Concentration in excess of 300 mg/l $.156/pound. 
Rate applicable to Total Suspended Solids (TSS). 
Concentration in excess of 350 mg/l $.138/pound. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE II 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable in entire territory served. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for resale customers. 
RESALE RATES 
Based on flow of sewage from flow meter reading $2.58 per 1,000 gallons. 
Based on water usage $3.19 per 1,000 gallons. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge equal to the actual bank fee assessed to the sewer utility or $25, whichever is greater, will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
SECURITY DEPOSIT 
Not to exceed $50 or two-twelfths of the average annual usage of the applicant's specific customer class, whichever is greater. 
After the customer has paid bills for sewer service for 12 consecutive months without a delinquency, the deposit with interest will be returned to the customer. If the customer is a tenant, the deposit will not be refunded until the customer discontinues service with the Sanitary Board. The rate of interest will be determined in accordance with 4.2.a.5. of the Rules For The Government of Sewer Utilities. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE III 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable in entire territory served. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for wastewater and leachate haulers. 
RATES 
Metered Haulers - Each hauler delivering through metered means shall be charged $40 per thousand gallons. 
Non-Metered Haulers - Commodity Charge: Each hauler shall pay a commodity charge of $40 per 1,000 gallons per load. Load will be the actual capacity of the truck or other transport method delivering wastewater and leachate. Actual capacity shall be determined or verified solely by the Sanitary Board. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge equal to the actual bank fee assessed to the sewer utility or $25, whichever is greater, will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE IV 
MUNICIPAL EXCISE TAX SURCHARGE 
The municipality listed below, having imposed public utility tax computed on the basis of two percent of revenues from sewer service sales by the sewer utility within the corporate limits of such municipalities, shall be billed as a "surcharge" to the customers receiving service within said corporate limits. 
The sewer utility is required to collect the utility tax pursuant to West Virginia Code Section 8-13-5a. 
Customers receiving sewer service within the corporate limits of the specified municipality shall pay a surcharge on the following surcharge rates. 
Utility Excise Tax 
Municipality Local Tax Rate Surcharge Rate Huntington 2% 2%  
SCHEDULE V - ALL CUSTOMERS 
Surcharge Formula to be applied in the cases of users producing unusual waste. 
The charge for the treatment of industrial waste will be calculated on the basis of the following formula: 
Ci = VoVi + BoBi+ SoSi 
Ci = Charge to unusual users per year. 
Vo = Average unit cost of transport and treatment chargeable to volume, in dollars per gallon. 
Vi = Volume of wastewater from unusual users in gallons per year. 
Bo = Average unit cost of treatment, chargeable to Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in dollars per pound. 
Bi = Weight of BOD from unusual users in pounds per year. 
So = Average unit cost of treatment (including sludge treatment) chargeable to total solids in dollars per pound. 
Si = Weight of total solids from unusual users in pounds per year. 
When an unusual user is to be served, a preliminary study of its wastes, and the cost of transport and treatment thereof, will be made. Waste containing materials which, in the judgment of the Huntington Sanitary Board, should not be introduced into the sewer system need not be handled by it. The results of this preliminary study will be used to determine the feasibility of the proposed sewer service and the charge therefore, based upon the formula set out above. 
Thereafter, unusual sewage will be monitored on a regular basis and at conclusion of each fiscal year, based on the investigation aforesaid and audit of the Huntington Sanitary Board's records, new cost figures will be calculated for use in the above formula. The cost of establishing the monitoring facilities shall be paid by the unusual user. Based on these audited figures, additional billings covering the past fiscal year will be made for payment by each unusual user, or refund given by the sanitary board, as the case may be. Such audited figures will then be used for the preliminary billing for the next fiscal year, at the end of which an adjustment will be made as aforesaid. 
SCHEDULE VI - ALL CUSTOMERS 
Applicable inside and outside the corporate limits of the Sanitary Board of the City of Huntington. 
    Where the amount of sanitary sewage discharged into the sanitary board's waste treatment system by certain industrial plant or plants cannot be accurately determined by the use of the sanitary board's water meter or meters, and the said plant cannot install a flow meter to measure such waste, a special formula will be used whereby such plant or plants will pay to sanitary board a sewer charge calculated at 50 gallons of water per each employee at the plant each working day. 
PHASE II
SCHEDULE I (Effective December 31, 2017) 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable within the entire territory served except for the territory formerly served by Citco Water and Sewerage Company. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for domestic, commercial and industrial sewer service (except unusual industrial waste). 
RATES 
First 2,000 gallons of water used per month $9.25 per 1,000 gallons. 
All over 2,000 gallons of water used per month $4.75 per 1,000 gallons. 
FLAT RATE CHARGE (NON METERED WATER SUPPLY) 
Equivalent of 4,500 gallons of water usage $30.38 per month. 
MINIMUM CHARGE 
No bill will be rendered for less than $18.50 per month which is the equivalent, of 2,000 gallons of usage. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge of $25 will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DISCONNECT/RECONNECT/ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 
Whenever water service has been disconnected for non-payment of sewer bills in conjunction with a water service termination agreement with West Virginia American Water Company, a disconnection fee of $25 shall be charged; or in the event the delinquent sewer bill is collected by the water company, an administrative fee of $25 will be charged. 
Whenever water service, which has been previously disconnected or otherwise withheld for non-payment of a sewer bill in conjunction with a water service termination agreement with the West Virginia American Water Company, is reconnected a reconnection fee of $25 shall be charged. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
TAP FEE 
The following charges are to be made whenever the utility install a new tap to serve an applicant. 
A tap fee of $100 will be charged to customers applying for service before construction is completed adjacent to the customer's premises in connection with a certificate proceeding before the commission. This pre-construction tap fee will be invalid after the completion of construction adjacent to the applicant's premises that associated with a certificate proceeding. 
A tap fee of $900, or the actual cost of the connection (solely determined by the sanitary board), whichever is greater, will be charged to all customers who apply for service outside of a certificate proceeding before the commission for each new tap to the system. 
LEAK ADJUSTMENT 
An amount not to exceed $2 per 1,000 gallons is to be used when a bill reflects unusual water consumption which can be attributed to eligible leakage on customer's side of meter. This rate shall be applied to all such consumption above the customer's historical average usage. The Huntington Sanitary Board shall establish a nondiscriminatory policy regarding this provision for leak adjustments. 
SECURITY DEPOSIT 
Not to exceed $50 or two-twelfths of the average annual usage of the applicant's specific customer class, whichever is greater. 
After the customer has paid bills for sewer service for 12 consecutive months without a delinquency, the deposit with interest will be returned to the customer. If the customer is a tenant, the deposit will not be refunded until the customer discontinues service with the Sanitary Board. The rate of interest will be determined in accordance with 4.2.a.5. of the Rules For The Government of Sewer Utilities. 
INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE RATES 
Rate applicable to Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD). 
Concentration in excess of 300 mg/l $0.138 per pound. 
Rate applicable to Total Suspended Solids (TSS). 
Concentration in excess of 350 mg/l $0.122 per pound. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE II 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable in entire territory served. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for resale customers. 
RESALE RATES 
Based on flow of sewage from flow meter reading $2.87 per 1,000 gallons. 
Based on water usage $3.54 per 1,000 gallons. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge of $25 will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the lasted pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
SECURITY DEPOSIT 
Not to exceed $50 or two-twelfths of the average annual usage of the applicant's specific customer class, whichever is greater. 
After the customer has paid bills for sewer service for 12 consecutive months without a delinquency, the deposit with interest will be returned to the customer. If the customer is a tenant, the deposit will not be refunded until the customer discontinues service with the Sanitary Board. The rate of interest will be determined in accordance with 4.2.a.5. of the Rules For The Government of Sewer Utilities. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE III 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable in entire territory served. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for wastewater and leachate haulers. 
RATES 
Metered haulers - Each hauler delivering through metered means shall be charged $40 per thousand gallosn 
Non-metered haulers - Each hauler shall pay a commodity charge of $40 per 1,000 gallons per load. Load will be the actual capacity of the truck or other transport method delivering wastewater and leachate. Actual capacity shall be determined or verified solely by the Sanitary Board. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge of $25 will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE IV 
MUNICIPAL EXCISE TAX SURCHARGE 
The municipality listed below, having imposed public utility tax computed on the basis of two percent of revenues from sewer service sales by the sewer utility within the corporate limits of such municipalities, shall be billed as a "surcharge" to the customers receiving service within said corporate limits. 
The sewer utility is required to collect the utility tax pursuant to W. Va. Code, § 8-13-5a. 
Customers receiving sewer service within the corporate limits of the specified municipality shall pay a surcharge on the following surcharge rates. 
Utility Excise Tax 
Municipality Local Tax Rate Surcharge Rate Huntington 2% 2%  
SCHEDULE V - ALL CUSTOMERS 
Surcharge Formula to be applied in the cases of users producing unusual waste. 
The charge for the treatment of industrial waste will be calculated on the basis of the following formula: 
Ci = VoVi + BoBi + SoSi. 
Ci = Charge to unusual users per year. 
Vo = Average unit cost of transport and treatment chargeable to volume, in dollars per gallon. 
Vi = Volume of wastewater from unusual users in gallons per year. 
Bo = Average unit cost of treatment, chargeable to Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in dollars per pound. 
Bi = Weight of BOD from unusual users in pounds per year. 
So = Average unit cost of treatment (including sludge treatment) chargeable to total solids in dollars per pound. 
Si = Weight of total solids from unusual users in pounds per year. 
When an unusual user is to be served, a preliminary study of its wastes, and the cost of transport and treatment thereof, will be made. Waste containing materials which, in the judgment of the Huntington Sanitary Board, should not be introduced into the sewer system need not be handled by it. The results of this preliminary study will be used to determine the feasibility of the proposed sewer service and the charge therefore, based upon the formula set out above. 
Thereafter, unusual sewage will be monitored on a regular basis and at the conclusion of each fiscal year, based on the investigation aforesaid and audit of the Huntington Sanitary Board's records, new cost figures will be calculated for use in the above formula. The cost of establishing the monitoring facilities shall be paid by the unusual user. Based on these audited figures, additional billings covering the past fiscal year will be made for payment by each unusual user, or refund given by the sanitary board, as the case may be. Such audited figures will then be used for the preliminary billing for the next fiscal year, at the end of which an adjustment will be made as aforesaid. 
SCHEDULE VI - ALL CUSTOMERS 
Applicable inside and outside the corporate limits of the Sanitary Board of the City of Huntington. 
    Where the amount of sanitary sewage discharged into the sanitary board's waste treatment system by certain industrial plant or plants cannot be accurately determined by the use of the sanitary board's water meter or meters, and the said plant cannot install a flow meter to measure such waste, a special formula will be used whereby such plant or plants will pay to sanitary board a sewer charge calculated at 50 gallons of water per each employee at the plant each working day. 
PHASE III
SCHEDULE I (Effective December 31, 2018) 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable within the entire territory served except for the territory formerly served by Citco Water and Sewerage Company. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for domestic, commercial and industrial sewer service (except unusual industrial waste). 
RATES 
First 2,000 gallons of water used per month $10.40 per 1,000 gallons. 
All Over 2,000 gallons of water used per month $5.35 per 1,000 gallons. 
FLAT RATE CHARGE (NON METERED WATER SUPPLY) 
Equivalent of 4,500 gallons of water usage $34.18 per month. 
MINIMUM CHARGE 
No bill will be rendered for less than $20.80 per month which is the equivalent of 2,000 gallons of usage. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge of $25 will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DISCONNECT/RECONNECT/ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 
Whenever water service has been disconnected for non-payment of sewer bills in conjunction with a water service termination agreement with West Virginia American Water Company, a disconnection fee of $25 shall be charged; or in the event the delinquent sewer bill is collected by the water company, an administrative fee of $25 will be charged. 
Whenever water service, which has been previously disconnected or otherwise withheld for non-payment of a sewer bill in conjunction with a water service termination agreement with the West Virginia American Water Company, is reconnected a reconnection fee of $25 shall be charged. 
Any increase in West Virginia American Water Company's disconnection, reconnection and administrative fees charged to the Sanitary Board will be billed by the Sanitary Board under the same terms set forth above. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
TAP FEE 
A tap fee of $900, or the actual cost of the connection (solely determined by the Sanitary Board), whichever is greater, will be charged to all customers who apply for service for each new tap to the system. 
LEAK ADJUSTMENT 
An amount not to exceed $2 per 1,000 gallons is to be used when a bill reflects unusual water consumption which can be attributed to eligible leakage on customer's side of meter. This rate shall be applied to all such consumption above the customer's historical average usage. The Huntington Sanitary Board shall establish a nondiscriminatory policy regarding this provision for leak adjustments. 
SECURITY DEPOSIT 
Not to exceed $50 or two-twelfths of the average annual usage of the applicant's specific customer class, whichever is greater. 
After the customer has paid bills for sewer service for 12 consecutive months without a delinquency, the deposit with interest will be returned to the customer. If the customer is a tenant, the deposit will not be refunded until the customer discontinues service with the Sanitary Board. The rate of interest will be determined in accordance with 4.2.a.5. of the Rules For The Government of Sewer Utilities. 
INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE RATES 
Rate applicable to Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) 
Concentration in excess of 300 mg/l $.156/pound 
Rate applicable to Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 
Concentration in excess of 350 mg/l $.138/pound 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE II 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable in entire territory served. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for resale customers. 
RESALE RATES 
Based on flow of sewage from flow meter reading $3.20 per 1,000 gallons. 
Based on water usage $3.96 per 1,000 gallons. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge equal to the actual bank fee assessed to the sewer utility or $25, whichever is greater, will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
SECURITY DEPOSIT 
Not to exceed $50 or two-twelfths of the average annual usage of the applicant's specific customer class, whichever is greater. 
After the customer has paid bills for sewer service for 12 consecutive months without a delinquency, the deposit with interest will be returned to the customer. If the customer is a tenant, the deposit will not be refunded until the customer discontinues service with the Sanitary Board. The rate of interest will be determined in accordance with 4.2.a.5. of the Rules For The Government of Sewer Utilities. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE III 
APPLICABILITY 
Applicable in entire territory served. 
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE 
Available for wastewater and leachate haulers. 
RATES 
Metered Haulers - Each hauler delivering through metered means shall be charged $40 per thousand gallons. 
Non-Metered Haulers - Commodity Charge: Each hauler shall pay a commodity charge of $40 per 1,000 gallons per load. Load will be the actual capacity of the truck or other transport method delivering wastewater and leachate. Actual capacity shall be determined or verified solely by the Sanitary Board. 
RETURNED CHECK CHARGE 
A service charge equal to the actual bank fee assessed to the sewer utility or $25, whichever is greater, will be imposed upon any customer whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason. 
DELAYED PAYMENT PENALTY 
On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
EFT, CREDIT CARD AND DROP BOX PAYMENTS 
A service charge will be imposed on EFT, Credit Card or Drop Box payments. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from the financial institution for processing payment. 
SCHEDULE IV 
MUNICIPAL EXCISE TAX SURCHARGE 
The municipality listed below, having imposed public utility tax computed on the basis of two percent of revenues from sewer service sales by the sewer utility within the corporate limits of such municipalities, shall be billed as a "surcharge" to the customers receiving service within said corporate limits. 
The sewer utility is required to collect the utility tax pursuant to West Virginia Code Section 8-13-5a. 
Customers receiving sewer service within the corporate limits of the specified municipality shall pay a surcharge on the following surcharge rates. 
Utility Excise Tax 
Municipality Local Tax Rate Surcharge Rate Huntington 2% 2%  
SCHEDULE V - ALL CUSTOMERS 
Surcharge Formula to be applied in the cases of users producing unusual waste. 
The charge for the treatment of industrial waste will be calculated on the basis of the following formula: 
Ci = VoVi + BoBi+ SoSi 
Ci = Charge to unusual users per year. 
Vo = Average unit cost of transport and treatment chargeable to volume, in dollars per gallon. 
Vi = Volume of wastewater from unusual users in gallons per year. 
Bo = Average unit cost of treatment, chargeable to Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in dollars per pound. 
Bi = Weight of BOD from unusual users in pounds per year. 
So = Average unit cost of treatment (including sludge treatment) chargeable to total solids in dollars per pound. 
Si = Weight of total solids from unusual users in pounds per year. 
When an unusual user is to be served, a preliminary study of its wastes, and the cost of transport and treatment thereof, will be made. Waste containing materials which, in the judgment of the Huntington Sanitary Board, should not be introduced into the sewer system need not be handled by it. The results of this preliminary study will be used to determine the feasibility of the proposed sewer service and the charge therefore, based upon the formula set out above. 
Thereafter, unusual sewage will be monitored on a regular basis and at conclusion of each fiscal year, based on the investigation aforesaid and audit of the Huntington Sanitary Board's records, new cost figures will be calculated for use in the above formula. The cost of establishing the monitoring facilities shall be paid by the unusual user. Based on these audited figures, additional billings covering the past fiscal year will be made for payment by each unusual user, or refund given by the sanitary board, as the case may be. Such audited figures will then be used for the preliminary billing for the next fiscal year, at the end of which an adjustment will be made as aforesaid. 
SCHEDULE VI - ALL CUSTOMERS 
Applicable inside and outside the corporate limits of the Sanitary Board of the City of Huntington. 
    Where the amount of sanitary sewage discharged into the sanitary board's waste treatment system by certain industrial plant or plants cannot be accurately determined by the use of the sanitary board's water meter or meters, and the said plant cannot install a flow meter to measure such waste, a special formula will be used whereby such plant or plants will pay to sanitary board a sewer charge calculated at 50 gallons of water per each employee at the plant each working day. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1); Ord. of 12-27-16(2) ) 
933.23 - RESERVED. 
933.24 - WATER METERS. 
    Each meter shall be considered a separate billing unit in applying the rates. The registrations of water on two or more meters shall be combined and billed to each user as though registered on one meter in the event that the meters are located in only one facility with one sanitary sewer connections subject to the approval of the sanitary board. 
    In the event any person, form or corporation discharging sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquid in the city's POTW, either directly or indirectly, obtains part or all of the water used by him from sources other than the West Virginia-American Water Company, such user of other water shall, at his own expenses, install and maintain water usage other than that obtained from the West Virginia-American Water Company, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewerage service charge, as above set forth, shall be the sum of the quantity measured by all such meters plus the quantity of water obtained from the West Virginia-American Water Company. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.25 - WATER NOT ENTERING THE POTW. 
    In the event it is established to the satisfaction of the sanitary board that a portion of the water measured by the above-named meter or meters does not and cannot enter the public sanitary sewerage system, and in the event that the total water used by such person, firm or corporation exceeds 40,000 cubic feet per month, then the board may determine, in such manner and by such method as it may deem practical, the percentage of the metered water entering the sanitary sewerage system, or the board may require or permit the installation of additional meters in such a manner as to determine either the quantity of the water excluded from the sewerage system of the quantity of water, sewerage or industrial waste actually entering the sewerage system, exclusive of storm water runoff. The sewerage service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water estimated, measured or computed by the board to be actually entering the sewerage system, exclusive of storm water runoff, subject to the minimum charge provision. 
    Persons, industries of corporation requesting consideration for a reduction in the sewerage service charge because of water not entering the POTW shall make written application to the board for such consideration, giving the name of the firm, industry or business, address, West Virginia-American Water account number and supporting data fully describing other sources entering the POTW. Upon request by the board, the application shall be accompanied by a sketch to approximate scale showing the plan of the property, water distribution system, sewer layout, existing meters and any proposed meters in sufficient detail to determine the quantity of flow entering, or not entering, the sewerage system. The cost of furnishing, installing and maintaining any meters other than those utilized to measure water purchased from the West Virginia-American Water Company shall be borne by the applicant. The type, size, location, arrangement and maintenance of such meters shall be subject to the approval of the board. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.26 - WATER USED FOR RECREATION. 
    Persons, industries, or corporations requesting consideration for a reduction in the sewerage service charge because of water used for swimming pools or other recreational purposes and which shall not enter the POTW shall make written application to the board for such consideration, giving the name of the person, industry or business, the service address, the West Virginia-American Water Corporation account number, the West Virginia-American Water Corporation billing statement for the month during which the water was used, the West Virginia-American Water Corporation billing statement for the two months prior to the month for which the exemption was requested, and a description of how and where the water will eventually be disposed. The minimum volume for exemption shall be not less than 5,000 gallons. The cost of furnishing, installing and maintaining any meters other than those utilized to measure water purchased from the West Virginia-American Water Corporation shall be borne by the applicant. The type, size, locations, arrangement, and maintenance of such meters shall be subject to the approval of the board. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.27 - SERVICE CHARGE REVIEW. 
    The board reserves the right to revise by article the service charges levied and assessed against all persons using the city's POTW. On at least a biennial basis, the board shall review all service charges and revise the charges accordingly to reflect the actual sewage collection and treatment costs and any applicable debt service costs. 
    The board shall notify all persons using the city's POTW of the applicable service charges on at least an annual basis by publishing the service charge rate schedule in the city's largest daily newspaper. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
SURCHARGE FOR CERTAIN INDUSTRIAL WASTES 

933.28 - SURCHARGE LEVIED. 
    Although the sewage treatment works will be capable of treating certain abnormal industrial wastes as heretofore defined in sections 933.01 and 933.02, the actual treatment of such wastes may increase the cost of operating and maintaining the city's POTW. Therefore, there is hereby levied and assessed against each person, industry or corporation discharging more than 40,000 cubic feet per month of such abnormal industrial waste into the POTW, a surcharge or surcharges, which are intended to cover such additional cost to the board. Such surcharges shall be in addition to the regular sewerage service charge set forth in sections 933.20 to 933.27, and shall be payable as hereinafter provided in the amount hereinafter provided. No industrial user will be subject to both BOD and chlorine requirement surcharges. This will prevent double charging for chlorine. The surcharges provided for in sections 933.28 to 933.32 shall be added to the normal sewerage service charge set forth in sections 933.20 to 933.27. They shall be billed monthly and shall be subject to the same penalty as set forth in section 933.22 for delayed payment fee. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.29 - SAMPLING. 
    The strength of any industrial waste, the discharge of which is to be subject to surcharge, shall be determined monthly, or more frequently, from samples taken at the manhole described in section 933.42 or at any other sampling point mutually agreed to by the board and the producer of such waste. The frequency and duration of the sampling period shall be as such, in the opinion of the board, will permit a reasonably reliable determination of the average composition of the wastes, exclusive of storm water runoff. Representative samples of the wastewater discharge shall be collected by a representative of the board, in proportion to the flow of waste, exclusive of storm water runoff, and composited for analysis in accordance with the current revision of 40 CFR 136. Upon request by the industrial user, the board may split samples with the industrial user for their own analysis. Except as hereinafter provided, the strength of the waste, so found by analysis, shall be used for establishing the surcharge or surcharges. However, the board may, if it so elects, accept the results of routine sampling and analyses by the producer of such wastes in lieu of, or in addition to, making its own samplings and analyses. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.30 - CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. 
    In the event any industrial waste, the average volume of which exceeds 40,000 cubic feet per month, is found by the board to have a chlorine requirement in excess of 25 parts per million, or 25 ppm, the producer of such waste shall be surcharged an amount equal to the product of the actual volume of wastes in hundred cubic feet per billing period, exclusive of storm water runoff, discharged to the POTW and the "chlorine requirement surcharge rate". The "chlorine requirement surcharge rate" shall be determined by the following formula: 
Rc = 0.00626 Pc (C - 25) 
Where Rc = The chlorine requirement surcharge rate in cents per 100 cubic feet of waste discharged. 
Pc = The average cost of chlorine to the city in cents per pound. 
C = The average chlorine requirement of the industrial waste expressed in parts per million (ppm) as determined in accordance with Section 933.29 or 933.31. 
The figure 25 appearing in the above formula corresponds to the maximum chlorine requirement permissible without surcharge. The figure 0.00626 is the factor to convert parts per million to pounds per 100 cubic feet. No discount shall be permitted for sewage or industrial wastes having a chlorine requirement of less than 25 parts per million. 
It is recognized that the chlorine requirement of certain undiluted chemical wastes may be difficult to determine because of excessive concentrations of interfering substances. In such instances the waste may first be diluted with municipal sewage. Portions of the diluted waste and the sewage used in making the dilution shall then be allowed to stand at room temperature, approximately 68 degrees F, for a period of not less than two hours, or more than eight hours. The chlorine requirement of each shall then be determined and the chlorine requirement of the undiluted waste computed by the following formula: 
C = M (V1 + V2) - SV2 
Where C = The chlorine requirement of the waste to be used in the formula of section 933.30. 
M = The chlorine requirement of the mixed sewage and waste in parts per million. 
S = The chlorine requirement of the sewage used for dilution in parts per million. 
V1 = The volume of waste used in the mixture. 
V2 = The volume of sewage used in the mixture. 
In the application of this procedure, the volumes of waste and diluting sewage used shall be such that the ratio of V1 to (V1 + V2) is approximately equal to the ratio of the average daily flow of wastes in question to the average daily flow of sewage entering the treatment works. This procedure shall be used only in those instances where the board believes its use to be necessary or desirable in order to determine the equitable chlorine requirement surcharge rate. 
Since the above stipulated surcharge is only intended to compensate the board for the additional cost of chlorinating abnormal industrial wastes, it shall only be applied during those periods when the board is actually using chlorine. In the event the board uses chlorine for only a portion of some given billing period, then the surcharge for that particular period, as computed in accordance with section 933.30, shall be reduced by the percentage of such period during which no chlorine is used. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.31 - SUSPENDED SOLIDS CONCENTRATION. 
    Suspended solids surcharging will be included within a significant industrial user's permit when deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.32 - BOD CONCENTRATION. 
    BOD surcharging will be included within a significant industrial user's permit as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
ADMINISTRATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMITS AND GENERAL PERMITS 
Wastewater analysis 
    When requested by the board, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 90 days of the request. The board is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 

933.33 - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT AND GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater in any area under the direct jurisdiction of the city, or any public service district served by the board's POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit from the board, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 933.34 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The board may require other users to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 933.48 through 933.49 of this article. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.34 - PERMIT APPLICATION. 
1.  Individual wastewater discharge and general permitting: New connections. Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit, who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit, in accordance with this article, must be filed at least 180 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
2.  Individual wastewater discharge and general permit application contents. 
A.  All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. Users that are eligible may request a general permit under section 933.34(3). The board may require users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a permit application: 
(a)  Identifying information. 
1.  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
2.  Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises; 
(b)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(c)  Description of operations. 
(1)  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications (SIC) of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(2)  Types of wastes generated as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; licensed and certified by the WVDEP; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304 of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 as amended; and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(5)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(d)  Time and duration of discharges; 
(e)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit; 
(f)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in section 933.12(c) (40 CFR 403.6(e)); 
(g)  Measurement of pollutants: 
(1)  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources; 
(2)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the board, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process; 
(3)  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported; 
(4)  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 933.41 of this article. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the board or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard; 
(5)  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 933.41(k) of this article; 
(h)  Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on section 933.41(d)(2) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]; 
(i)  Any request to be covered by a general permit based on section 933.34(3); 
(j)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the board to evaluate the permit application. 
B.  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
3.  Wastewater discharge permitting: General permits. 
A.  At the discretion of the board, the board may use general permits to control SIU discharges to the POTW if the following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must: 
(1)  Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations; 
(2)  Discharge the same types of wastes; 
(3)  Require the same effluent limitations; 
(4)  Require the same or similar monitoring; and 
(5)  In the opinion of the board, are more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual wastewater discharge permits. 
B.  To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a written request for coverage that identifies its contact information, production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance with section 933.41(d)(2) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, and any other information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective in the general permit until after the board has provided written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted in accordance with section 933.41(d)(2). 
C.  The board will retain a copy of the general permit, documentation to support the POTW's determination that a specific SIU meets the criteria in section 933.34(3)(A)(1)-(5) and applicable state regulations, and a copy of the user's written request for coverage for three years after the expiration of the general permit. [See 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(A)(1) through (5)] 
D.  The board may not control an SIU through a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the Combined Wastestream Formula (section 933.12(c)) or net/gross calculations (section 933.12(d)). [See 40 CFR 403.6(e) and 40 CFR 403.15] 
4.  Application signatories and certifications. 
A.  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the certification statement in section 933.41(n). 
B.  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the board prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
C.  A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the board pursuant to section 933.02(66)(3) must annually submit the signed certification statement in section 933.41(n). [See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)] 
5.  Individual wastewater discharge and general permit decisions. The board will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete permit application, the board will determine whether to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. The board may deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.35 - PERMIT MODIFICATIONS. 
1.  The board may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the board's POTW, board's personnel, beneficial sludge use or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(i)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with section 933.39. 
2.  The board may modify a general permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(c)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(d)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with section 933.39. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND GENERAL PERMIT ISSUANCE 

933.36 - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT AND GENERAL PERMIT CONTENTS. 
    An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the board to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(a)  Individual wastewater discharge permits and general permits must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date; [Note: See section 933.37.] 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the board in accordance with section 933.39 of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; 
(5)  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with section 933.41(d)(2). [See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)] 
(6)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; 
(7)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the board to be necessary; 
(8)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the board (section 933.41(d)(2)) must be included as a condition in the user's permit. 
(b)  Individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices; 
(7)  A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit; and 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the board to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.37 - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND GENERAL PERMIT DURATION. 
    An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the board. Each individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.38 - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND GENERAL PERMIT REISSUANCE. 
    A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 933.34 of this article, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.39 - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND GENERAL PERMIT TRANSFER. 
    Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the board and the board approves the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit coverage transfer. The notice to the board must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(a)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(b)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(c)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual wastewater discharge permit or coverage under the general permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.40 - SPECIAL AGREEMENTS. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the board and any person or industrial user located outside the city limits, whereby an industrial waste may be discharged by the user to the public sanitary sewerage system, provided that the objectives of the general pretreatment regulations and the provisions of this article are fulfilled. Similar to any other limitations imposed under this article, the provisions of any such special agreement will be superseded by more stringent requirements of any applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.401 - REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS. 
(a)  If another public service district, or user located within another public service district, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the executive director shall enter into an interjurisdictional agreement with the contributing public service district. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a) above, the executive director shall request the following information from the contributing public service district: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing public service district; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing public service district that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the executive director may deem necessary. 
(c)  An interjurisdictional agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing public service district to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this ordinance and local limits, including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 933.13 of this ordinance. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing public service district to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying pretreatment implementation activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, activities to be conducted by the executive director; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing public service district to provide the executive director with access to all information that the contributing public service district obtains pertinent to the pretreatment program; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing public service district's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing public service district's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the executive director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing public service district's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the executive director; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the interjurisdictional agreement. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.41 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a) (4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the board a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the board a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
A.  All information required in section 933.34(2)(A)(a), section 933.34(2)(A)(b), section 933.34(2)(A)(c), and section 933.34(2)(A)(f). (See 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)-(7)). 
B.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The user shall provide the information required in section 933.34(2)(A)(g)(1) through (4); 
2.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph; 
3.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority; 
4.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with subsection j and k; 
5.  The board may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
6.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
C.  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in section 933.01(5) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
D.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 933.41(b) of this article. 
E.  Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with section 933.41(n) of this article and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 933.02(5). 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 933.41(a)(2)(D) of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the board no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the board. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the board a report containing the information described in section 933.34(2)(A)(f) and (g) and 933.41(a)(2)(B) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in section 933.12 [Note: See 40 CFR 403.6(c)], this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 933.41(n)(1) of this article. All sampling will be done in conformance with section 933.41(k). 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports even if they have been designated a non-significant categorical industrial user under the provisions of section 933.41(d)(3). 
(1)  Except as specified in section 933.41(d)(3), all significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the board submit no less than twice per year, June and December, or on dates specified, reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the board or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(2)  The board may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. [See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)] This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
B.  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit. See section 933.34(2)(A)(h). 
C.  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. 
D.  The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with section 933.02(5), and include the certification statement in section 933.41(n)(1) (40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)). 
E.  Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. 
F.  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the board must be included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the board for three years after expiration of the waiver. 
G.  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's permit by the board, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement in section 933.41(n)(1) below, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user. 
H.  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations, the user must immediately: Comply with the monitoring requirements of section 933.41(d)(1) or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the board, and notify the board. 
I.  This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  The board may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports [see section 933.41(d)(1) (40 CFR 403.12(e)(1))] to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the WVDEP or EPA where the industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following: 
A.  0.01 percent of the board's POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches; 
B.  0.01 percent of the design dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the board's POTW; and 
C.  0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed in accordance with section 933.11 of this article. 
Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as defined in section 933.44 of this article. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to an industrial user with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the opinion of the board, decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(4)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 933.41(n)(1) of this article. 
(5)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(6)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the board, using the procedures prescribed in section 933.41(k) of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. [See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(6)] 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the board of any significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
(1)  The board may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 933.34 of this article. 
(2)  The board may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit under section 933.38 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit or a general permit under section 933.35 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the board of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the board, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph 1, above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(4)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the board immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall provide appropriate reports to the board as the board may require. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the board within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the board within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the board performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the board performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the board receives the results of this sampling, or if the board has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
If the board performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the board will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. [See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(2)] 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 933.41(e) of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 933.41(a), (c), (d) of this article. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph 1, above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the board, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the board or other parties approved by EPA. 
(k)  Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsections (2) and (3) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the board. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the board, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the board, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. [See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3)] 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in section 933.41(a) and 933.41(c) [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the board may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs section 933.41(d) (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. [See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4).] 
(l)  Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(m)  Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with Best Management Practices established under section 933.13(c). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the board, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the board. 
(n)  Certification statements. 
(1)  Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with section 933.34(4); users submitting baseline monitoring reports under section 933.41(a)(2)(E) [See 40 CFR 403.12 (l)]; users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under section 933.41(c) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(d)]; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by section 933.41(d)(1-4) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)], and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of section 933.41(d)(2)(D) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(iii)]. The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 933.02(5): 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(2)  Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the board pursuant to sections 933.02(66)(3) and 933.34(4) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)] must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in section 933.02(5) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.120(l)]. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the board: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____________ , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from ____________ , ____________ to ____________ , ____________ [months, days, year]: 
(a)  The facility described as ____________ [facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user as described in section 933.02(66)(3). [See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)] 
(b)  The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
(c)  The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based on the following information. 
_____
_____
(3)  Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on section 933.41(d)(2) must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the user. [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(v)] 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR ;$rule; [specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ____________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under section 933.41(d)(1). 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

933.42 - MONITORING FACILITIES. 
    When required by the board, any person discharging to the public sanitary sewerage system industrial wastes, or industrial wastes and sanitary sewage together in excess of 40,000 cubic feet per month, or 120,000 cubic feet per quarter, shall install a suitable manhole or manholes on his connecting sewer or sewers to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the combined flow of wastes from his premises. Alternate monitoring facilities or arrangements may be acceptable to the board under certain conditions and shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. Such monitoring facilities shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans acceptable to the board. The monitoring facilities shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible to the board or its authorized representative at all times. 
    There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The monitoring facilities which the user is required to install shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
    Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the board's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 180 days following written notification by the board. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.43 - INSPECTION AND SAMPLING. 
(a)  Right of entry: The board shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the board ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the board shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The board shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The board may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated no less than yearly or per the manufacturer's recommendation to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the board and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the board access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)  When the monitoring facility is constructed in the public right-of-way or easement, it must be located in an unobstructed location. The location of the monitoring facility shall provide ample room in or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples and analysis whether constructed on public or private property. The monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the board's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications, and such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such manner so as to enable the board to perform independent monitoring activities. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the board has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the board designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community. The board may seek issuance of a search warrant from the "Circuit Court of Cabell County, West Virginia". 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.44 - PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. 
    The board shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12-months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates paragraphs (c), (d) or (h) of this section) and shall mean: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 933.11 through 933.13; See 40 CFR 403.3(l) 
(b)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by sections 933.11 through 933.13 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); see 40 CFR 403.3(l). 
(c)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by sections 933.11 through 933.13 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the board determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; see 40 CFR 403.3(l). 
(d)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the board's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(h)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the board determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.45 - PRETREATMENT. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 933.11 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the board, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the board for review, and shall be acceptable to the board before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the board under the provisions of this article. 
    All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of approval authority upon request. 
    Additional pretreatment measures: 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the board may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the board they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the board and, shall comply with the oil and grease management article 933.56, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired in accordance with the oil and grease management article 933.56 by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.46 - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, general permits, and monitoring programs, and from the board's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the board, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
ENFORCEMENT 

933.465 - APPLICATION. 
    The conditions and requirements of this article are applicable to all industrial users. The user has a duty to comply with all of the conditions of this article. Any noncompliance constitutes a violation of the article and is subject to appropriate enforcement action including, but not limited to, permit revocation or denial of a permit renewal application. 
    The pretreatment program enforcement response plan provides guidance to the sanitary board and the board's pretreatment staff relative to the procedures to be followed in enforcing the board's industrial waste pretreatment program. It is anticipated that general adherence to the plan will assist overall administration and enforcement of the board's program. It defines the roles and responsibilities of the individuals assigned to administering the enforcement program, and identifies and describes available enforcement responses. The plan also presents a guide to assist in the selection of appropriate enforcement responses to a range of possible violations. (See Appendix A) 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.47 - NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION. 
    When the board finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the board may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the board. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the board to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.48 - ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES. 
Administrative enforcement remedies: 
(a)  Consent orders. The board may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 933.48(b) and (c) of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(b)  Compliance orders. When the board finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the board may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(c)  Cease and desist orders. When the board finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the board may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Emergency suspensions. The board may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The board may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the board may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The board may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (e) of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the board prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (e) or (g) of this article. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(e)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 933.49, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 933.10 to 933.19 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (g) of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the board shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Notification of enforcement action. Except in the case of emergency situations subject to the provisions of section 933.48, whenever the board deems it necessary to take enforcement action, including revocation of the user's permit, under the provisions of this article, the board may issue the affected user a formal written notification of the proposed enforcement action by certified mail. Such notice shall state the basis for the proposed action and the reasons for the board's tentative action. 
The industrial user may comment on the proposed action and to submit to the board a written request for a meeting with the board to appeal the proposed action. All requests for an appeal meeting shall clearly state the specific action or provision(s) of the proposed action that is relevant to the appeal shall also be submitted with the request for appeal. The board may deny the appeal request on the basis of insufficient grounds, or may schedule a meeting for the user to present the appeal to the board. As soon as practicable after the conclusion of the review period or the appeal meeting, the board shall issue to the user a formal written notification of the intended enforcement action and their conclusions. A notification of enforcement action shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Show cause hearing. The board may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the board and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in section 933.02(5) and required by section 933.34(4)(A). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
The board may itself conduct the hearing and take evidence, or may designate any of its members, to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the board notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the board for action thereon. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded shall be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
After the board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances and are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
Judicial enforcement remedies: 
(h)  Injunctive relief. When the board finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or general permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the board may petition the "Circuit Court of Cabell County, West Virginia" through the board's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, general permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The board may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(i)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the board for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The board may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the board. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(j)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000 dollars per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of $25,000, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 years, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, individual wastewater discharge permit, or general permit or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than $25,000.00 per violation, per day or imprisonment for not more than 30 years, or both. 
(k)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The board may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with board's enforcement response plan. However, the board may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the board is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
Administrative fines: 
(l)  When the board finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standards or requirement, the board may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $10,000. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(m)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 10% per month. A lien against the user's property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(n)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the board to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 60 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the board may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The board may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(o)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Supplemental enforcement action: 
(p)  Performance bonds. The board may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the board, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the board to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(q)  Liability insurance. The board may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge or a general permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(r)  Payment of outstanding fees and penalties. The board may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder. 
(s)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(t)  Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the board. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of article 933.11 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the board for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(u)  Contractor listing. Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the board held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the board. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

933.49 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
    The conditions and requirements of this article are applicable to all permitted industrial users and shall be incorporated into the user's permit either expressly or by reference. The permittee has a duty to comply with all of the conditions of this article. Any noncompliance constitutes a violation of the article and is subject to appropriate enforcement action including, but not limited to, permit revocation or denial of a permit renewal application. 
    The board may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to notify the board of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(b)  Failure to provide prior notification to the board of changed conditions pursuant to section 933.41(e); 
(c)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(d)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Refusing to allow the board timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(g)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(h)  Failure to pay fines; 
(i)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(j)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(k)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(l)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(m)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.50 - UPSET PROVISIONS. 
    Under the conditions specified in 40 CFR 403, an upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an enforcement action for noncompliance with Federal Categorical Standards. Any industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate that the conditions necessary for an upset according to the general pretreatment regulations have been met. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the board within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
(A)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(B)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(C)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.501 - PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS. 
    User shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 933.11 of this article or the specific prohibitions in sections 933.11(b)-(s) except (j) and (m) of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(a)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(b)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the board was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. [Note: 40 CFR 403.5(a)(2)] 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.502 - BYPASS. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Bypass notifications. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the board, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the board of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The board may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Bypass. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the board may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(A)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(B)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(C)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The board may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the board determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.51 - BILLING PRACTICE; COLLECTION OF SERVICE CHARGES. 
    The sewerage service charge and the surcharges, where applicable and provided for in this article, shall be payable in four quarterly payments each year, or in 12 monthly payments each year in accordance with the billing practices of the West Virginia-American Water Company, provided that the amount of sewerage service charge payable from any person at the first payment period after the passage date of this article, shall be determined on the basis of a per diem pro rata amount of the established minimum charge per quarter or per month, or shall be based upon the water consumed at the above established rates, whichever is the larger. Whenever the sewer service charge payable hereunder becomes due after the first day or terminates before the last day of a billing period, the service charge so payable shall be apportioned in the same manner and in the same way that water charges are apportioned. 
    The sewerage service charges, surcharges and fees, levied by or pursuant to this article, shall be billed by the sanitary board; or, at the discretion of the board, by the West Virginia-American Water Company, to all firms, persons and corporations liable therefore pursuant to such terms, arrangements, agreements and compensation as may be determined by contract between the board and the West Virginia-American Water Company. The collection of such service charges, surcharges and fees shall be by the board, or by its designated and authorized agent, and all moneys so collected shall be deposited to its credit at any state or national bank within the state, and investments in such bank certificates of deposit, savings accounts, and the like, any state agency investment funds or pools, any Federal Government securities, or with the executive director of the board, who shall maintain the same in a special fund and remit same periodically to the state sinking fund in a manner approved by the state sinking fund commissioner. The moneys maintained in this special fund by the state sinking fund commission shall be paid out on order of the board for such purpose as may be allowed by law, with regard to and incidental to the acquisition, construction, maintenance, operation, management, extension and repair of the board's POTW and for the enlargement and replacement of the same, and for the purpose of construction and improvements to the board's POTW system. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
REGULATION BY SANITARY BOARD 

933.52 - POTW RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    In addition to the specific authority granted by this article the board shall make and enforce such other rules and regulations for the safe, economical and efficient management, control and protection of the board's POTW for the construction and use of house sewers and connections to the POTW, for the construction and use of all other connections thereto, and for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such sewerage service charges as may be needful or necessary from time to time, provided that council shall have the right to alter, supplement or revoke such rules and regulations. 
    No person shall violate any of the rules or regulations made and promulgated by the board as aforesaid, and any such person shall be subject to the provisions of section 933.48. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
NOTICE AND HEARING 

933.53 - REQUIREMENTS. 
    All statutory requirements of this section shall be compiled with in regard to proper notice to all of the users of the services afforded by such sanitary sewerage system and the owners of property served or to be served thereby and others interested, concerning the proposed rates and charges and an opportunity to be heard thereon by such users and property owners. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
UTILITY INTERFERENCE; TAMPERING 

933.54 - INTERFERENCE WITH SEWERS BY TELEPHONE LINES OR CONDUITS, GAS OR WATER MAINS. 
    No person or public utility shall erect any telephone, telegraph or high tension line or conduit, or lay or construct any gas or water mains or any other construction of whatsoever nature in any street, alley or other public place, which will now or at any future time, interfere with the present or any future sewers or sewerage system of the board. When it is found that any such telephone, telegraph or high tension line, or any telephone, telegraph or high tension conduits, or any gas or water mains do or shall interfere with the present sewers or sewerage system or any future sewers or sewerage system, then the same shall be immediately removed or altered, as the case may be, by the person or public utility maintaining the same, so as not to interfere with the sewer or sewerage system, upon ten days' notice from the board, and unless the same are so removed or altered, as the case may require, then the board shall have the right to remove or alter the same and the cost thereof may be charged to the owner thereof, and if the same is not immediately paid, the board may collect the same in any action at law, or serve upon any public utility violating the provisions of this section a notice to show cause why its franchise should not be revoked. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.55 - CUTTING OR BREAKING SANITARY OR COMBINATION SEWER. 
    No person shall cut, break or pierce any board sanitary or combination sewer or appurtenance thereof, or place, introduce or connect any tube, pipe, trough or conduit into any sanitary or combination sewer or appurtenance thereof, without having first obtained a consent, in writing, from the board to do so. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
933.56 - GREASE. 
    The following paragraphs are specific for managing fats, oils and greases generated from cooking establishments discharging to the board's collection system. Permitting, inspections, enforcement and fees for the following articles are administered through sections 933.01 through 933.51. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Board means the Huntington Sanitary Board or their duly authorized representative. 
(2)  Fats, oils and grease (FOG) means groups of substances with similar physical characteristics that are detectable quantitatively on the basis of their common solubility in an organic solvent, usually originating from animals or vegetables. These substances are measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as grease or greases. 
(3)  Cooking establishments means those establishments that engage in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting; toasting; or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
(4)  Executive director. The person designated by the sanitary board to supervise the operation of the publicly-owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the executive director. 
(5)  Non-cooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving establishments. 
(6)  User means any person who contributes causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
(7)  Operator means the person responsible for the overall operation of the commercial establishment. 
(8)  Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns, or employee thereof. 
(9)  Grease trap or interceptor means a device for separating and retaining fats, oils and grease from the wastewater prior to entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. All are sometimes referred to herein as grease interceptors. 
(10)  Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer. 
(11)  Prewash sink means a sink generally located prior to the dishwasher. This sink is usually equipped with a sprayer to remove food particles from dishes, prior to entering the dishwasher. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall discharge any wastewater into the sewer system of the board that contains fats, oil or grease in excess of 160 milligrams per liter of wastewater. Oil and grease shall be determined by collecting four grab samples evenly spaced throughout normal business hours and analyzing separately. The average of all four results shall be less than 160 milligrams per liter. 
(2)  No person shall discharge any wastewater to the grease interceptor during the cleaning process, including, but not limited to, the decanting of water from the truck of a third party contracted to clean the grease interceptor. Tap water may be used to aid in cleaning the grease interceptor. 
(c)  Grease interceptors. 
(1)  A grease interceptor shall be installed, at no cost to the board, in any establishment where the quantity of fats, oil, and grease in its wastewater is likely to exceed 160 milligrams per liter at any time. Said establishments include, but are not limited to, all restaurants, cafeterias, bakeries, meat processing operations, schools, universities, churches, daycares, jails, hospitals, service stations and/or other facilities that prepare food for resale, patients or club members. 
(2)  In any establishment that is required to install a grease interceptor, the owner and/or operator of the facility shall properly operate and maintain the grease interceptor, so that the wastewater discharged from the facility does not contain fats, oil or grease at or above prohibited levels at any time. 
(3)  In any establishment that is required to install a grease interceptor, the owner/operator of the facility shall not: 
A.  Discharge any quantities of fats, oil or grease into the sewer system not associated with the normal cleaning of cooking utensils and/or containers in which food is cooked, prepared, served or stored; 
B.  Connect dishwashers, disposals, floor drains or mop sinks to the grease interceptor; 
C.  Allow the grease interceptor to accumulate grease constituting more than 25% of the total liquid depth; 
D.  Introduce any additives, bacteria or enzymes for the purpose of emulsifying the grease; 
E.  Alter the grease interceptor in any manner that reduces the efficiency; 
F.  Connect plumbing fixtures into which fats, oils and grease are not discharged to the grease interceptor; 
G.  Install the grease interceptor in such a manner as to make inspection and maintenance of the grease interceptor difficult. 
(4)  Any establishment that has a prewash sink shall connect the sink to a grease interceptor. If it is not possible to connect the prewash sink to an existing grease interceptor, then a separate trap shall be installed for the prewash sink. Prewash sinks shall have a screening devise to remove solids from the wastewater. A garbage disposal at this point is prohibited. 
(d)  Grease interceptor size. All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity approved by the board or appointed designee and shall be readily and easily accessible for user cleaning and board inspection. All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of waste content in order to maintain minimum design capacity or effective volume of the grease interceptors, but not less often than every 30 days, unless the board determines an alternate frequency. 
(1)  Users who are required to pass water through a grease interceptor shall size the grease interceptor using the following formula: 
GT = M × G 
GT = grease interceptor size in gallons. 
M = meals served during the mealtime period in which the greatest number of patrons are served. 
G = gallon multiplier. If one mealtime is served per day, the multiplier is 2.5; if two mealtimes are served per day, the multiplier is 3; if three mealtimes are served per day, or the establishment is open to the public for meals more than 12 hours in a 24-hour period, the multiplier is 5. 
(2)  Existing facilities required by this article to install a grease interceptor, but not subject to subsection (a)(1) hereof, shall install a grease interceptor with a volume at least 300% greater than the monthly total volume of fats, oils, and grease produced by the facilities. 
(3)  In the event that meals served by the facility, or the amount of fats, oils and grease generated each month cannot be calculated by the owner/operator of said facility, the board shall make said calculation, based upon the best evidence available, and require the existing facility to install a grease interceptor of a size indicated by said calculation. Unless the board accepts extenuating circumstances, in no case, shall the grease interceptor be smaller than 30 gallons per minute, or have less than 60-pound grease capacity. The board, in making said calculation, shall not be guaranteeing the appropriateness of the size of the grease interceptor required by said calculation, nor shall the board be prevented from requiring a larger grease interceptor or if subsequent experience demonstrates the existing grease interceptor's inadequacy. 
(4)  The board may modify the requirements for the size of the grease interceptor, as calculated in subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) hereof, for good cause, including, but not limited to, restrictions in the space for installation of a grease interceptor. In this event, the grease interceptor shall be sized as the following: 
A.  Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the local plumbing code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with 25% of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate. 
B.  In no case shall the grease interceptor have a retention time less than two pounds for each gpm of flow with the smallest trap rated at 30 gallons per minute, or have less than a 60-pound grease capacity. The board, in making said calculation, shall not be guaranteeing the appropriateness of the size of the grease interceptor required by said calculation, nor shall the board be prevented from requiring a larger grease interceptor or if subsequent experience demonstrates the existing grease interceptor's inadequacy. 
(5)  The user shall remove any accumulated grease and sludge as required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the use's expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor. 
(6)  The board may exempt an otherwise covered facility from the requirements of this article if the owner/operator of the facility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the board that its wastewater will not contain fats, oil or grease in excess of 160 milligrams per liter. A request shall be made in writing to the board along with a copy of the menu, and a list of kitchen equipment (number of sinks, dishwasher, fryer, etc.). 
(7)  The board reserves the right to re-evaluate the facility at its discretion if changes in the menu or other business operations, or problems in the sewer system, will warrant the installation of a grease interceptor. 
(8)  The use of automatic grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the board. Any establishment using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that the discharge limit for grease, as measured from the unit's outlet is consistently achieved. 
(e)  New construction. 
(1)  Facilities constructed subsequent to the passage of this article, and required by this article to install a grease interceptor, shall locate the grease interceptor within 30 feet of the fixtures served by the grease interceptor, in an easily accessible location and, when possible, outside the facilities to be served. If the grease interceptor is too large to allow the installation of a one-piece easily removable lid, two lids shall be installed. Lids shall be positioned over each chamber and sanitary tee to allow for measurement, servicing, and removal of the fats, oils and grease. These lids, or access manholes, shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. These lids shall have a minimum diameter of 24 inches and shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight. Sample ports shall be installed on the grease interceptor effluent line. 
(2)  No non-grease laden sources will be connected to those lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
(3)  Prior to construction, the contractor and/or operator of the new facility shall submit the following to the board: 
A.  Plans and specifications for the grease interceptor proposed to be installed; 
B.  Site plan showing grease interceptor location and fixture(s) to be served; 
C.  Seating capacity of the facility; and 
D.  Calculation of the required size of the grease interceptor. Restaurants, cafeterias, or any other facility that prepares food for resale, patients or club members shall calculate the required size as set forth in subsection (d)(1) hereof, but in no case shall the grease interceptor be smaller than 250 gallons. The installation and/or construction of the grease interceptor may not occur until written approval of the plans or specifications, site plan, and size is received from the board. 
(f)  Permits. 
(1)  No establishment shall operate a grease interceptor without a grease interceptor permit. In order to obtain a grease interceptor permit, the owner and/or operator of an establishment that is required to have a grease interceptor permit by this article shall submit a complete permit application, including plans and specifications, site plan, seating capacity of the facility, appropriate fee as detailed in the board's schedule of rates, and the calculation of the required size of the grease interceptor to the board at least 60 days prior to the date the facility begins operation. The board shall approve or reject the application in writing within 90 days of its submission. 
In the event the application is approved, the owner and/or operator shall install the grease interceptor, or modify an existing grease interceptor, in accordance with the plans and specifications and shall notify the board when said installation/modification is completed. The notification shall occur at least ten days prior to the date the facility begins operations. A grease interceptor permit shall not be issued until the board has inspected the grease interceptor. 
(2)  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed three years. A permit may be issued for a period less than three years at the discretion of the board. 
(3)  Permits may be re-assigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only with written prior approval of the board. 
Permits may be terminated for the following reasons: 
A.  Failing to properly install, operate or maintain the grease interceptor; 
B.  Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises, the grease interceptor, and the grease interceptor records; 
C.  Failing to pay the permit fee; 
D.  Failing to meet effluent limitations; and 
E.  Failing to maintain accurate grease interceptor records. 
(4)  The owner and/or operator shall apply for permit renewal by submitting a completed permit application including the appropriate fees as determined by the board per section 933.21 60 days prior to expiration of the existing permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if the application has been submitted in a timely manner and the failure to reissue the permit prior to the permit expiration of the previous permit is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the owner and/or operator. 
(5)  Existing facilities that are required to obtain a grease interceptor permit by this article shall submit a completed permit application within 60 days of the date of the passage of this article. The board shall review each application and, if necessary, inspect each facility, to determine whether it is in compliance with the provisions of this article. If the facility is in compliance, the board shall issue the owner and/or operator a grease interceptor permit. In the event the facility is not in compliance, the board will issue a notice of violation, pursuant to subsection (h) hereof. The initial permit application will be accepted as an approved permit for the purposes of this article until such time as the board has completed its review of the application; if the completed application has been submitted in a timely manner and the failure to issue the permit is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the owner and/or operator. 
(g)  Disposal. 
(1)  Facilities that clean their grease interceptors and dispose of the grease themselves must maintain, and have available for inspection by the board, a log for the previous three years which contains the following information: 
A.  The date and time the grease interceptor was cleaned; 
B.  The volume, in gallons, of fats, oils and grease removed; 
C.  The method of disposal. 
The board shall supply log sheets. 
(2)  Facilities that employ third parties to clean their grease must maintain, and have available for inspection by the board, receipts for the previous three years from said third parties reflecting the date and time of the removal, the volume removed, and the amount paid for services, as well as receipts from the facility where the third party disposed of the grease. A representative of the facility must be present when a third party cleans a grease interceptor. 
(3)  Failure to keep said log or receipts shall be sufficient grounds for the termination of the facility's grease interceptor permit. 
(h)  Inspection. The board shall have the right to enter any facility covered by this article without prior notice to inspect and test the grease interceptor and related fixtures and plumbing, and inspect the facility's log or third party receipts. Any violations found during inspection shall be noted on an inspection form. A subsequent notice of violation will be sent to the owner and/or operator of the facility by First Class mail, which will give said owner and/or operator 14 days to correct the violation. Extensions of the 14-day period may be granted for good cause shown. Failure to correct the violation may result in the termination of the facility's grease interceptor permit. Nothing in this article, however, shall limit the board's right to pursue the remedies set forth in the City of Huntington's Sewer Use Article, in addition to the remedies set forth herein. 
(i)  Enforcement. 
(1)  When the board finds that provisions of this article have been violated, and issues a Notice of Violation, as set forth in subsection (h) hereof, the operator may file a written objection to the notice of violation with the board within ten days of the date of said notice. Said written objections must set forth with specificity the reasons for said objection. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the operator's written objection to the notice of violation, the board shall determine whether said objection raises an issue of disputed fact material to the alleged violation. If the board determines that a material issue of disputed fact has been raised, the board shall schedule the matter for a hearing. 
(3)  After review of the evidence, if the board concludes that this article has been violated, it may issue an order revoking the operator's grease interceptor permit and establishing conditions which the operator must meet in order to receive a new grease interceptor permit, terminating sewer service to the facility, or such other remedy as justice requires. 
(4)  If any person violates a provision of this article, any order of the Huntington Sanitary Board issued under subsection (h) hereof, or any term or condition of a permit issued under this article, the board's attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in court, including, but not limited to, enjoining further commercial activity at the facility until the operator has complied with the requirements of this article. The board may also recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter fees and other expenses of litigation in said action. 
(5)  If an obstruction of a board sewer main(s) occurs that causes sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the board's sewer main(s), the board will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the board use articles, against the generator or contributor of such grease. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
ARTICLE 935 - HUNTINGTON STORMWATER UTILITY 

935.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to combine the services currently provided in several divisions of city government into the Huntington Stormwater Utility under the Huntington Water Quality Board, to engage in stormwater management to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water supplies located in or running through the city, and to enact rules and regulations, pertaining to and funding stormwater management. 
(Ord. of 623-14(1)) 
935.02 - ESTABLISHED; POWERS; DUTIES; FEES. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Huntington Stormwater Utility, which shall be operated as a municipal stormwater system of the City of Huntington (the "city") under W. Va. Code of 1931, Ch. 16, Art. 13, as amended (the "Act"). This utility shall serve the Huntington Urban Watershed, as described hereinafter. The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall provide stormwater management to all real property located within the Huntington Sewer Utility's Service area, as defined herein. 
(b)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall protect, to the extent practicable, watercourses and water supplies located in or running through the city from pollution, excessive flows, and other conditions which degrade the water environment, reduce recharging of groundwater, or endanger human, aquatic and benthic life within the Huntington Stormwater Utility's Service area. 
(c)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall have all powers conferred by the Act, specifically including, but not limited to the authority to: plan, acquire, improve, construct, inspect, develop, install, modify, manage, operate, maintain, replace, control, demolish, abandon, regulate, and finance the stormwater system to serve the Huntington Stormwater Utility's service area. The Huntington Stormwater Utility is further authorized to acquire property and/or rights in land by gift, purchase, lease, or exercise of the right to eminent domain, to construct, reconstruct, improve, and extend the stormwater system. The Huntington Stormwater Utility is further authorized to charge and collect rates and fees for the operation, maintenance, improvement, extension and upkeep of the stormwater system which rates and fees shall be determined by the Council of the City of Huntington. The utility is further authorized to accept state or federal funds under any state or federal law or program for actions preliminary to construction/reconstruction or for construction/reconstruction of facilities for the stormwater system. 
(d)  The city, on behalf of the Huntington Stormwater Utility, is authorized to issue revenue bonds secured by the revenues of and from the stormwater system to finance in whole or in part the cost of design, acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of the stormwater system, to issue refunding revenue bonds to refinance bonds secured by the revenues of the stormwater system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(e)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility may enter into and perform contracts and agreements with other governmental entities, utility enterprises and private parties for or concerning the planning, construction, leasing or other acquisition, and the financing thereof, of facilities for the stormwater system and the maintenance and operation thereof. 
(f)  Fees and charges for the Huntington Stormwater Utility shall be subject to review, approval and enactment by the Huntington City Council, pursuant to the Huntington City Charter and the City Code of the City of Huntington and the duly enacted procedures of city council. Enacted rates and fees shall at all times be sufficient to fully fund the Huntington Stormwater Utility. Collected rates and fees shall be solely for the purposes of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(g)  All real property, easements, fixtures and personal property of the city pertaining to stormwater, specifically including, but not limited to, all assets of the stormwater division of the department of public works currently held by the department of public works shall be transferred to the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(h)  Article 955 of the Huntington City Code relating to the city's floodwall system shall be amended to transfer the functions, assets and duties of the division of floodwall protection within the department of public works to the Huntington Stormwater Utility under the supervision and control of the Huntington Water Quality Board as part of the stormwater system, as provided by the Act. 
(i)  Article 969 of the Huntington City Code relating to illicit discharge and detection shall be amended to transfer the responsibilities of the department of public works under article 969 to the Huntington Stormwater Utility under the supervision and control of the Huntington Water Quality Board. 
(j)  Article 970 of the Huntington City Code relating to erosion and sediment control shall be amended to transfer the responsibilities of the department of public works under article 970 to the Huntington Stormwater Utility under the supervision and control of the Huntington Water Quality Board. 
(k)  All power and authority possessed by the City of Huntington pertaining to stormwater management is hereby transferred to the Huntington Stormwater Utility under the supervision and control of the Huntington Water Quality Board. 
(l)  All stormwater systems or facilities owned or controlled by the City of Huntington, and revenues raised for stormwater management, including but not limited to, public flood control are to be collected and/or managed by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used herein shall be as follows: 
(a)  "City" is the City of Huntington, West Virginia, and its duly elected and appointed officers and employees, including the Huntington Water Quality Board, the Huntington Stormwater Utility, and the Huntington Sanitary Board. 
(b)  "Customer" is any person or entity, of any kind, that is the legal owner of real property containing impervious area within the Huntington Stormwater Utility's Service area as defined by this article. 
(c)  "Flat rate charge" is the charge applicable to any owner of real property containing impervious area located within the Huntington Stormwater Utility's Service area. 
(d)  "Huntington Urban Watershed" is all areas within the corporate boundaries of the City of Huntington and those areas outside of said corporate boundaries from which stormwater or surface water naturally drains into the city. 
(e)  "Impervious area" means any portion of real property covered by buildings, structures, pavement, gravel or other material that significantly inhibits stormwater from penetrating the soil. 
(f)  "Multi-unit property" is a residential, non-residential or commercial property of any size that has located upon the property structures capable of housing two or more residents or tenants, at least one of which having no ownership interest in the property. 
(g)  "MS4" means municipal separate storm sewer system. The City of Huntington is a regulated MS4 under the NPDES program. 
(h)  "NPDES" means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. A permitting program with authority from the Clean Water Act. 
(i)  "Non-residential customer" means any owner of property not defined as a residential customer and includes, but is not limited to, owners of multi-unit, commercial and industrial property and governmental entities that own property within the Huntington Stormwater Utility's Service area. 
(j)  "Non-stormwater" is all flows to the stormwater system not defined as a pollutant or stormwater in this article or as so determined by the city. This may include, but is not limited to, cooling water, process water, ground water from a purge well and dechlorinated swimming pool discharge. 
(k)  "Pervious area" is all real property that is not impervious. 
(l)  "Pollutant" means any liquid or non-liquid material including, but not limited to, dredged soil, solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, grease, petroleum products, munitions, chemical waste, detergents, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, silt, dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, gasses entrained in water, paints, oil and other automotive fluids, soil, rubbish, debris, materials containing fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, and enterococcus, heavy metals, hazardous wastes, yard waste from commercial landscaping operations, animal waste, materials that result from the process of building, and offensive matter of any kind which, when discharged to water, causes or contributes to water pollution and/or the degradation of water quality. 
(m)  "Pollution" is the degradation of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive properties of the watercourses and water supplies located in or running through the city and/or the discharge of any pollutant to the watercourses and water supplies located in or running through the city which will or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare or to the beneficial use of the water and/or the water environment. 
(n)  "Real property" as used in this article, is land and fixtures and improvements upon that land, but does not include publicly owned streets or sidewalks. 
(o)  "Residential customer" means the owner of real property on which is located one single family dwelling. 
(p)  "Service area" is, initially, all areas within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(q)  "Stormwater" includes atmospheric precipitation, surface runoff water, groundwater discharge and floodwater. 
(r)  "Stormwater management" is the process of collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and/or disposal of stormwater to reasonably manage the magnitude and frequency of runoff to minimize the impact of the runoff upon the water quality of the receiving stream and the other hazards associated with stormwater, including, but not limited to, pollution and flooding. 
(s)  "Stormwater system" includes all real property, fixtures and personal property of the Huntington Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, stormwater sewers, drains, ditches, streets, retention/detention structures, floodwalls, dams, and river impoundments, used for collecting, conveying, storing, treating and/or disposal of stormwater and non-stormwater. 
(t)  "Water quality service charge" is a charge for services rendered by the Huntington Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, fees for permit applications, stormwater management plan review, flood protection activities, inspection, and other services. 
(u)  "Water quality service fee" is a flat rate charge or a charge based on square feet of impervious land area. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.04 - WATER QUALITY FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES. 
(a)  Owners of real property with impervious area located within the service area shall pay the water quality fees and service charges for the operation, maintenance, improvement of, and necessary additions to, the stormwater system. Therefore, all owners of real property with impervious area in the service area shall be charged for the use of the stormwater system. 
(b)  The city council shall, by ordinance, set water quality service charges and fees to recover from owners of real property with impervious area located within the service area, the cost of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. Such water quality fees and service charges are intended to cover costs that include, but are not limited to, the costs of administration, operation, maintenance, improvement of, and necessary additions to the stormwater system, debt service for any debt obligations secured by the revenues of the stormwater system and regulatory compliance of the stormwater system and stormwater management program, all as authorized under the provisions of W. Va. Code, § 16-13-1, et seq. 
(c)  The city council may establish and enforce water quality service charges. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.05 - PROPERTY AFFECTED. 
    Except as provided in this article and/or by regulation, any owners of real property with impervious area within the service area shall be subject to the water quality service fee regardless of whether such property is privately or publicly owned. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.06 - AUTHORIZED WATER QUALITY SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES. 
    The monthly water quality service fee authorized under section 935.04 above shall be established as follows: 
Residential Non-residential $7.15 per month First 3,000 Impervious sq. ft. $7.15 per month Between 3,000 and up to a maximum of 1,000,000 impervious sq. ft. in the aggregate $1.05 per 1,000 sq. ft. per month Minimum monthly charge $7.15 per month  
    Multi-unit property owners are eligible to pay a non-residential service fee based upon the aggregate total square footage of impervious area owned within the service area. However, said multi-unit property owner will be required to pay a monthly minimum charge on each parcel of real property owned. 
    The initial water quality service fee shall be effective October 1, 2014. Water quality service fees based upon square feet of impervious area shall not be implemented until mapping of the service area has been completed by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
    Returned check charge. A service charge of $25 will be imposed upon any customer, property owner or any other person or entity whose check is returned by the bank for any reason. 
    EFT, credit card and drop box payments. A service charge will be imposed on EFT, credit card or drop box payments or any other electronic transactions. The amount shall be equal to the actual charges to the utility from any source. 
    Delayed payment penalty. On all current usage billings not paid in full by the latest pay date, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid. This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once for each bill where it is appropriate. 
    The city council may, from time to time, by ordinance, change the water quality service fees or charges. 
    The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall assign discount credits to those newly constructed properties employing volumetric flow reduction facilities, and to those existing properties employing volume and/or rate of flow reduction practices. A non-residential customer with an aggregate total of impervious area exceeding 1,000,000 square feet shall not be eligible for such discount credit. The credits may be made available only with adequate mapping and research by the Huntington Stormwater Utility, and may be reasonably delayed pending the fulfillment of these prerequisites. 
    Residential customers who are recipients of Medicaid, food stamps, supplemental security income, federal public housing assistance, low-income home energy assistance program benefits, temporary assistance to needy families benefits, or benefits under other income-related state or federal programs shall be eligible, upon certification being provided to the Huntington Stormwater Utility, shall pay a Water Quality service fee reduced by 65% of the then-applicable water quality service fee for residential customers. Continuation of eligibility for the reduced water quality service fee established pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual certification. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.07 - BILLING. 
    The billing for water quality service fees and charges described herein may be combined with the billing for other services provided by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.08 - COLLECTION. 
    The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall assess interest and penalties upon unpaid and past due water quality service fees and service charges, and act as it deems appropriate to enforce collection of unpaid water quality service fees and water quality charges. Unpaid water quality service fees and water quality charges shall constitute just cause for disconnection of public water service to the non-paying property. The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall enter into an agreement with the public water provider to accomplish these purposes, and shall further ensure sufficient notice of disconnection is made in accordance with the rules of the Public Service Commission. Water service shall be reactivated only upon full payment of the water quality service fees and water quality charges or other payment arrangements approved by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. The Huntington Stormwater Utility may also take appropriate legal action to collect unpaid water quality service fees or water quality charges, including, but not limited to, placing a lien upon the subject property and/or bringing a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover unpaid charges and fees. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.09 - USE OF FUNDS. 
    All funds collected by the Huntington Stormwater Utility shall be accounted for separately and shall be used solely for the purposes of the Huntington Stormwater Utility authorized under West Virginia Code § 16-13-1, et seq., including, but not limited to, construction, operation, repair, improvement, extension and maintenance of the stormwater system, debt service on any obligations secured by the revenues of the stormwater system, and stormwater environmental compliance and stormwater management programs. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.10. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS. 
(a)  The stormwater system shall be used for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater. 
(b)  No person shall place or cause to be placed any substance or material, including any pollutant, into the stormwater system, unless written approval has been granted by the Huntington Stormwater Utility or the person maintains a current industrial waste discharge permit authorizing such discharge and such discharge will not cause a pass through violation for the stormwater system. The Huntington Stormwater Utility may grant approval to discharge non-stormwater into the stormwater system for any reason or combination of reasons in its sole discretion. 
(c)  Any person or entity engaged in activities which will or may result in any pollutant entering the stormwater system shall undertake stormwater control practices to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, compliant operation of facilities that may be a source of pollutants, such as paved parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, storage facilities, and private roads/streets. 
(d)  No person shall deposit, leave or maintain, or cause to be deposited, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, grass clippings, leaves, garbage, grease, petroleum products, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, stream, conduit or other drainage structures, parking area, or upon any private or public plot of land so that any discharge therefrom may result in pollution. 
(e)  No person shall cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin, storage facility, or similar container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged into any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structure, or upon any public or private plot of land in the service area. 
(f)  No person shall use the stormwater system for discharge from any environmental cleanup that is regulated under federal or state law unless approved by the stormwater utility. Approval by the Huntington Stormwater Utility must be conditioned upon the discharge meeting all criteria for discharge under this article. Approval conditions may provide for measures appropriate to prevent harm due to possible exfiltration into the ground adjacent to the stormwater system or failure of any pretreatment system for the discharge. 
(g)  Any person who maintains and complies with a Ground Water Protection Plan established pursuant to 47 CSR 58 (West Virginia Ground Water Protection Rule) shall be deemed to be in full compliance with the requirements of subparagraphs (c), (d) and (e) this section. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.11 - ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. 
    It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain or continue illicit connections to the stormwater system. The provisions of article 969 of the Huntington City Code, relating to illicit discharge and detection are incorporated by reference herein and the responsibilities of the department of public works previously under article 969 are hereby transferred to the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.12 - STORAGE AREAS. 
    No person shall store any material including grease, oil or other hazardous substance in a manner that will or may result in such substance entering the stormwater system causing pollution. No person shall store motor vehicles, machine parts, or other objects or materials in a manner that may leak grease, oil, or other hazardous substance, and/or other pollutant into the stormwater system to prevent the pollution of the stormwater system. Spill containment systems may consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, or other devices as required. No person shall operate a spill containment system such that it allows incompatible liquids to mix and thereby create a hazardous condition. Any person who maintains and complies with a Ground Water Protection Plan established pursuant to 47 CSR 58 (West Virginia Ground Water Protection Rule) shall be deemed to be in full compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.13 - DISCHARGE IN VIOLATION OF PERMIT. 
    Any discharge that would cause a violation of any NPDES permit assigned to the City of Huntington and any amendments, revisions or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge, including, but not limited to, the cost of remedial activity, shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and the city shall seek to have such persons defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action against the City of Huntington relating to such discharge as provided by applicable rules of law. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.14 - STORMWATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION. 
(a)  Only parties authorized by the Huntington Stormwater Utility may perform construction upon the public facilities of the stormwater system. Public facilities of the stormwater system which may be constructed by authorized parties shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Those facilities that serve two or more properties, including, but not limited to, stormwater system facilities that collect and transmit stormwater from and/or across two or more properties; and, 
(2)  All taps or other connections from a private lateral to a facility of the stormwater system. 
(b)  All costs and expenses of the Huntington Stormwater Utility incidental to the installation of private stormwater facilities, connection of a private facility to the stormwater system, and installation of public facilities to facilitate and/or convey flows from a specific private facility to the stormwater system, shall be borne by the owner(s) of the private facility. The amount of, and terms of payment for, these costs and expenses, shall be determined by the Huntington Stormwater Utility for such facility, in its sole discretion. 
(c)  Parties authorized by the Huntington Stormwater Utility to perform construction of or upon the stormwater system shall comply with the design and construction standards required by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. These parties shall allow for inspection of the construction by the Huntington Stormwater Utility at all times, and construction shall only occur during normal working hours of the Huntington Stormwater Utility unless otherwise authorized by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. No facility constructed by an authorized party may be covered or connected to the stormwater system without specific authorization of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. This authority shall be granted by the Huntington Stormwater Utility upon satisfaction of the design and construction standards required by the Huntington Stormwater Utility for such facility, in its sole discretion. 
(d)  All public facilities of the stormwater system shall, upon authorized completion and acceptance, be property of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.15 - STORMWATER TAPS. 
(a)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility or a party authorized by the Huntington Stormwater Utility will furnish and install stormwater system taps of the size and at the location requested in writing by an applicant upon a form to be provided by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. The applicant shall pay the full and actual cost of the tap installation. 
(b)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility may deny a tap application when the requested tap is proposed to an inadequate public facility. A public facility shall be considered inadequate when, under expected wet weather conditions, that facility is calculated to be unable to effectively convey stormwater in a manner, and to a location, deemed appropriate by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.16 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  No person shall construct or maintain any property, residence or business not in compliance with the standards of this article. 
(b)  Authorized Huntington Stormwater Utility employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted, after reasonable notice, to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person or firm shall fail to provide any report or other information or perform any duty required by this article. 
(d)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility is authorized to take appropriate legal action to require compliance with this article. 
(e)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility is authorized to enforce and collect upon the terms of a payment and performance bond in the event of default of the conditions described therein. 
(f)  If, after reasonable notice, a person fails to comply with this article, the Huntington Stormwater Utility may cause the work to be done to achieve compliance and shall charge the cost of that work to the person responsible. The responsible person shall pay in full the charged amount within 30 days of the invoice date, or otherwise make arrangements, acceptable to the Huntington Stormwater Utility, for full payment of the invoiced amount. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.17 - CONCEALMENT. 
    Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.18 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT POWERS. 
    In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this article, the Huntington Stormwater Utility has the authority to utilize any of the remedies or sanctions authorized by West Virginia law and this Code that, in its judgment, will effectively protect the stormwater system and comply with federal and state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.19 - NON-EXCLUSIVITY OF REMEDIES. 
    Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
935.20 - DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. 
    The degree of protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this article does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the state or no damage to real or personal property within the Huntington Urban Watershed. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
ARTICLE 941 - DISPOSAL OF HAULED SEPTAGE WASTES[10] 
    Hauled industrial or non-domestic waste is subject to article 933 through section 933.51 of this ordinance. 
    The following paragraphs are specific for managing septage haulers discharging to the board's wastewater treatment plant. Permitting, inspections, enforcement and fees for the following articles are administered through article 933.01 through section 933.51. 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Article 941 was revised and reenacted by an Article passed March 10, 1997. Subsequent amendments to Article 941 will be indicated by legislative histories at the end of the affected section. 

941.01 - WHERE DISPOSAL PERMITTED; PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  Septage wastes, or hauled domestic waste, means putrid or offensive matter collected from privies, septic tanks, portable toilets, and cesspools. Septage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the board and at such times as are established by the board. Such waste shall not violate section 933.11 or 933.13 of this article or any other requirements established by the board. 
(b)  The board requires haulers of septage waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The board also may prohibit the disposal of hauled septage. The discharge of hauled septage is subject to all other requirements of articles 933 and 941. 
(c)  Septage waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the board. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the board. The board may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The board may require the septage haulers to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Septage waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of sources of septage, waste hauler permit number, truck identification, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the waste as domestic septage and not to contain any characteristic hazardous waste as defined by 40 CFR 261 Subpart C, any listed hazardous waste as defined by 40 CFR 261 Subpart D, or hazardous constituents as defined by 40 CFR 261 Appendix VIII. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.02 - APPLICATION FOR, ISSUANCE AND TERM OF SEPTAGE PERMIT. 
    The applicant shall be the owner or lessee of the vehicle for which a permit is applied. Any false, untruthful or misleading statements in any application for a permit or in any paper submitted in support of such application shall invalidate the permit. All permits issued by the board shall be for not more than five years. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.03 - INFORMATION REQUIRED UPON APPLICATION FOR SEPTAGE PERMIT. 
    All applicants for a permit to discharge septage into the wastewater treatment plant shall furnish the following information with each application: 
(a)  Name of firm or individual and address. 
(b)  Volume of septage removed each year for the last three years. New applicants shall estimate the volume for the first year. 
(c)  Number and identification of scavenger vehicles in collection service. 
(d)  Copies of appropriate permits as required by the WVDEP. 
(e)  Such other information as the board may from time to time require. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.04 - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
    Such a permit may be suspended or revoked at any time by the board for willful, continued or persistent violation of these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.05 - AMOUNT AND PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE. 
    The service charge for disposition of such domestic wastes into the sewer system or treatment facilities shall be listed in section 933.22. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.06 - SEPTAGE WASTE HAULER PERMIT. 
    All haulers shall be required to obtain a septage waste discharge permit as per section 941.03, prior to the discharge of any waste. Interested haulers shall complete and file with the board a permit application, signed by a duly authorized representative of the company, in the form prescribed by the board, and accompanied by an application fee according to the fee schedule adopted by the board. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.07 - GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR DISCHARGE OF SEPTAGE. 
(a)  All hauled discharges must meet the applicable federal, state, and local pretreatment standards. 
(b)  Waste haulers shall only discharge at locations specifically designated by the board. 
(c)  Hauled wastes are subject to sampling by the board at all times. The hauler may be required to suspend the discharge of wastes until the analysis is complete. The board reserves the right to refuse permission to discharge any load. 
(d)  All hauled wastes are subject to the prohibited discharge standards of the general pretreatment regulations as contained in 40 CFR 403.5(b) and the local prohibited discharge requirements contained in sections 933.10 through 933.13. 
(e)  Haulers shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the board, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the board. 
(f)  The board may require haulers to obtain and provide proof of financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.08 - PERMIT MODIFICATIONS. 
    The board may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the board's POTW, board personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(i)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. Modification for this purpose may not be allowed unless the permit is transferable as provided in section 941.09. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.09 - PERMIT TRANSFER. 
    Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days advance notice to the board and the board approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the board must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(a)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(b)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(c)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit; and 
(d)  Appropriate permits have been obtained from the WVDEP. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.10 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION. 
    The board may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to notify the board of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(b)  Failure to provide prior notification to the board of changed conditions pursuant to section 933.41(e); 
(c)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(d)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Refusing to allow the board timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(g)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(h)  Failure to pay fines; 
(i)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(j)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(k)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(l)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(m)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.11 - NON-DOMESTIC WASTE GENERATORS. 
    All facilities interested in discharging non-domestic waste to the Huntington POTW via truck shall obtain a discharge permit as required by section(s) 933.33 through 933.46. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.12 - ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. Alternative methods may be approved by the board in such cases as the board deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.13 - PENALTY. 
(a)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  The board may seek civil penalties of $25,000 per violation, per day, if a user violates, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The board may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the board. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $25,000, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. 
Remedies nonexclusive: 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The board may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with board's enforcement response plan. However, the board may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the board is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
Administrative fines: 
(c)  When the board finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standards or requirement, the board may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $10,000. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(d)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 10% per month. A lien against the user's property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(e)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the board to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 60 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the board may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The board may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(f)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Supplemental enforcement action: 
(g)  Performance bonds. The board may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the board, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the board to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(h)  Liability insurance. The board may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(i)  Payment of outstanding fees and penalties. The board may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-29-12(1)) 
941.99 - RESERVED. 
CHAPTER FIVE - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES 
ARTICLE 951 - REFUSE COLLECTION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 9, 2013, amended article 951 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 951, §§ 951.01-951.22, 951.99, pertained to similar subject matter. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Placing material in streets, § 311.01; loads dropping or leaking, § 347.04. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(10) et seq. 

951.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Ashes" means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
(b)  "Dwelling unit" means any closed-in area used as the principal place of residence for one family or one individual in which water or sewer service is provided and food may be prepared or eaten. 
(c)  "Approved container" means a metal or plastic container, which is portable, watertight, equipped with handles and tight-fitting lid, and has a capacity of not less than ten gallons nor more than 32 gallons, which when full, shall not have a total combined weight of contents and container of more than 75 pounds. 
(d)  "City" means employees of the city public works department or the authorized representative of the city. 
(e)  "Garbage" means all matter, solid, liquid or mixed, which attends, is created or accumulates within the city from the preparation, cleaning, cooking, use, storage or sale of any matter designed or intended as foodstuff for human consumption. Such term shall also include tin cans, bottles and other containers from which food or foodstuffs have been removed. 
(f)  "Occupant" means any person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises. 
(g)  "Premises" means every residence, household, apartment, trailer court, motel, hospital, nursing home, hotel, restaurant, café, market, wholesale or retail store, establishment or place of business in the City in which garbage or trash accumulates. 
(h)  "Refuse" means garbage and rubbish collectively. 
(i)  "Residential premises" means single-family dwellings, duplexes, apartments and trailers. 
(j)  "Rubbish" means all normal wastes resulting from the use or occupancy of any premises such as ashes, brush, grass, leaves or other similar substances, but does not include any building material, industrial waste, containers described in the definition of garbage, waste of a dangerous or explosive nature, or human or animal excreta. 
(k)  "Litter" means the disorderly accumulation of objects, especially discarded waste material or scraps. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.02 - KEEPING OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH ON PREMISES PRIOR TO REMOVAL. 
    Tree, bush and bush trimmings intended for removal shall be tied in bundles not exceeding 48 inches by 18 inches in size, shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight and need not be placed in containers. All other garbage and rubbish shall be placed in approved containers. 
    Every occupant of premises from which garbage and rubbish are to be removed shall deposit all garbage and rubbish in such containers as shall prevent the same from being scattered or blown upon any other premises or public ways in the city to cause litter. The city shall make one pickup of uncontained garbage and rubbish per month at no extra charge, provided the amount of uncontained garbage and rubbish does not exceed such as will fit in an eight foot pickup truck bed. Any loads of garbage and/or rubbish that exceed such amount shall be considered a special collection for which a fee will be assessed by the public works director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.03 - COMBINING GARBAGE AND RUBBISH. 
    The occupant of any premises may combine rubbish with garbage in any approved container. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.04 - CITY NOT TO COLLECT CERTAIN ITEMS. 
(a)  The city shall not collect, remove or dispose of the following types of refuse: hot ashes, offal, sewage, animal excreta, waste of dangerous or explosive nature or material resulting from the demolition, repair, alteration or erection of buildings or structures. Such material in this section shall not be placed in approved containers used for collection by the city. Provided, that animal excreta may be collected so long as the same is placed within a sealed plastic bag and which bag is placed within another sealed plastic bag and placed in an approved container used for collection by the city. 
(b)  No person shall place used needles, syringes or bio-hazardous materials in refuse containers or bags for collection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.05 - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, refuse collection services for all dwelling units within the limits of the city, exclusive of multifamily dwellings containing five or more units, shall be provided by the city. The city may, at its option and subject to the provisions of section 951.04, provide refuse collection and disposal services to any person, firm, corporation or governmental entity owning any multifamily dwelling containing five or more units, owning or operating any commercial enterprise or carrying out any governmental function within the city. 
(b)  All persons, firms, corporations and governmental entities owning any multifamily dwelling containing five or more units, owning or operating any commercial enterprise, or carrying out any governmental function within the city shall provide for the removal of garbage and rubbish from their premises by contracting with a refuse hauler licensed by the state, or, may contract with the city for the removal of garage and rubbish from their premises, provided, that the city agrees to and is in a position to provide such services, and further provided, that all such contracts entered into by and between the city and such persons, firms, corporations and governmental entities shall contain uniform provisions including, but not limited to, uniform terms, conditions, rates and charges. 
(c)  No person, firm, corporation or governmental entity shall allow upon any property owned or occupied by the same and upon any public or private right-of-way abutting such property, the deposit, presence or accumulation of garbage or rubbish except for any period of time as may be necessary for the removal of such garbage or rubbish as required in this article or as may be required under any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to deny refuse or solid waste collection and disposal services or assess a special charge to any person or entity whose solid waste requirements are abnormally large or peculiar in the opinion of the health officer or the director of public works so as to justify special handling. Any special charge shall be set by the director of public works and shall be reasonable under the circumstances. Circumstances justifying special handling may include but are not limited to problems of accessibility to the collector, major construction or demolition waste: the presence of excrement, sewage, animal carcasses or other substances which may pose a serious threat to the public health; brush that is not bundled according to section 951.02 or the generation of more than four containers of 50-gallon capacity of refuse or the equivalent thereof per week. 
(e)  All persons receiving refuse collection services from the City of Huntington shall not place refuse on the curb prior to 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled refuse pick-up. All refuse shall be placed in a plastic bag not weighing more than forty pounds and subsequently placed within a hard container and placed at the curb for pick-up. 
(f)  All persons who reside within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington and pay for refuse service may be allowed use of the City of Huntington landfill. Each property owner may dispose of no more than one load per month. Such load shall not exceed the eight-foot bed of a pickup truck or equivalent size trailer. A valid West Virginia identification showing proof of residency and a current refuse paid receipt from the City of Huntington Finance Office showing a matching residential address must be shown. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.06 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR. 
    The mayor shall supervise, see to and provide for the control of the storage, collection, removal and disposal of all refuse which accumulates within the city and shall enforce or cause the enforcement of the provisions of this article. For the purpose of carrying out the spirit and intent of this article in supplementation thereof, the mayor is authorized to promulgate such rules, regulations and orders on behalf of the city relating to the efficient storage, collection, removal and disposition of refuse and litter as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and sanitary requirements of the public. Such rules, regulations and orders without limitation on the generality thereof shall have the same force and effect as if specifically set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.07 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF HEALTH DEPARTMENT. 
    In order to promote the highest possible standards of health, sanitation and safety of the residents of the city, the Director of the Cabell-Huntington Health Department is authorized and directed to cooperate with the efforts of the mayor in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.08 - SERVICE FEE; POWERS OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; PENALTIES FOR NON-PAYMENT; EFFECTIVE DATE. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon all users of the refuse collection and disposal services provided by the city a fee of $20 per month per dwelling unit. Any user who recycles through an established refuse hauler may offset refuse service fees in the amount of $4.50 per quarter, or one-half of the amount remitted to said refuse hauler, provided that satisfactory receipts are provided to the director of finance. 
(b)  When the aggregate gross income of all persons residing in a dwelling unit during the preceding calendar year was 75- to 100-percent of the poverty guideline set for that year for a household of three by the United States Department of Health and Human Services and published yearly in the Federal Register, the rate for refuse disposal services to such dwelling unit shall be reduced to $10 per month. When the aggregate gross income of all persons residing in a dwelling unit during the preceding calendar year was less than 75-percent of the poverty guideline set for that year for a household of three by the United States Department of Health and Human Services and published yearly in the Federal Register, the rate for refuse disposal services to such dwelling unit shall be reduced to $5 per month. Provided, that the resident or residents who occupy such dwelling unit make an application for such rate to the director of finance and file therewith an affidavit pertaining to the relevant facts. The rate and charges shall become effective with the first quarterly billing after the filing of the affidavit. The city may require any applicant to provide documentation to verify income declarations set forth in affidavit. Failure to provide documentation requested shall render applicant ineligible for the reduced rate. Further, to qualify for the reduced rate, applicant shall not be in arrears on any prior refuse billings or, alternatively, shall be in a payment plan with the city to address arrearages with payments current. Notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection, nothing contained herein shall permit the owner of a single unit or multi-unit building held for rent to participate in this discount program. 
    In the event any person making application for reduced charges shall submit any false, erroneous or untrue information relative to the eligibility or qualifications of the applicant for such reduced charges as set forth herein, any such person supplying such false, erroneous or untrue information shall be subject to a penalty equal to 150% of a full year's unreduced rate then in effect in addition to any penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The director of the division of finance, with the approval of the mayor, may make such other provisions as he or she may deem necessary or proper, consistent with this article, for the billing and collection of charges for services, provided, that, the director shall bill all property owners receiving services for such services for the fee imposed herein on a quarterly basis. All property owners that are users of such services shall remit payment of the fee imposed herein within the time period prescribed on the bills issued by the director. 
    The director of the division of finance may prescribe such forms and records as shall be used for the collection and accounting of all fees for any and all services rendered under this article, with the authority to require any and all persons responsible for such collection and accounting to comply with same. 
(d)  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 951.99(a) or (b) of this article. Compliance officers and sworn fire officers are authorized to issue citations for violations of any provision within article 951. Police officers are authorized to issue citations and seek arrest warrants for any violations of the provisions of article 951. 
(e)  Each installment of the refuse collection and disposal service fee imposed herein shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date the bill is sent. Bills not paid within 30 days of their issuance shall be considered and treated as delinquent. There shall be added to each delinquent account a penalty of 5% of the balance thereof on the 31st day after the bill has been sent. Thereafter, a penalty of 5% shall be added to the total outstanding balance at the end of each billing period. 
(f)  No fee collected hereunder, retroactive to the date of January 1, 2015, shall be restricted to any specific use or purpose other than for expenditures related to the operation of the sanitation and trash enterprise fund. Funds now existing in the general fund landfill closure account shall be limited to use for landfill closure, and for capital and other expenditures of the sanitation and trash enterprise fund. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall become effective upon adoption by council and approval by the mayor and retroactive to January 1, 2015, and shall remain in full force and effect until further ordinance of council. 
(Ord. No. 10-25-2011(2); Ord. No. 9-9-13(1); Ord. of 4-13-15(5) ; Ord. of 9-12-16(1) ) 
951.09 - RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION OF PREMISES. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the duties and responsibilities imposed upon them by the terms of this article, the chief executive officer, the Director of the Cabell-Huntington Health Department and their designated representatives shall be authorized to enter upon and inspect any premises at reasonable hours. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.10 - THROWING OR SCATTERING GARBAGE OR RUBBISH. 
    No person shall throw, place or scatter any garbage, rubbish or other refuse over or upon any premises, street or alley, either public or private, or adjacent thereto, either with or without the intent to later remove such garbage, rubbish or other refuse, or to suffer or permit any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person to become or remain offensive, littered, unsanitary, unsightly, unsafe or hazardous to public health from the accumulation of garbage or rubbish. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.11 - FEEDING OF GARBAGE. 
    No person shall feed garbage not originating on his own premises to any animal or fowl within the city. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.12 - BURNING GARBAGE. 
    No person shall burn any garbage, except in standard domestic or commercial incinerators of a type approved by the National Fire Protection Association to comply with the regulation of the Department of Natural Resources and the State Air Pollution Control Commission. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.13 - BURNING RUBBISH. 
    No person shall burn any rubbish or industrial or commercial waste except in the manner specified in the Fire Prevention Code and any other fire prevention ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.14 - REMOVAL OF GARBAGE BY HOTELS, RESTAURANTS, RETAIL FOOD STORES OR ANY OTHER BUSINESS USING A COMMERCIAL CONTAINER FOR REFUSE. 
    Any person owning, keeping or operating any hotel, restaurant, or retail food store within the city, shall remove all accumulated garbage or offal at least two times per seven-day week. Other businesses that use a commercial container for refuse may have their container emptied as necessary. No such person shall permit any garbage, swill, or offal to collect and remain at or about his premises that is not placed in a closed, covered and secured refuse container. All containers must list the name and phone number of owner and the name and address of lessee on one side of container in a conspicuous area and must remain in plain view when parked. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.15 - UNLAWFUL ACTS. 
    No person within the city: 
(a)  Shall keep or maintain on any premises any garbage or rubbish intended for removal or collection therefrom in any manner other than that prescribed by this article. 
(b)  Except when contained in one or more vessels meeting the requirements of this article and left for the purpose of collection at a place designated by rule, regulation or order of the mayor, shall throw, dump, drain or leave any garbage, paper, cans, bottles, rubbish or litter of any kind or nature whatsoever in, on or about any public or private street, alley, court, lane, way, thoroughfare, lot, lands, dump, premises or vehicle, whether such points, places or objects enumerated in this subsection are under the ownership or control of such person or another. 
(c)  Shall empty, place or dump any garbage which is not mechanically or thoroughly ground into any public or private sewer or stream of any connection therewith. 
(d)  Except for the city or for private collectors that are certified by the state Public Service Commission, shall engage in or conduct the business of collection removal or disposal of solid waste within the corporate limits. 
(e)  Being the holder of a private refuse collector's license or his agent or employee, shall fail or refuse to comply with and abide by any duty, provision, term, covenant, prohibition or agreement required of licenses under the provisions referred to in this article. 
(f)  Shall cause or permit any vehicle containing garbage to stand upon any street, alley or thoroughfare within the city, except when in actual use in receiving or loading garbage. 
(g)  Shall maintain, collect, receive, remove, transport, convey or dispose of any garbage or rubbish in such manner or by such means as to constitute a public or private nuisance or to constitute a source of injury or damage to the person or property of another. 
(h)  Shall transport any garbage or rubbish in any manner except in a vehicle or container equipped so as to prevent the flowing or dropping off of any of the contents on the public streets or ways of the city or private property therein. 
(i)  Shall fail or refuse to comply with any other duty or requirement of this article or to do or perform any other act or thing prohibited by the provisions and terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.16 - DISPOSAL IN ANOTHER PERSONS CONTAINER PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of garbage, trash or other refuse by dumping it into any dumpster or container located on any property other than that on which such garbage, trash or other refuse was produced. The consent of the property owner on which the waste is disposed of shall be irrelevant under this section. No person shall place garbage, trash or other refuse contained in a garbage bag or other disposable container on a street, alley, way or other point usually used as a pick up point by the sanitation department when such person has not paid a refuse fee for that particular pick up point. 
(b)  This section shall not apply in such manner as to disallow the use of one central dumpster or collection station where a building or set of adjoining buildings owned by the same person or association and used for a similar purpose is located on one or more parcels. 
(c)  No person shall scavenge or withdraw any substance from a dumpster, trash can or other trash or refuse container located on private or public property for the purpose of converting such substance to his or her own use. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
PRIVATE REFUSE COLLECTORS 
951.17 - PERMITS; APPLICATION. 
    The mayor is authorized to issue permits to private refuse collectors to operate within the city in such number as he deems appropriate for the preservation of the public health, safety, welfare and economy of the city; provided, that no such permit shall be granted unless the person seeking the same shall file with the mayor an application setting forth or accompanied by the following information, representations and stipulations: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  The name of any person other than the applicant interested in the proposed business function of garbage and rubbish collection. 
(c)  The type of vehicle to be used, which shall consist only of a motor-propelled vehicle. If such vehicle is to be used for the collection of liquid or semi-liquid garbage, then it shall be equipped with, and such garbage shall be deposited in either a watertight metal tank or one or more watertight vessels for containing garbage, either, both or all of which shall be equipped with tight, close-fitting lids or covers. Except when necessary for the filling or emptying thereof, such tank or vessel and such lids or covers shall be kept in place at all times, and none thereof when containing any liquid substance shall ever be filled to an extent greater than a point six inches from the top thereof. If the vehicle is to be used for the hauling of rubbish or solid garbage, then it may be equipped with a body of any type which insures against the spilling, dropping or blowing of the contents thereof upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city. 
(d)  The places where any garbage or refuse collected will be disposed of, which places of disposal shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and shall in no event be at or upon any place which will constitute a public or private nuisance. 
(e)  A covenant, signed by the applicant, signifying that he will comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.18 - PERMIT ISSUANCE. 
    Upon being satisfied that any applicant referred to in section 951.17 is able to comply with all the terms, conditions and requirements of this article and any rules, regulations and orders issued pursuant hereto, together with all covenants and agreements contained in an application therefor, the mayor may grant a private refuse collectors' permit to such applicant to collect, remove and dispose of all garbage or rubbish from the premises of the permittee's customers. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.19 - PERMIT TRANSFERABILITY; EXPIRATION. 
    No private refuse collectors' permit shall be transferable without the written approval of the mayor. Every such permit shall expire on December 31 in the year in which the same is issued and while in effect shall be at all times in the possession of the permittee or his agent or employee acting thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.20 - PERMIT REVOCATION. 
    In the event of the failure of any permittee under this article to comply with any provision or requirements of this article or any rule, regulation or order put into effect by the mayor as provided in this article, the mayor shall be and he is empowered to revoke the permit of such licensee forthwith and give notice to such effect by mail addressed to such permittee at the address specified in the application for the permit; provided, that in the event of such revocation of a private refuse collectors' permit by the mayor, the permittee shall have the right to appeal from the mayor's action to council. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.21 - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE 106. 
    Any such private refuse collector or other person who, in order to defeat, evade or otherwise thwart the payment or collection of the service fees established for city-owned disposal places, knowingly misinforms or provides false information to any municipal employee who requests or requires information of such collector or person to enable such employee to determine the applicable service fees payable hereunder shall be guilty of a violation of this section and shall be subject to the civil and criminal penalties provided in section 951.99. 
    The rates hereinbefore established may hereafter be changed from time to time by resolution of council without the necessity of modifying or amending this section. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.22 - PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION APPROVED HAULERS. 
    The following rules shall apply to private trash and refuse haulers operating under section 951.15(d): 
(a)  All Public Service Commission approved haulers operating within the city on June 1 of each year shall submit by July 1 of that year a complete list, including names and addresses, of all municipal customers serviced by the hauler on June 1 of that year. Said list shall be submitted to the office of the director of the division of finance and shall be authenticated by the signature of the approved hauler. 
(b)  If a private hauler is operating within the city, it shall be the responsibility of that hauler to remove all trash and refuse surrounding each dumpster and container serviced by it. This removal of trash and refuse shall be administered every time that the dumpster or container is emptied, but such clean up shall only apply to trash and refuse accumulation caused by the presence of such containers. 
(c)  Each dumpster shall be closed, covered and secured in a manner so as to promote sanitary conditions and to prevent leakage or escape of trash or refuse. 
(d)  All grease trap dumpster must be placed in a secured, enclosed area. No grease trap dumpsters may be placed on any city right-of-way, including, but not limited to alleyways. 
(e)  The use of dumpsters by private haulers shall at all times be subject to the rules and regulations promulgated from time to time by the mayor and on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
951.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  A penalty of 10% of the stated fee shall be added for failure to pay the installments due on the specified dates. Additionally, or in the alternative, any person, firm, corporation, governmental entity or other entity violating any provision of this article for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(b)  If any person shall violate or cause to be violated any provision of article 951 they shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 9-9-13(1)) 
ARTICLE 952 - RECYCLING[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- West Virginia recycling program, W. Va. Code, Art. 20-11. 

952.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following words and phrases used throughout this article shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Aluminum" means empty all-aluminum beverage or food cans. 
(b)  "Article 11" means the West Virginia Recycling Act, a part of Senate Bill 18. 
(c)  "Bi-metal containers" means empty food or beverage containers consisting of steel and aluminum. 
(d)  "Collector" means entity or entities authorized by the city to collect recyclable materials from residences, or authorized by commercial, municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive collection services from the city to collect recyclable materials from those properties. 
(e)  "Commercial establishments" means those properties used for commercial or industrial purposes. 
(f)  "Community activities" means events that are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals per day. 
(g)  "Corrugated paper" means structural paper material with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges. 
(h)  "Ferrous containers" means empty steel or tin coated food or beverage containers. 
(i)  "Glass containers" means empty bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass. Expressly excluded is non-container glass, such as plate glass, automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products. 
(j)  "High grade office paper" means all white paper, bond paper and computer paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and in residences. 
(k)  "Institutional establishment" means those facilities that house or serve groups of people including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, day care centers, school and universities. 
(l)  "Lead acid batteries" includes but is not limited to, automotive, truck and industrial batteries that contain lead. 
(m)  "Leaf waste" means leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden residues, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass clippings. 
(n)  "Magazines and periodicals" means printed matter containing miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals. Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever. 
(o)  "Multi-family housing properties" means any properties having four or more dwelling units per structure. 
(p)  "Municipal establishment" means public facilities operated by the city and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities. 
(q)  "Municipal waste" means any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. "Municipal waste" does not include source-separated recyclable materials. 
(r)  "Newspapers" means paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, color comics, glossy advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other than black and white. 
(s)  "Person(s)" means owners, lessees, and occupants of residences, commercial, municipal and institutional establishments. 
(t)  "Plastic containers" means empty plastic food and beverage containers. Due to the wide variety of types of plastics, the city may stipulate specific types of plastic which may be recycled. 
(u)  "Recyclable materials" means materials generated by residences and commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified by the city and can be separated from municipal waste and returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful products. "Recyclable materials" may include, but are not necessarily limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastic and any other items selected by the city or specified in future revisions to Article 11. These recyclables shall be "clean" which means not exposed to foreign substances or conditions rendering them unusable for recycling. The recyclable materials selected by the city may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the city. 
(v)  "Recycling" means the collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized operation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials. 
(w)  "Residences" means any occupied single or multi-family dwellings having up to four dwelling units per structure for which the city provides municipal waste collection service. 
(x)  "Scavenging" means the collection or pick up at curbside of any municipally mandated recyclable materials by unauthorized persons. 
(y)  "Source separated recyclable materials" means those materials separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled. 
(z)  "Waste" means a material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. "Waste" does not include source separated recyclable materials. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.02 - ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM/GRANT OF POWER. 
    The city hereby establishes a recycling program for the mandatory separation and curbside collection of recyclable materials. Collection of the recyclable materials shall be made at least once per month by the city, its designated agent, or any other collector authorized by the city, from residences and from industrial, commercial, municipal and institutional establishments. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.03 - PHASED IMPLEMENTATION - PILOT PROGRAM. 
    The city shall conduct a pilot program serving approximately 4,150 single family households in designated areas within the city. The program will consist of three separate and distinct components utilizing the Cabell County Solid Waste Authority to provide the necessary public information and education program, the city for the collection of the recyclable materials, and the private sector for the marketing and sale of these recyclables. 
    The areas designated for participation in this pilot program have been selected, to the maximum extent possible, to reflect the solid waste disposal characteristics representative of the population of the city and are shown on the map attached to original Ordinance 3-8-93 as Exhibit A. 
    All persons residing within these designated areas shall fully comply with the recycling provisions established by this article. 
    The designated recycling materials to be separated from other waste products under this pilot program shall be: 
 Clear glass. 
 Colored glass. 
 Beverage cans. 
 High density polyethylene plastic (HDPE). 
 Polyethylene terephthalate plastic (PET). 
    Recycling containers will be placed in each household so that each citizen may separate recyclable items by category. The recyclables will be placed at the curbside, when the bin becomes full, in conjunction with the regular garbage pick-up day and collected by the city using a compartmentalized recycling truck with one driver and one collector. The collected recyclables will subsequently be taken to a private sector processing and marketing facility where they will be sold to the respective end-users. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.04 - SEPARATION AND COLLECTION. 
(a)  All persons shall separate designated recyclable materials from other waste produced at their residence, store the recyclable for collection and shall place same for collection as follows: 
(1)  Persons in residences shall place separated recyclables at curbside in a specified container/bin. 
(2)  An owner, landlord, manager or agent of an owner, landlord or manager of a multi-family housing property may comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a collection system at each property. The collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords, managers and agents of owners, landlords or managers who comply with this article shall not be liable for non-compliance of occupants of their buildings. 
If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the city or its authorized agent, owners, landlords and agents of owners and landlords shall submit an annual report to the city reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the previous year. This requirement may be fulfilled by submission of a letter or form from the collector which certifies that recyclable materials are being collected from the multi-family housing property. 
All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated at their houses, apartments and other residential establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise provided for composting of leaf waste. 
(b)  Persons must separate high grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper and such other materials as may be designated by the city generated at industrial, commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and from community activities of 200 persons or more a day and store the recyclable materials until collection. A person may be exempted from this paragraph by: 
(1)  Providing for the recycling of high grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste and other materials deemed appropriate by the city. 
(2)  Submitting, at a minimum, an annual recycling report to the governing body of the city. The report shall document the amount of municipal waste generated per year as well as the type and weight of materials that were recycled in the previous calendar year. Valid documentation shall include information from an end-use, recycler or waste hauler which describes the type and weight of each recyclable material that was collected and marketed. Documentation may be in the form of one of the following: 
A.  Copies of weight receipts or statements which consolidate such information; 
B.  A report from the provider of recycling collection services which identifies the amount of each material collected and marketed. The type and weight of recyclables generated by an individual establishment may be approximated based on a representative sample of its source separated materials; or 
C.  A report from the provider of waste collection services that identifies the type and weight of each recyclable material collected and marketed in cases where recyclables are commingled with establishment's waste. The type and weight of recyclables generated by an individual establishment may be approximated based on a representative sample of its waste. For subsections (b)(2)B. and C. hereof, where recyclables from several establishments are collected in the same vehicle, an individual establishment's contribution to the load may be apportioned. Only the weight of materials marketed for recycling purposes can be credited to an establishment. 
(3)  If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the city or its authorized agent, occupants of said establishments shall submit an annual report to the city reporting the type and weight of materials recycled during the previous calendar year. This requirement may be fulfilled by submission of a letter or form from the collector which certifies that recyclable materials are being collected from the establishment. 
(4)  All employees, users (patrons), and residents of industrial, commercial, municipal and institutional establishments must be informed of the recycling program. The education program should describe the program's feature and requirements, and should include at a minimum an annual program meeting and an orientation to the program upon the arrival of a new employee or resident. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.05 - OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. 
    All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the city or authorized collector pursuant to this article shall, from time of placement at the curb, become the property of the city or the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided by section 952.07. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable materials by the generator unless or until such materials are placed at the curbside for collection. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.06 - OWNERSHIP OF RIGID RECYCLING CONTAINER. 
    All rigid recycling containers supplied by the city to the residences shall be and remain the property of the city. The container shall remain with the residence and it shall not move with the resident, owner or renter of any municipal dwelling. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.07 - EXISTING RECYCLING OPERATIONS. 
    Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person, firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment without prior written permission from the governing body or other entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable materials to make such a collection. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.08 - DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. 
    Disposal of recyclable materials with other municipal wastes by any person is prohibited and shall be a violation of this article. Disposal by collectors or operators of recycling facilities of source separated recyclable material into landfills or to be burned in incinerators is prohibited unless markets do not exist and the collectors or operators have notified the city in writing. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.09 - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this article as deemed necessary, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Designating the recyclable materials to be separated for collection and recycling by residences and additional recyclable materials to be separated by commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and at community activities. 
(2)  Establishing procedures, rules and schedules for the collection of recyclable materials. 
(3)  Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials recycled. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this article shall receive an official written warning of noncompliance for the first and second offense. Thereafter all such violations shall be subject to the penalties defined in section 952.99. 
(c)  The city or the authorized waste collector reserves the right not to collect municipal waste from any residential, commercial, multifamily housing property or institutional establishment containing recyclable materials in combination with other non-recyclable waste materials. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.10 - FRANCHISE OR LICENSE. 
    The city may enter into an agreement(s) with public or private agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials from curbside. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.11 - MODIFICATIONS. 
    The city may, from time to time, modify or amend the standards and regulations herein and as authorized by section 952.07. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
952.99 - PENALTY. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any persons, firm or corporation, other than the city or one authorized by the governing body or other entity responsible for providing for collection of recyclable materials, to collect recyclable materials placed by residences or commercial, municipal or institutional establishments for collection by the city or an authorized collector, unless such person, firm or corporation has prior written permission from the generator to make such collection. In violation hereof, unauthorized collection from one or more residences or commercial, municipal and institutional establishment on one calendar day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article, shall, upon summary conviction before any municipal judge, pay a fine not less than $25 and not exceeding $500 and costs of prosecution and in default of payment of the fine and costs, the violator may be sentenced to the community service to be determined by municipal court, not to exceed ten days. 
(Ord. 3-8-93) 
ARTICLE 953 - WEEDS AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Building material in public place, § 905.01 et seq. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(13). 

953.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
(a)  "Fire hazard" means that which creates a risk or danger of fire. 
(b)  "Materials" means weeds, brush, rubbish, trash, paper, volatile liquids or solids and any other kind of flammable substance. 
(c)  "Owner" means the owner or agent thereof of property situated in the city. 
(d)  "Weeds" means all rank, noxious, poisonous, harmful, unhealthful vegetation or growths as well as unsightly or economically useless plants especially of wild growth. 
(1964 Code Sec. 16-24) 
953.02 - DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO MAINTAIN PROPERTY. 
(a)  Any property owner shall keep and maintain all vacant lots and other property owned by him or her, or that area between the property line and roadway abutting same, in such condition that the property shall not constitute a fire hazard or condition detrimental to the general health and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(b)  Any property owner shall maintain his or her property in the city in such a manner so as to avoid the growth or accumulation of the following matter: 
(1)  All materials of a combustible nature which constitute a fire hazard; and 
(2)  The growth of weeds beyond a height of 12 inches. 
(Ord. 8-27-90) 
953.03 - REMOVAL OF HAZARD; FAILURE TO COMPLY. 
(a)  If it is determined that a property owner has failed to comply with the provisions of section 953.02 hereof, the city may send notice by mail of its demand that the noncompliance be corrected. 
(b)  If the property owner fails to comply with the demands contained in the notice within ten days of its mailing, the mayor or his or her designee may enter upon the property and remove the offending matter in order to abate the threat to the public health. 
(c)  In those cases where the city removes offending matter at its own expense, the property owner shall be charged a fee of $0.75 per square yard of the area cleared. The property owner shall be invoiced for the cost as calculated above. If the property owner fails to remit the amount due, the city may recover that amount plus its related costs by filing an appropriate legal action. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the mayor or his designee from entering onto property to remove matter described in section 953.02 hereof without notice, if it is determined that such matter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit or waive any criminal sanctions which may be pursued by the city, and whoever violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $500, or imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days, or both, and such criminal fines and penalties shall be in addition to the fee of $0.75 per square yard of the area cleared as provided for in subsection (c) hereof. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09) 
ARTICLE 955 - FLOODWALL SYSTEM 

955.01-955.17 - RESERVED. 
955.18 - TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR FLOODWALL SYSTEM. 
    Upon the amendment of this article becoming effective, the division of flood protection of the department of public works created by section 955.12 of this article shall be transferred to the Huntington Stormwater Utility established in Article 935 of the Code of City Ordinances of the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
955.19 - TRANSFER OF ASSETS TO HUNTINGTON STORMWATER UTILITY. 
    The director of finance is hereby required to transfer on the city's books of account all intangible assets of the division of flood protection of the department of public works held by it as of the original effective date of this section into earmarked and segregated accounts of the Huntington Stormwater Utility established in article 935 of the Code of City Ordinances of the City of Huntington. The earmarked and segregated accounts shall include but not be limited to, all moneys on hand collected from special assessments from the property owners of the city for floodwall protection and all residues attributable to such special assessments for floodwall maintenance and operation. The city shall continue to operate the funds as segregated accounts until such time as they shall hereafter be exhausted. The moneys in the accounts shall not be appropriated or utilized for any purpose except the operation and maintenance of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
    Likewise, all moneys so collected under the flood protection service fee provided in this article shall be accounted for in separate and readily identifiable revenue accounts which indicate the source of the funds entered in the revenue accounts and transferred to the Huntington Stormwater Utility. The moneys in the accounts shall not be appropriated or utilized for any purpose except the operation and maintenance of the Huntington Stormwater Utility under the direction and control of the Huntington Water Quality Board established in article 930 of the Code of City Ordinances of the City of Huntington. 
    The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall establish separate and easily identifiable expense accounts relating to the operation and maintenance of the Huntington Flood Protection System in order that the costs of operating the same may be easily identified in relation to the revenues received from the aforesaid flood protection service fee. 
    The director of finance shall also transfer to the Huntington Stormwater Utility the emergency reserve fund established in section 955.15 of this article to be utilized solely for the purpose of paying for equipment and operational needs of the floodwall system. 
    All real property, easements, and tangible assets of the city related to flood protection shall also be transferred to the Huntington Stormwater Utility and included as part of the stormwater system, as provided by W. Va. Code § 16-13-1, et seq. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
955.20 - TRANSFER OF WORK FORCE. 
    It is hereby specifically provided that the work force of the division of flood protection shall be transferred to the Huntington Stormwater Utility established in article 935, and that no employee of the division of flood protection becoming an employee of the Huntington Stormwater Utility shall be replaced or succeeded by any person except by one of equivalent work experience and qualifications so as to assure the capability of the Huntington Stormwater Utility to maintain and operate the floodwall system. 
(Ord. of 6-23-14(1)) 
ARTICLE 959 - AMBULANCE SERVICE[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Authorized operation, § 303.05; right-of-way, § 341.05; following, parking near, § 349.06. 
State Law reference- Emergency Ambulance Service Act, W. Va. Code, Art. 7-15; Emergency Medical Services Act, W. Va. Code, Art. 16-4C. 

959.01 - ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE. 
    Ambulance service shall be provided and maintained by the city. Such ambulance service shall be utilized for emergencies only and shall not be used in cases where no emergency exists. The Mayor shall provide the necessary equipment and maintenance thereof for such service and shall designate personnel of the city who shall provide such service, all within the limits of the budget of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 22-6.1) 
959.02 - RULES AND REGULATIONS BY MAYOR. 
    The mayor, with the consent and approval of council, shall have and is given the authority to promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the provisions of sections 959.01 through 959.03. 
959.03 - CHARGE FOR SERVICE. 
    For all persons who reside in the city, the city shall make a charge of $90 for each trip made by the personnel and the equipment of the city. 
    For those persons who do not reside in the city, the city shall make a charge of $140 for each trip made by the personnel and equipment of the city. 
    In addition, thereto, in the event that any of the following shall be used, the fee shall be as follows: 
EKG Monitoring Fee $25.00 Oxygen Use Fee  10.00 Obstetric Kits Use Fee  12.00 Splints Application Fee   5.00 Burn Sheets Application Fee   5.00  
(Ord. 5-29-85) 
ARTICLE 960 - CONDUIT STANDARDS 

960.01 - LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS. 
    The Council of the City of Huntington finds that: 
(1)  Demand for access to high-speed telecommunications services is growing. In order to fill such demand, telecommunications service providers install telecommunication lines in public rights-of-way. 
(2)  In other jurisdictions, the demand for access and the number of telecommunications service providers has sometimes resulted in multiple, serial excavations within the public rights-of-way. Each such excavation can and does result in traffic disruption, a weakening of pavement integrity, and a shortening of the useful life of paved surfaces. 
(3)  The City of Huntington has not experienced a high demand for use of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers, but in order to responsibly manage its public rights-of-way the city should anticipate such demand in the future and plan accordingly. 
(4)  Requiring that conduit be installed in newly constructed public streets and rights-of-way in order to accommodate the anticipated future demand for access to telecommunications services will assist the city in responsibly managing its public rights-of-way by: 
A.  Reducing or eliminating the need for excavation within public streets and rights-of-way when telecommunications service providers seek to locate underground telecommunications facilities within such streets and rights-of-way in the future; 
B.  Reduce or eliminate the traffic disruption that occurs whenever excavation occurs within streets and public rights-of-way; 
C.  Reduce or eliminate the loss of pavement integrity and diminishment of the useful life of pavement that occurs whenever paved streets and rights-of-way are cut and excavated within; and 
D.  Meet the needs and desires of the public for access to high-speed telecommunications services and the needs and desires of telecommunications service providers to locate within the public streets and rights-of-way. 
(5)  In residential areas, anticipated demand for the reasonable future can likely be met by the capacity provided by two telecommunication lines. In non-residential areas, anticipated demand is higher, but can likely be met for the reasonable future by the capacity provided by four telecommunication lines. Requiring the installation of conduit and other facilities necessary to support these lines will allow anticipated needs to be met while allowing the city to responsibly manage its rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
960.02 - INTENT. 
    The intent of this section is to provide for the construction of infrastructure sufficient to allow telecommunications service providers desiring to deploy communication lines in the future to do so by pulling the same through the conduit and appurtenances installed pursuant to this section and without excavating within the right-of-way. This section is not intended to require telecommunications service providers to install additional ducts or conduit but is intended to require those constructing public streets, including the city and private developers, to provide and install such conduit and appurtenances as may be necessary to accommodate future telecommunications needs within public streets and rights-of-way without further excavation or disturbance. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
960.03 - REQUIREMENTS-ADOPTION OF STANDARDS. 
    Whenever any new public street is constructed, whether by the city as a public works project or by a private party in conjunction with development, the following shall be required: 
(1)  In all new local access public streets serving or abutting residential development, a conduit of a sufficient diameter and containing interducts of sufficient number and diameter to accommodate a minimum of two telecommunication lines shall be installed by the party constructing the street. 
(2)  In all new connector or arterial public streets serving or abutting residential development, and in all new public streets serving or abutting nonresidential development, a conduit of a sufficient diameter and containing interducts of sufficient number and diameter to accommodate a minimum of four telecommunication lines shall be installed by the party constructing the street. 
(3)  In addition to installing conduit, the party constructing the street will be required to install such vaults and other appurtenances as may be necessary to accommodate installation and connection of telecommunication lines within the conduit. 
(4)  All construction and installation shall be accomplished according to construction standards adopted by the public works director. The construction standards shall be adopted with due consideration given to existing and anticipated technologies and industry standards. The construction standards shall specify the minimum diameter of the conduit and interducts and the minimum number of interducts to meet the requirements of this section. 
(5)  All conduit and appurtenances installed by private parties pursuant to this section shall be conveyed and dedicated to the city with the dedication and conveyance of the public street and/or right-of-way. 
(6)  Any and all installation costs shall be the responsibility of the party constructing the public street. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
960.04 - USE BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS. 
    Whenever conduit installed or to be installed under this section is available or will become available within a newly constructed public streets or right-of-way upon dedication, all telecommunications service providers thereafter locating telecommunication lines within such street or right-of-way shall be required to locate their communication lines within such conduit unless it can be demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the public works director that such location is not technologically feasible or reasonably practicable. Conduit capacity shall be allocated to telecommunications service providers on a first-come, first-served basis; provided, that the city may reserve capacity within such conduits for its own use; and provided further, that the public works director may adopt additional rules for conduit allocation in order to ensure that all telecommunications service providers have reasonable access to the city's rights-of-way and that no barriers to entry or competition result from the allocation of conduit space. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
960.05 - FEES. 
    The city reserves the right to charge reasonable fees for the use of conduit installed pursuant to this section, to the extent consistent with and as limited by federal and state laws and regulations. Any such fees shall be established by resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
960.06 - COMPLIANCE. 
    All new construction or reconstruction shall comply with these standards, unless a variation or exemption to these requirements is specifically recommended in writing by the responsible city official and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
ARTICLE 963 - JEAN CARLO STEPHENSON CITY AUDITORIUM[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(36). 

963.01 - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR USE; CONTENTS. 
    No person shall have the use of the auditorium until he first obtains from the mayor or the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. a written permit granting the use thereof to such applicant, which permit shall plainly set forth the name and address of such applicant, the time during which the Auditorium is to be used, the purpose for which the Auditorium is to be used, the fee paid for the use thereof and such other facts as will best meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. 12-9-96) 
963.02 - FEES FOR USE. 
    Before any permit is issued for the use of the Auditorium, the applicant for such permit shall pay the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. fees for the use thereof in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  The applicant shall pay a fee of $375 for each day or $125 for a fractional part of each day, that such auditorium is used for rehearsals or set-up times, etc. However, this fee may be adjusted by the Auditorium Committee of the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. with the approval of the mayor for applicants who agree to use the Auditorium on a regular basis, or in certain other circumstances. 
(b)  The user shall agree to indemnify and save the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc., and the city harmless against any and all claims which may arise as a result of using the facility. 
(c)  The user shall obtain a policy of public liability insurance, covering bodily injury, designating the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. and the city as the named insured, which policy shall be a single limit policy in the minimum amount of $1,000,000. Such policy shall also include insurance in a minimum amount of $500,000 property damage; such policy or policies, or a certificate thereof, showing such policy or policies to be in full force and effect, shall be delivered to the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. before use of the auditorium is issued. 
(d)  The user shall agree to pay the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. and the city any damages which may accrue to the facility or any public or private property relating thereto. 
(e)  The user shall pay and discharge the cost of janitor services in cleaning the auditorium following the use thereof by the user in the amount of $80 for each day's use or fractional part of a day's use. 
(f)  The user shall enter into an agreement with the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. setting forth all of the provisions of this section before any permit shall be issued for the use thereof. 
(Ord. 12-9-96) 
963.03 - OPERATION AND CHARGES FOR THE USE OF SOUND SYSTEM AND THEATRICAL EQUIPMENT. 
    The auditorium sound system and all technical equipment shall be operated by a member of the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. or its representative. If outside technical assistance is needed, a separate contract must be made with the recommended technician at the fees they present in their contract. The technician will be recommended by the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. 
(Ord. 12-9-96) 
963.04 - PLACARDS, ADVERTISEMENTS, STREAMERS AND SALE OF MERCHANDISE OR FOOD. 
    No person shall place or hang any placards, advertisements, posters, streamers or other letter bearing or picture bearing material on the wall of the auditorium or on the outside thereof, or shall sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, or other goods, wares or merchandise in the auditorium or other section of the City Hall before, during or after any performance being held within the auditorium or at any other time unless specific authority to do so has first been obtained from the City of Huntington Foundation, Inc. and approved by the mayor. 
(Ord. 12-9-96) 
ARTICLE 967 - SWIMMING POOLS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Recreation advisory commission, Art. 157. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(37). 

967.01 - "SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURE" DEFINED. 
    Whenever reference is made in this article to the "swimming pool enclosures," such enclosures mean also the playgrounds and playground equipment within the outer fence of any city swimming pool. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-1) 
967.02 - OPENING AND CLOSING DATES; HOURS OF OPERATION. 
    Public swimming pools of the city shall be opened for operation on a day near Decoration Day of each year to be fixed by the mayor, and shall be closed for each season on a day likewise to be fixed by the mayor near Labor Day. The pools shall be kept open each day during the season between hours to be fixed by the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-2) 
967.03 - SWIMMING POOL MANAGERS. 
    There shall be four swimming pool managers, one of whom shall be assigned to each of the four public swimming pools of the city, whose duty it shall be, under the direction of the mayor, to be present at all times while the respective pools are open to the public and to enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations relating to swimming pools and preserve order in and about the same and keep the same clean and in good order. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-4) 
967.04 - LIFEGUARDS AND ATTENDANTS. 
    There shall be such number of lifeguards and other attendants at the several public swimming pools of the city as the mayor shall determine to be necessary for the proper and efficient management and operation of the pools. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-7) 
967.05 - MONEY RECEIPTS. 
    Each swimming pool manager shall keep, in books to be provided for that purpose, an account of all money received in connection with the operation of the public swimming pools of the city and shall pay over daily to the director of the division of finance all such money, together with a written statement of the amount of money received and the source from which it was received. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-8) 
967.06 - BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS; PURCHASES. 
    The director of the division of finance shall prescribe all necessary forms, books, receipts and reports for use by the swimming pool managers. All accounts pertaining to the public swimming pools shall be kept, receipts given and reports made in accordance with such forms. 
    All supplies, material, equipment and merchandise purchased for the operation and maintenance of the pools and concessions shall be purchased only on requisition in the manner provided for the purchase of other supplies, materials, equipment and merchandise for the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-9) 
967.07 - REPORTS REQUIRED. 
    The swimming pool managers shall report as requested during the swimming pool season to the director of the division of finance, showing attendance at all pools, amounts of money received and such other information as may be pertinent to the operation of the pools. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-10) 
967.08 - ADMISSION FEES; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS. 
    Admission fees shall be charged for the use of the public swimming pools of the city for the purpose of providing funds for the necessary and proper operation and maintenance of its pools. The amounts of admission fees and the hours to which they shall be applicable shall be as fixed by council from time to time by resolution. 
    All funds received for admissions and from concessions and other swimming pool sources are hereby appropriated for the operation and maintenance of the pools. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-11) 
967.09 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The following rules and regulations are hereby established and promulgated for the management and operation of the city swimming pools: 
(a)  Attendant. A qualified attendant shall be on duty at the poolside at each of the pools at all times when the pool is open to bathers. No person shall enter the pool or pool enclosure unless a qualified attendant is present at the time. 
(b)  Shower bath required. All persons using any of the swimming pools shall take a cleansing shower bath before entering the pool. 
(c)  Persons with skin diseases, colds, etc. prohibited. No person having any skin disease, sore or inflamed eyes, cold, nasal or ear discharges, or any communicable disease shall enter the swimming pool or the swimming pool enclosure. 
(d)  Spitting, etc., in pool. Spitting, spouting of water, blowing the nose or excreting any substance into the pool is prohibited. 
(e)  Boisterous or rough play. Boisterous or rough play, except supervised water sports, in the pools or on the runways, diving boards, floats, platforms or in the dressing rooms, shower rooms or other places in the pool enclosure is prohibited. 
(f)  Additional regulations. The mayor is hereby authorized to make such additional rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the proper management and operation of the city swimming pools, and anyone using such pools shall comply with all of such rules and regulations; provided, that the additional rules and regulations promulgated by the mayor shall not become effective unless and until the same are posted at public places in each of the swimming pools affected. 
(1964 Code Sec. 32-12) 
967.10 - VIOLATORS EXPELLED. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed for the violation of this article, the swimming pool managers shall have the authority to expel any person who willfully violates any of the regulations prescribed by or pursuant to this article, and may suspend the right of any such person to use any swimming pool of the city for such period of time, not exceeding 30 days, as he shall determine. The manager shall promptly thereafter make a written report to the mayor of the reason for such suspension. In proper cases, upon written complaint from a swimming pool manager, the mayor may suspend the right of any person to use any swimming pool in the city for such period of time, not exceeding 90 days, as he shall determine. 
ARTICLE 969 - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND DETECTION[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 22, 2012, repealed the former Art. 969, §§ 969.01. 969.02, 969.99, and enacted a new Art. 969 as set out herein. The former Art. 969 pertained to stormwater management and derived from Ord. of 11-8-10. 

969.01 - DECLARATION OF PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
    Declaration of purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system. 
    The objectives of this ordinance are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Authorized enforcement agency: The City of Huntington, its employees or designees designated to enforce this ordinance. 
    Best management practices: Activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best management practices include but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
    Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge: Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter. 
    Illicit connections: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
    Industrial activity: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permits: General, group, and individual storm water discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
    Non-storm water discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
    Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution: The human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
    Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drain system: Publicly-owned facilities operated by the city by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the city and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
    Stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rain storm events or snow melt. 
    Waters of the United States: Surface watercourses and water bodies including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry storm water at and during all times and seasons. 
    Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.03 - APPLICABILITY. 
    This ordinance shall apply to water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.04 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION. 
    The City of Huntington's Public Works Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the public works department may be delegated in writing by the director of public works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.05 - PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES. 
(a)  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water: 
(1)  Any discharge that contains toxic chemicals in toxic concentrations; 
(2)  Any discharge with a visible sheen; 
(3)  Any garbage, litter, abandoned objects, or other discharges that contain visible floating solids; 
(4)  Any discharge that cause or may cause visible discoloration to the receiving waters. Examples include, but are not limited to paints, dyes, and inks; 
(5)  Any heat discharge that causes damage to any element of the city's separate storm system; and 
(6)  Any yard waste (grass clippings, leaves, brush, sticks, etc.). 
(b)  Exemptions. Exempted discharges include the following: 
(1)  Drinking or potable water; 
(2)  Naturally occurring water (e.g. springs, diverted streams); 
(3)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(4)  Residential car wash; 
(5)  Landscape watering; 
(6)  Uncontaminated rainwater; 
(7)  Discharges by City of Huntington entities that are responsible for promoting health and safety of citizens (i.e. firefighting, sewer dye testing, etc.); or 
(8)  Discharges authorized by, and in full compliance with an NPDES or other state water-related discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.06 - PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  The prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.07 - SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS. 
    Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The City of Huntington may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize damage to persons. 
    Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
    A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.08 - WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITIONS. 
    No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.09 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION. 
    The City of Huntington shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of Public Works or Mayor of the City of Huntington to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.10 - INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the public works director or designee prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.11 - MONITORING OF DISCHARGES. 
(a)  Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities: 
(1)  The City of Huntington shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the City of Huntington ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The City of Huntington shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge. 
(4)  The City of Huntington has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City of Huntington and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Huntington access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance. 
(7)  If the City of Huntington has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.12 - REQUIREMENTS TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. 
    The City of Huntington will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.13 - REQUIREMENT TO REMEDIATE. 
    Whenever the public works director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the United States, the public works director may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.14 - REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE. 
    The public works director may require by written notice of requirement that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the City of Huntington as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.15 - NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 4:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Huntington or by our email reporting option on the city's website at www.cityofhuntington.com - "stormwater information" tab within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.16 - WATERCOURSE PROTECTION. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. 
    In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.17 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the City of Huntington finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this ordinance, the city may order compliance by written "Notice of Violation" to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
    If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(b)  Appeal. Any person receiving a "Notice of Violation" may appeal the determination of the city to the stormwater division. The notice of appeal must be received within seven days from the date of the "Notice of Violation". Hearing on the appeal before the stormwater coordinator or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the stormwater coordinator or their designee shall be final. 
(c)  Abatement by the city. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the stormwater coordinator upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(d)  Cost of abatement. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 1st day following discovery of the violation. 
(e)  Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(f)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(g)  Criminal prosecution. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $500 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
    The city may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
969.18 - SEVERABILITY. 
    The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-22-12(1)) 
ARTICLE 970 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 11, 2013, repealed the former Art. 970, §§ 970.01-970.03, 970.99, and enacted a new Art. 970 as set out herein. The former Art. 970 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 12-27-10(2). 

970.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is establish means to control and mitigate erosion of soil and sediment within the City of Huntington. It shall establish standards and specifications for conservation practices and planning activities to minimize erosion of soil and sediment for land disturbance activities greater than 5,000 square feet. The scope of this article includes controlling land disturbances, soil storage, and any sort of erosion resulting from such activities and establishes procedures for issuance, approval, administration, and enforcement of a control permit. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Terms in this article shall be defined herein: 
(a)  "Best Management Practice" or "BMP" means a technique or series of techniques which are proven effective in controlling runoff, erosion, and sedimentation. 
(b)  "Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. 
(c)  "City" means the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
(d)  "City engineer" means the City Engineer of the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
(e)  "Certified contractor" means a person who has received training and is licensed by the United States Environment Protection Agency's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. 
(f)  "Clearing and grubbing" means the cutting and removal of trees, shrubs, bushes, windfalls, and other vegetation including removal of stumps, roots and other remains in the designated areas. 
(g)  "Demolition" means any act or process of wrecking or destroying a building or structure. 
(h)  "Detention facility" means a temporary or permanent natural or manmade structure that provides for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. 
(i)  "Developer" means any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency or political subdivision engaged in land disturbance activity. 
(j)  "Drainage way" means any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
(k)  "Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, ice and/or land disturbance activities. 
(l)  "Erosion control" means a measure taken to prevent erosion. 
(m)  "Erosion and sediment control plan" or "plan" means a set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction. 
(n)  "Erosion control inspector" means a City of Huntington employee who has received a certificate of completion in a training program for erosion control approved by the public works director. 
(o)  "Excavation" means the mechanical removal of earth material. 
(p)  "Fill" means a deposit of soil or other earth materials placed by artificial means. 
(q)  "Final erosion and sediment control plan" or "final plan" means a plan which includes permanent measures and best management practices to control surface runoff and control sediment if not included in the initial erosion and sediment control plan. 
(r)  "Floodplain" means the 100-year floodplain, which is that area adjoining a watercourse that could be inundated by a flood that has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and is delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency floodway maps for West Virginia. 
(s)  "Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
(1)  "Existing grade" means the grade prior to grading. 
(2)  "Rough grade" means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. 
(3)  "Finish grade" means the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan. 
(t)  "Grading" means the excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
(u)  "Land disturbance activity" means any land change that may result in soil erosion from wind, water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters, lands or rights-of-way within the city. This includes, but is not limited to, building demolition, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Land disturbance activity does not include the following situations: 
(1)  Minor disturbances including, but not limited to, underground utility repairs, home gardens, minor repairs and maintenance work which does not include more than 500 square feet of land. 
(2)  Installation of fence, sign, telephone, utility poles and any other types of posts or poles. 
(3)  Emergency work or repairs to protect life, limb or property. If the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan except for the emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized. 
(v)  "Outfall" means the point of discharge to any watercourse from a public or private stormwater drainage system. 
(w)  "Perimeter control" means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
(x)  "Phasing" means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading. 
(y)  "Retention facility" means a temporary or permanent natural or manmade structure that provides for the storage of stormwater runoff by means of a permanent pool of water. 
(z)  "Runoff" means rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
(aa)  "Sediment" means soils or other surface materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion. 
(bb)  "Sediment control" means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
(cc)  "Sedimentation" means the process or action of deposition of sediment that is determined to have been caused by erosion. 
(dd)  "Site" means the entire area of land disturbance activity which is proposed in the permit application. 
(ee)  "Site redevelopment permit" means a permit issued by the city for the construction or alteration of ground. 
(ff)  "Site plan" means a plan or set of plans showing the details of any land disturbance activity of a site including but not limited to the construction of structures, drainage facilities, stormwater management facilities, parking lots, driveways, curbs, pavements, sidewalks, bike paths, recreational facilities, ground covers, plantings and landscaping. 
(gg)  "Slope" means the incline of the ground surface as expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance over vertical distance. 
(hh)  "Stabilization" means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
(ii)  "Start of construction" means the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
(jj)  "Stripping" means any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover including clearing, grubbing of stumps and root mat and topsoil removal. 
(kk)  "Watercourse" means any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, gutter, culvert, drain or wash in which waters flow either continuously or intermittently. 
(ll)  "Watershed" means a region draining to a specific river, river system or body of water. 
(mm)  "Waterway" means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
(nn)  "Wetland" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(oo)  "WVDEP" means the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.03 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. 
    All plans and specifications submitted under this article shall be in conformity with the standards, specifications and criteria in the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection's "Erosion and Sediment Control BMP Handbook" and those regulations promulgated by the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. A copy of the latest edition of this handbook is available in the office of building inspections and compliance for public viewing. A copy of the latest edition of this handbook is also available via the Internet at this website: http://apps.dep.wv.gov/dwwm/stormwater/BMP/index.html 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.04 - REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person may grade, fill, excavate, store, stockpile or dispose of earth materials or perform any other land-disturbing activity without first obtaining an erosion and sediment control permit from the office of building inspections and compliance. 
(1)  Conditions of approval. The office of building inspections and compliance will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the office of building inspections and compliance shall, in writing: 
A.  Approve the permit application; 
B.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, the issuing authority may impose such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or unreasonable hazard to persons or to a public or private property. Such conditions shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(i)  The granting and the recording in county land records of easements for drainage facilities, including the acceptance of their discharge on the property of others, and for the maintenance of slopes or erosion control facilities. 
(ii)  Adequate control of dust by watering or other control methods deemed acceptable by the issuing authority, and in conformance with applicable air pollution ordinances. 
(iii)  Improvements of any existing grading, ground surface or drainage collection on the site (not to exceed the area as proposed for work or development in the application) to meet the standards required under this article for new grading, drainage and erosion control. 
(iv)  Sediment traps and basins located within a densely populated area or in proximity of an area where small children may congregate without adult supervision may be requested to install additional safety devices. 
C.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
D.  Failure of the office of building inspections and compliance to act on an original or revised application within 30 days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the office of building inspections and compliance. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the office of building inspections and compliance. 
(2)  Responsibilities of permit holder. The permit holder shall maintain a copy of the permit, approved plans and reports required under the permit on the work site and available for public inspection during all working hours. The permit holder shall, at all times, be in conformity with the approved grading plan, the erosion and sediment control plan and also conform to the following: 
A.  General. Notwithstanding other conditions or provisions of the permit or the minimum standards set forth in this article, the permit holder is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent properties. No person shall grade on land in any manner or so close to the property line as to endanger or damage any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or other public or private property from settling, cracking, erosion, sedimentation or other damage or personal injury which might result. 
B.  Public ways. The permit holder shall be responsible for the prompt removal of, and the correction or damages resulting from, any soil, miscellaneous debris or other materials washed, spilled, tracked, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfare, incident to the construction activity or during transit to and from the construction site. 
(3)  Liability. The permit holder is responsible for safely and legally completing the project. Neither the issuance of a permit, nor the compliance with the provision hereto or with any condition imposed by the issuing authority, shall relieve a person from responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the city for damages to persons or property. 
(4)  Permit application. The owner or his authorized representative shall submit a completed application to the issuing authority, along with two copies of an erosion and sediment control plan in compliance with this article and the appropriate fee. Plans shall be prepared and/or approved by a civil engineer, surveyor, architect, or landscape architect. The city engineer may waive this certification requirement in instances when work is simple, clearly shown and entails no hazard or nuisance potential to adjacent property or watercourse. Any applicable fees will be set by city council. At a minimum, a permit application form shall consist of name and contact information for the owner, applicant (if applicable) and all contractors or subcontractors performing the land-disturbing activity, plan designer for both the grading plan and the erosion and sediment control plan; address of site to be developed; and the signature of the owner and/or applicant. 
(5)  Permit duration. Permits under this article shall be valid for the period during which the proposed land-disturbing activities and soil storage takes place or is scheduled to take place, whichever is shorter, but in no event shall such a permit be valid for more than one year. The permit holder shall commence permitted activities within 180 days of the scheduled commencement date for grading or the permit holder shall resubmit all required application forms, maps, plans, schedules and fees to the issuing authority, except where an item to be resubmitted is waived by the issuing authority. 
(6)  Permit renewals and extensions. The permit holder shall fully perform and complete all of the work required in the sequence shown on the approved plans within the time limit specified in the permit. Prior to a plan's expiration, the permit holder may submit to the chief building inspector a written request for an extension. If an extension is granted, a no-fee extension for up to 90 days may be granted. Other extensions not to exceed one year may be granted for a fee of $50 per extension. 
(7)  Permit denial. If the issuing authority determines that an erosion and sediment control plan does not meet the requirements in this article, a permit shall not be issued. The plan must be resubmitted with corrections before any land-disturbing activity is to begin. All other land use and building permits shall be suspended until the applicant submits an acceptable erosion and sediment control plan. 
(8)  Public input. The public is encouraged to report any issues or potential violations on construction sites by contacting the public works department stormwater office located at City Hall. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.05 - AMENDMENT OF APPROVED PLAN. 
    In any circumstance, all changes or modifications to the approved erosion and sediment control plan must adhere to the following conditions: 
(1)  All proposals to modify the approved plans must be submitted to the city engineer for his approval. No work in connection with any proposed modification shall be without the prior written approval of the issuing authority. 
(2)  When inspection of a site indicates that the approved erosion and sediment control plan needs modified, the modification shall be in compliance with the criteria listed in the WV DEP "Erosion and Sediment Control BMP Manual." 
(3)  The permit holder shall submit requests for revisions to the city engineer. This includes revisions due to plan and site discrepancies and inadequacies at controlling erosion and sediment as revealed through inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.06 - COMPLIANCE, MAINTENANCE, AND REPAIRS. 
    The issuance of an erosion and sediment control permit shall constitute an authorization between the permit holder, his agents, contractors and the issuing authority to do only that work described in the permit, or shown on the approved site plans and specifications, all in strict compliance with the requirements of the permit, including those documents referenced in this article. 
(1)  Action upon noncompliance. 
A.  In the event any work does not conform to the permit or to the plans or specifications or to any instructions of the issuing authority, a written notice to comply shall be delivered to the permit holder. In the determination of the issuing authority and after a written notice to comply has been delivered, the permit holder and his contractor shall be required to make said corrections within the time frame determined by the issuing authority. If an imminent hazard exists, the issuing authority may require corrective work to begin immediately. 
B.  If the issuing authority finds any existing conditions not as stated in the application or approved plans, work may be cancelled immediately on the entire project or any specified part thereof until plan revisions are submitted to conform to currently existing conditions. 
C.  Failure of the permit holder to comply with the directives of this section will constitute a violation and the issuing authority may cancel the permit. Necessary restoration to the site would then commence at the expense of the owner. Failure to pay any responsible costs in said restoration in a timely manner will result in the issuing authority seeking recovery of costs and damages pursuant to the condition set forth in this article. 
(2)  Maintenance. On any property on which grading or other work has been done pursuant to a permit granted under the provisions of this article, the permit holder or owner, contractor and employees shall at a minimum, daily inspect, maintain and repair of all graded surfaces and erosion control facilities, drainage structures or means and other protective devices, plantings and ground cover installed while construction is active. After construction is complete, the owner or their agent shall continue to regularly inspect the vegetation until adequate turf establishment or other suitable vegetative cover is established. 
(3)  Repairs. The issuing authority may require the posting of a surety bond in a form provided by the city attorney, when in the judgment of the issuing authority, the project provides potential for environmental damage. The bond shall be in such form and amount as is necessary to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected. In lieu of a surety bond and with the consent of the issuing authority, the applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit that has been approved by the city attorney in an equal amount to that of a required surety bond. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.07 - INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING. 
    The contractor and/or their agents shall conduct a pre-construction meeting with the issuing authority on each site which has an approved erosion and sediment control plan. After commencing initial grading or land-disturbing activities, the permit holder shall obtain written inspection approvals by the issuing authority at the following stages in the development or of each development thereof: 
(1)  Completion of installation of perimeter erosion and sediment controls, prior to proceeding with any other land-disturbing activities or grading, other building or grading inspection approvals may not be authorized until initial approval by the erosion control inspector is made. 
(2)  Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of topsoil, the construction of temporary erosion and sediment facilities, disposal of all waste materials, and preparation of the ground and completion of rough grading but prior to placing top soil, permanent drainage or other site development and ground covers. 
(3)  Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion control facilities including establishing ground covers and planting and all other work of the permit. The issuing authority may require additional inspections as may be deemed necessary. Work shall not proceed beyond the stages outlined above until the erosion control inspector inspects the site and approves the work previously completed. Request for inspection shall be made at least 48 hours in advance (not including weekend days or holidays) of the time inspection is desired. Upon requests for inspection, the issuing authority shall perform the inspection within 72 hours of request. The permit holder shall request inspection before the following events occur: 
A.  Start of construction. 
B.  Installation of sediment and erosion measures. 
C.  Completion of site clearing. 
D.  Completion of rough grading. 
E.  Completion of final grading. 
F.  Close of construction season. 
G.  Completion of final landscaping. 
    In making application for a permit covered by this article, the applicant or the person performing or allowing such work consents to the issuing authority to having the right to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan. This does not include consent to enter into any building which is completed and which has been secured, but does include consent to inspect any area of the property where land-disturbing activity is occurring or is thought to be planned as a site of land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.08 - FUNDING. 
    Funding for enforcement of the erosion and sediment control ordinance shall be provided through resources allocated to the public works department. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.09 - CONTRACTOR TRAINING. 
    Persons, firms and corporations subject to the requirements of this ordinance are encouraged to review educational resources and training conferences and workshops found on the United States Environmental Protection Agency website at this link: http://water.epa.gov/learn/. The City of Huntington Stormwater Office will provide supplementary training on an as needed basis. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.10 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    The issuing authority shall be responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(1)  The issuing authority may post a stop-work order for the entire project or any specified part thereof if any of the following conditions exist: 
A.  Any land disturbance activity regulated under this ordinance being undertaken without a permit. 
B.  An erosion and sediment control plan is not being fully implemented. 
C.  Any conditions of the permit are not being met. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, a stop-work order shall be posted by delivering a copy of the stop-work order to the site of the land-disturbing activity or affix a copy of the stop-work order in reasonable location where the land-disturbing activity is taking place. Additionally, a copy of the order shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the permit holder listed on the application. 
(3)  If the permit holder does not cease the activity or comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions within one day, the issuing authority may revoke the permit. 
(4)  If the owner or land user where no permit has been issued does not cease the land disturbance activity, the issuing authority may request the city attorney to obtain injunctive relief. 
(5)  The issuing authority may retract the revocation. 
(6)  The issuing authority may issue a notice of intent to the permit holder, owner or land user of the issuing authority's intent to perform work necessary to comply with this article. 
(7)  Compliance with the provisions in this article may also be enforced by injunction. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
970.99 - FEES, PENALTIES, AND OTHER LEGAL ACTIONS. 
(1)  Fees. Applications and inspections fees shall be adjusted by act of city council. The fees for the permit required in this article shall be paid pursuant to the schedule set for in the table below: 
Application fee $50 Plan review fee (Includes initial inspection. Fee assessed each time plans/corrections are submitted) $150 Additional inspections fee (assessed per inspection) $50 Square footage fee See general permit fee schedule Plan extension fee $50  
(2)  Penalties. Any person(s), firm, corporation or agency as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who fails to comply with the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, for each separate offense. Each day there is a violation of any part of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Severability. The provisions and sections of this article shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity of the remainder. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13(1)) 
ARTICLE 971 - CONTROL OF POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF 

971.01 - FINDINGS. 
    It is hereby determined that: 
(a)  Development and redevelopment projects and the associated increase in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, soil erosion, non-point source pollution, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(b)  These changes in stormwater runoff contribute to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants and can be harmful to public health and safety as well as to the natural environment; 
(c)  These effects can be controlled and minimized by proper controls to manage stormwater runoff from development and redevelopment; 
(d)  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act ("Clean Water Act") and federal phase II stormwater rules promulgated pursuant to it, as well as the West Virginia Water Pollution Control Act and General NPDES Permit No. WV0116025 compel certain urbanized areas, including the City of Huntington, to adopt the minimum stormwater controls for development and redevelopment. Therefore, these water quality and quantity regulations are adopted to meet the requirements of state and federal law regarding control of stormwater runoff and discharge; and 
(e)  Pursuant to W. Va. Code § 16-13-23a, the Huntington Stormwater Utility has the authority to enact ordinances or regulations which allow for the issuance of orders, the right to enter properties and the right to impose reasonable fines and penalties regarding correction of violations of municipal stormwater ordinances or regulations within the Huntington Urban Watershed served by the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. of 11-28-16(1) ) 
971.02 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within the Huntington Urban Watershed, as defined in Article 935.04(d). This ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through implementation of the six watershed protection elements set forth in NPDES Permit No. WV0116025: 
(1)  Minimize impervious surfaces; 
(2)  Preserve, protect, create and restore ecologically sensitive areas; 
(3)  Reduce thermal impacts of stormwater runoff; 
(4)  Avoid or prevent hydro-modification of streams and other water bodies; 
(5)  Protect trees and other vegetation; and 
(6)  Protect native soils. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
971.03 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION. 
    The Huntington Stormwater Utility, established by Article 935 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Huntington, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
917.04 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The definitions set forth in Articles 935, 969, and 970 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Huntington are hereby incorporated as if set forth fully herein. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
971.05 - APPLICABILITY. 
    This article shall be applicable to any new development or redevelopment site within the Huntington Urban Watershed that meets one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Land development that creates 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover; 
(2)  Land development activities that are less than 5,000 square feet if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development; 
(3)  Land redevelopment activities that will result in the improvement, restoration, rebuilding or new construction on any developed property that encompasses 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface, and has one of the following characteristics: i) Land that currently has an existing structure; ii) Land that is currently covered with an impervious surface, such as a parking lot or roof; or iii) Land that is currently degraded and is covered with sand, gravel, stones, or other non-vegetative covering. 
(4)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility may, upon approval of city council, establish certain exemptions to the applicability of this article by regulation. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
971.06 - CONTROL OF POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER. 
(a)  The Huntington Stormwater Utility shall, by regulation, establish requirements for all development and redevelopment in the Huntington Urban watershed that meet or exceed the requirements for "Controlling Runoff from New Development and Redevelopment" set forth in NPDES Permit No. WV0116025. 
(b)  These regulations shall promote the use of stormwater facilities that: 
(1)  Minimize the amount of impervious surfaces within the Huntington Urban Watershed by minimizing the creation, extension, and widening of parking lots, roads, and associated development and encouraging the use of low impact development or green infrastructure practices; 
(2)  Preserve, protect, create and restore ecologically sensitive areas within the Huntington Urban Watershed that provide water quality benefits and serve critical watershed functions. These areas may include, but are not limited to; riparian corridors, headwaters, floodplains and wetlands; 
(3)  Implement stormwater management practices that prevent or reduce thermal impacts to streams; 
(4)  Avoid or prevent hydromodification of streams and other water bodies caused by development, including roads, highways and bridges; 
(5)  Implement standards to protect trees and other vegetation with important evapo-transpirative qualities; 
(6)  Protect native soils, prevent topsoil stripping and prevent compaction of soils. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
917.07 - REQUIREMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT. 
    No person shall undertake development or redevelopment within the Huntington Urban Watershed without the written approval of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. Any written approval must be signed by the stormwater director and be in the form prescribed by the Director of the Huntington Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
971.08 - ENFORCEMENT-INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS. 
(a)  Authority to inspect and investigate. Pursuant to W. Va. Code § 16-13-23a(1) and other relevant West Virginia laws and regulations, the Stormwater Utility shall have the authority, upon presentation of identification and credentials, to enter and inspect any land, building, structure, or premises within the Huntington Urban Watershed to ensure compliance with this article, or any regulations, permits, agreements, or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this article, and to investigate to determine whether the activity is being conducted in accordance with this article and the approved stormwater management plan, and whether the measures required in the plan are effective. The stormwater utility shall also have the power to require written statements, or the filing of reports under oath as part of an investigation. 
(b)  No person shall resist, delay, obstruct, hamper or interfere with the stormwater utility while the stormwater utility is inspecting and/or investigating or attempting to inspect and/or investigate an activity under this article. Failure to provide access to the stormwater utility is a violation of this article and may result in the assessment civil penalties pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Inspection and/or investigation frequency. The inspections and investigations outlined above in subsection (a) may be conducted or established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections and/or investigations; random inspections and/or investigations; inspections and/or investigations based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections and/or investigations with other agencies inspecting and/or investigating pursuant to environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
971.09 - ENFORCEMENT-VIOLATIONS. 
(a)  Violations. Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this article or any regulations, permits, agreements, or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this article, is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  Responsible persons/entities. Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or maintain any structure, stormwater management facility, practice, or condition in violation of this article, as well as any person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or constitutes a violation of this article, or fails to take appropriate action, so that a violation of this article results or persists; or an owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment of the property on which the violation occurs shall be subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement actions in accordance with this section. For the purposes of this article, responsible person(s) shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Person maintaining condition resulting in or constituting violation. Any person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that constitutes a violation of this article, or fails to take appropriate action, so that a violation of this article results or persists. 
(2)  Person who owns or controls use of property. The owner of the land on which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of the property, any person who is responsible for stormwater controls or practices pursuant to a private agreement or public document, or any person, who has control over, or responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment of the property. 
(c)  Notice of violation and order to correct. If, through inspection and/or investigation, it is found that any building, structure, or land is in violation of this article, the stormwater utility shall notify in writing the responsible person/entity. The notice may be served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notification shall indicate the nature of the violation, contain the address or other description of the site upon which the violation occurred or is occurring, order the necessary action to abate the violation, and give a deadline for correcting the violation. The notice shall, if necessary, specify a date by which the responsible person/entity must comply with this article, and advise that the responsible person/entity is subject to remedies and/or penalties or that failure to correct the violation within the time specified will subject the responsible person/entity to remedies and/or penalties as described section 971-10 of this article. If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time, as provided in the notification, the stormwater utility may take appropriate action, as provided in this article to correct and abate the violation. 
(d)  Extension of time. A responsible person/entity who receives a notice of violation and correction order, or the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, may submit to the stormwater utility a written request for an extension of time for correction of the violation. On determining that the request includes enough information to show that the violation cannot be corrected within the specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the responsible person/entity requesting the extension, the stormwater utility may extend the corrective action deadline, in its sole discretion, as long as is reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation. The stormwater utility may grant an extension only by written notice of extension. The notice of extension shall state the date prior to which correction must be made, after which the violator will be subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation and correction order. 
(e)  Emergency enforcement. If a violation threatens the effective enforcement of this article or poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety, or the environment, then the stormwater utility may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any person so ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The stormwater utility may seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or penalty specified in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
971.10 - ENFORCEMENT-PENALTIES AND REMEDIES. 
(a)  Civil penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or any regulations, permits, agreements, or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this article may, at the sole discretion of the stormwater utility, be subject to a civil penalty. A civil penalty may be assessed from the date a violation occurs. The stormwater utility shall determine the amount of the civil penalty and shall notify the violator of the amount of the penalty and the reason for assessing the penalty. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified of the violation except as provided in subsection 971-09(e), in which case the penalty is assessed concurrently with a notice of violation. Refusal to accept the notice or failure to notify the stormwater utility of a change of address shall not relieve the violator's obligation to comply with the article or to pay such a penalty. 
(b)  Calculation of Violations. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense. 
(c)  Penalties assessed concurrent with notice of violation. Penalties may be assessed concurrently with a notice of violation for any of the following, in which case the notice of violation shall also contain a statement of the civil penalties to be assessed, the time of their accrual, and the time within which they must be paid or be subject to collection as a debt: 
(1)  Failure to submit a stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Performing land disturbing activities or beginning development or redevelopment work without an approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Obstructing, hampering or interfering in any way with an authorized representative who is in the process of carrying out official duties, including failing to provide access to property within the Huntington Urban Watershed for inspection or investigation purposes; 
(4)  A repeated violation for which a notice was previously given on the same project or property or to the same responsible person/entity responsible for the violation; 
(5)  Willful violation of this article or any regulations, permits, agreements, or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this article; and 
(6)  Failure to install or maintain stormwater facilities per an approved plan. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(c)  Amount of civil penalty. The civil penalty for each violation of this article may be up to $500 per violation per day. The determination of an appropriate civil penalty shall be at the sole discretion of the stormwater utility. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the stormwater utility may consider any relevant mitigating and aggravating factors including, but not limited to: the degree and extent of harm caused by the violation; the cost of rectifying the damage; the economic benefit of noncompliance; whether the violation was committed willfully; cooperation with the stormwater utility; and the prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with this article or any other ordinance or law. 
(d)  Failure to pay civil penalty. If a violator does not pay a civil penalty assessed by the stormwater utility within 30 days after it is due, or does not request a hearing as provided in subsection 971-10(f), the stormwater utility may initiate a civil action to recover the amount of the assessment. The civil action shall be brought in either Wayne or Cabell County Circuit Court or in any other court of competent jurisdiction. A civil action must be filed within three years of the date the assessment was due. An assessment that is appealed is due at the conclusion of the administrative and judicial review of the assessment. If the stormwater utility obtains a judgment against a violator for unpaid civil penalties issued pursuant to this article, the violator shall be responsible for any costs and/or attorney fees incurred by the stormwater utility. 
(e)  Appeal of remedy or penalty. The issuance of an order of restoration and/or notice of assessment of a civil penalty shall entitle the responsible party or entity to an appeal before the stormwater utility if such person submits a written demand for an appeal hearing to the Huntington Stormwater Utility Board within 30 days of the receipt of an order of restoration and/or notice of assessment of a civil penalty. The stormwater utility may, in its sole discretion, develop procedural rules for appeals by regulation. 
(f)  Additional remedies. 
(1)  Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The stormwater utility or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building, property or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site and served by the stormwater practices in question until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations. 
(2)  Disapproval of subsequent permits and plan approvals. As long as a violation of this article continues and remains uncorrected, the stormwater utility or other authorized agent may withhold, and the stormwater utility may disapprove, any subsequent request for permit or plan approval or authorization provided for by this article or the zoning, subdivision, and/or building regulations, as appropriate for the property on which the violation occurs. The stormwater utility is also authorized to deny applications by responsible parties for properties not associated with or connected to the existing violations. 
(3)  Disconnection of water and sewer service. Pursuant to W. Va. Code § 16-13-16(m), the stormwater utility, the City of Huntington or other authorized agent may discontinue both water and sewer service to any building, property or person for the failure to comply with an order of the stormwater utility, pay penalties, violations or fees assessed by the stormwater utility or to correct ongoing violations of this article or any regulations enacted pursuant to this article. 
(4)  Correction as public health nuisance, costs as lien, etc. If a violation is deemed to pose a threat to the public health, safety, or the environment and is within the Huntington Urban Watershed, the stormwater utility, with the written authorization of Huntington Stormwater Utility Board, may cause the violation to be corrected and the costs to be assessed as a lien against the property. Pursuant to W. Va. Code § 16-13-23a(m), the stormwater utility may also collect the costs of correcting any violation by instituting a civil action. 
(5)  Restoration of areas affected by failure to comply. By issuance of an order of restoration, the stormwater utility may require a person who engaged in a land disturbing activity and failed to comply with this article to restore the waters and land affected by such failure so as to minimize the detrimental effects to the environment. This authority is in addition to any other civil penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this article. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. Violation of this article may be enforced as a misdemeanor subject to the maximum fine permissible under state law. 
(Ord. of 4-10-17(1) ) 
PART ELEVEN - HEALTH AND SANITATION CODE 
ARTICLE 1105 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Art. 505 et seq. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate public health matters, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(13), (23), (40); power to establish local health units, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(40); Art. 16-2. 

1105.01 - DEFINITION. 
    "Health officer" means the Director of the Cabell-Huntington Health Department and his delegates. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-1) 
1105.02 - ENFORCEMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH PROVISIONS; POLICE POWER OF HEALTH OFFICER. 
    The health officer shall see that all provisions of the Codified Ordinances relative to public health are observed and obeyed. He shall cause complaint to be made before the municipal judge of all violations of the Codified Ordinances and other city ordinances relative to public health and attend, as a witness or otherwise, all trials of such cases. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the Codified Ordinances relative to public health, the health officer is given all powers of a police officer of the city, including the authority to make arrests. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-2) 
1105.03 - DUTIES OF HEALTH OFFICER AS TO CONTAGIOUS DISEASES GENERALLY. 
    The health officer shall be in charge of the control of contagious, infectious and communicable diseases. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-2.1) 
1105.04 - MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY DISEASE. 
    Whenever it is deemed necessary by the health officer to establish the true character of any disease which there is probable cause to believe communicable, a medical examination of the persons affected by such disease may be ordered by the health officer. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit such examination. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-3) 
1105.05 - ISOLATION OF PERSONS WITH COMMUNICABLE DISEASE; CLEANING INFECTED BUILDINGS. 
    Any person in the city having any communicable disease shall be isolated as the health officer may direct; and all buildings, clothing, property, premises and vehicles which may have been infected by any such person shall be cleaned as the health officer may direct. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-4) 
ARTICLE 1109 - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Animal nuisances, Art. 505 et seq.; refuse disposal, Art. 951. 
State Law reference- Authority to abate public nuisances, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(13), (23). 

1109.01 - WHAT CONSTITUTES NUISANCES. 
    In addition to those declared by statute to be such, each of the following specific conditions and things are hereby prohibited and declared nuisances: 
(a)  The deposit or accumulation of foul, decaying or putrescent substances or other offensive matter in or upon any lot, street or highway or in or upon any public or private place; the overflow of foul liquids or the escape of any gases to such extent that the same shall become or be likely to become hazardous to health or shall, by reason of offensive odors, become a source of unreasonable discomfort to persons living or passing in the vicinity thereof. 
(b)  A polluted well, spring or stream or the pollution of any body of water used for drinking purposes. 
(c)  The maintenance of any privy vault or cesspool, except as provided in the Codified Ordinances. 
(d)  Keeping any building or room in such a state of uncleanliness, or the crowding of persons in any building or room in such manner as to endanger the health of the persons dwelling therein or thereabout, or so that there is less than 400 cubic feet of air to each adult, and 150 cubic feet of air to each child under 12 years of age occupying such building or room. 
(e)  The accumulation of manure, unless it is in a properly constructed pit or receptacle. 
(f)  The accumulation of water in which mosquitos breed. 
(g)  The maintenance in any public place of a roller towel for the use of more than one person. 
(h)  The maintenance of all chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or other fowl of any kind whatsoever, and the maintenance of any building or coop, used for the purpose of raising or confining the same, in or upon any lot, street, or highway, or in or upon any public or private place, in an unsanitary or other offensive manner, or permitting or allowing to accumulate therefrom any foul, decaying or putrescent substances or other offensive matter. 
(i)  The keeping, establishing, maintaining or abandoning of any open pit, well, cesspool or other excavation in or upon any lot, street or highway, or in or upon any public or private place, unless properly protected and accepted by the standards as established by the mayor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-5) 
1109.02 - MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE AN OFFENSE; NOTICE; FINES. 
    Should it be discovered by the health officer that a nuisance is being maintained as declared by any statute of the state or the provisions of section 1109.01 the health officer shall give notice to the owner or occupant, or other person in charge, of any premises, building or other place of the violation, and instructing the owner, occupant or person in charge to report to the division of finance in regard to such violation. The penalty for maintenance of any such nuisance shall be $25. Each day such violation shall continue may be deemed a separate offense. The failure of such occupant, owner or other person in charge of the premises, building or other place to make such payment within 14 days shall render such owner, occupant or other person subject to the penalties provided in section 101.99 of the Administrative Code. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-6) 
1109.03 - DUTIES OF HEALTH OFFICER TO PREVENT NUISANCES. 
    The health officer is charged with the prevention and abatement or suppression of nuisances. He shall, when it is ascertained that any nuisance or other condition detrimental to the public health exists on any premises or in any building or other place, serve written notice upon the owner, occupant or other person in charge of such premises, building or other place, to abate or remove such nuisance or condition within a reasonable time, such time to be stated in the notice. 
    No owner or occupant, or other person in charge of any premises, building or other place shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove or abate any nuisance when lawfully ordered to do so by the health officer. 
    If such owner or occupant of any premises fails or refuses to abate or remove any nuisance when lawfully ordered to do so by the health officer, the health officer may have such nuisance abated or removed after reasonable notice to such owner, occupant, tenant, agent or lessee of the intention to do so, and the expense of abating or removing such nuisance, with 1% per month interest, shall be collected from such owner, occupant, tenant, agent or lessee by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-7) 
ARTICLE 1110 - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Animal nuisances, Art. 505 et seq.; refuse disposal, Art. 951. 
State Law reference- Authority to abate public nuisances, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(13), (23). 

1110.00 - PURPOSE. 
    This article is enacted to remedy nuisance activities that repeatedly occur or exist at chronic nuisance properties by providing a process for abatement; and this remedy is not an exclusive remedy available under any state or local laws and may be used in conjunction with such other laws. Specifically, it is recognized that W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(23) permits municipalities to "provide for the elimination of hazards to public health and safety and to abate or cause to be abated anything which in the opinion of a majority of the governing body is a public nuisance." Thus, it is farther recognized that the City of Huntington is currently empowered to abate public nuisances without the necessity of litigation. The right to abate public nuisances through action of the governing body is expressly reserved. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.01 - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY DEFINED. 
(a)  Property on which three or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any 30-day period; or 
(b)  Property on which or within 200 feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three or more nuisance activities during any 30-day period; or 
(c)  Property which, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses has occurred within the previous 30 days, and the chief of police has determined that the search warrant was based on evidence of continuous or repeated nuisance activities at the property; or 
(d)  Property on which continuous or repeated nuisance activities exist or have occurred. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.02 - NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. 
    The following activities are hereby nuisance activities: harassment; intimidation; disorderly conduct; assault or menacing; sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or sexual misconduct; public indecency; prostitution or related offenses; alcoholic liquor violations; offensive littering; criminal trespass; theft; arson, damage to property, disturbing the peace or related offenses; possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses; illegal gambling; criminal mischief; any attempt to commit and/or conspiracy to commit any of the above activities; fire or discharge of a firearm; unlawful operation of sound producing or reproducing equipment; unlawful drinking in public places; curfew; indecent exposure; violations of housing codes; keeping of dangerous or vicious animals. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.03 - NUISANCE PROPERTY. 
    Any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any business or residence, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent. For property consisting of more than one unit, property may be limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all units of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading and landscaping. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.4 - VIOLATION. 
(a)  Any property determined by the chief of police and/or his designee to be a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this article and subject to its remedies. 
(b)  Any owner of property determined by the chief of police and/or his designee to be a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this article and subject to its remedies. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.05 - PROCEDURE. 
(a)  When the chief of police and/or his designee receives two or more police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activities on or within 200 feet of a property, the chief of police and/or his designee shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated under section 1110.02 of this article. Upon such a finding, the chief of police and/or his designee shall notify the property owner that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
(2)  A statement that the chief of police and/or his designee has information that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that have occurred. The chief of police and/or his designee shall offer the property owner an opportunity to propose a course of action that the chief of police and/or his designee agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation. 
(3)  Demand that the property owner respond to the chief of police and/or his designee within ten days to discuss the nuisance activities. 
(b)  When the chief of police and/or his designee receives a police report documenting the occurrence of additional nuisance activity on or within 200 feet of a property after notification as provided by this article, the chief of police and/or his designee shall notify the property owner in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
(2)  A statement that the chief of police and/or his designee has determined the property to be a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his or her determination. 
(3)  Demand that the property owner respond within ten days to the chief of police and/or his designee and propose a course of action that the chief of police and/or his designee agrees abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation. 
(4)  Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the property owner at the address of the property determined to be a chronic nuisance property as well as the address shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, or such other place which is likely to give the property owner notice of the determination by the chief of police and/or his designee. 
(c)  If the property owner fails to respond as required in this article, the chief of police may refer this matter to the city attorney. Prior to referring this matter to the city attorney, the notice shall also be posted on the property. 
(d)  If the property owner responds as required and agrees to abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the chief of police and/or his designee may postpone referring the matter to the city attorney. If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement within 60 days, the chief of police may refer the matter to the city attorney. 
(e)  When a property owner makes a response to the chief of police and/or his designee as required any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. 
(f)  The failure of any property owner to receive notice as provided shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this article. 
(g)  Any evictions that may result from abatement proceedings in accordance with this article shall be prima facie evidence that said evictions were not effected in violation of any federal, state or local Fair Housing, Human Rights or anti-discrimination laws. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.06 - COMMENCEMENT OF ACTIONS; REMEDIES; BURDEN OF PROOF. 
(a)  The mayor may authorize the city attorney to commence legal proceedings in the circuit court to abate chronic nuisance property and to seek closure, the imposition of civil penalties against any and all of the persons charged thereof, and any other relief deemed appropriate. 
(b)  If the court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court shall order that the property be closed and/or secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than six months, nor more than one year. The order shall be entered as a part of the final judgement. The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure. 
(c)  If the court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may impose a civil penalty of up to $100 per day for each day nuisance activities occurred on the property, following notice pursuant to this article; or, the cost to the city to abate the nuisance activities at the property, whichever is greater. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed against the property owner and may be included in the city's money judgment. 
(d)  If satisfied of the good faith of the property owner, the court shall not award civil penalties if the court finds that the property owner at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance. 
(e)  In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider any of the factors and shall cite those found applicable: 
(1)  The actions taken by the property owner to mitigate or correct the nuisance activities at the property. 
(2)  The financial condition of the property owner. 
(3)  Repeated or continuous nature of the problem. 
(4)  The magnitude or gravity of the problem. 
(5)  The cooperation of the property owner with the city. 
(6)  The cost to the city for investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the nuisance activities. 
(7)  Any other factors deemed relevant by the court. 
(f)  The city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(g)  Evidence of a property's general reputation and/or the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.07 - SUMMARY CLOSURE. 
    Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. Proceedings to obtain an order of summary closure shall be governed by the laws for obtaining temporary restraining orders. In the event of summary closure, the city is not required to comply with the notification procedures set forth above in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.08 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against all unauthorized access, use or occupancy in the event that the property owner fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, the city shall recover all costs reasonably incurred by the city to physically secure the property as provided in this section. The finance department shall prepare a statement of costs and the city shall thereafter submit the statement to the court for review. 
(b)  The property owner shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after either: 
(1)  The property owner received notice of the determination of the chief of police; or 
(2)  The property owner received notice of an action brought pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A lien shall be placed against the property for the amount of the city's money judgment. In addition, any person who is assessed penalties and/or costs under this article shall be personally liable for payment thereof to the city. Judgments imposed by this article shall bear interest at the statutory rate. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.09 - ATTORNEY FEES. 
    The court may, in its discretion, award attorney fees to the prevailing party. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
1110.10 - CUMULATIVE REMEDIES. 
    The rights and penalties provided in this article are cumulative and not exclusive, and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the city under other provision of law. The city's actions in pursuit of remedies under this article shall not be construed as an election of remedies and such other remedies as may be available by law may also be pursued. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09) 
ARTICLE 1111 - CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as article 1110. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as article 1111. 

1111.01 - AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS. 
    Municipalities in West Virginia, pursuant to the authority found in W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5, are authorized to implement regulations "to regulate the use of streets, roads, alleys, ways, sidewalks, crosswalks, and public places belonging to the municipality..." Likewise, municipalities are authorized to "prevent injury or annoyance to the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome." West Virginia municipalities are also permitted to "provide for the elimination of hazards to public health and safety..." and to "protect and promote public morals, safety, health, welfare and good order." 
    The Council of the City of Huntington finds that people camping on public property and on public rights-of-way create a public health and safety hazard because of the lack of proper electrical and/or sanitary facilities for these people. People without proper sanitary facilities have openly urinated, defecated, and littered on public property and on the public rights-of-way. Further, the council finds that individuals camping on public property utilize various mechanisms including propane, kerosene, electric heating implements or burn barrels for warmth and these mechanisms are often utilized contrary to well establish fire and life-safety codes. These practices, likewise, present public health and safety issues for the public. Use of public property for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the right of others to use the areas for which they were intended. 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
1111.02 - PURPOSE. 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to prevent harm to the health and safety of the public and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by making public streets and other areas readily accessible to the public and to prevent use of public property for camping purposes or storage of personal property which interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
1111.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following definitions are applicable to this article unless the context otherwise requires: 
    "Camp" or "camping" means to pitch, create, use or occupy camp facilities for the purposes of habitation, as evidenced by the use of camp paraphernalia. 
    "Camp facilities" includes, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary shelters, or vehicles, if said vehicle is being used as a temporary living quarters for a period longer than one night as long as the vehicle is legally parked. 
    "Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, blankets, mattresses, hammock, or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
    "Park" means any areas designated for public recreation and amusement that are maintained and/or controlled by the City of Huntington and/or the Greater Huntington Parks and Recreation District. 
    "Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
    "Street" means any highway, lane, road, street, right of way, boulevard, ally and every way or place in the City of Huntington that is publicly owned or maintained for public vehicular travel. 
    "Vehicle" means the same as defined in section 301.47 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, as revised. 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
1111.04 - UNLAWFUL CAMPING. 
(a)  It should be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities for purpose of habitation, or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or as permitted pursuant to section 1111.07 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Any park; 
(2)  Any street, alley, sidewalk, easement and/or right-of-way; or 
(3)  Any creek bed, riverfront property or beneath bridge abutments; or 
(4)  Any publicly owned or maintained parking lot or other publicly owned or maintained area, improved or unimproved. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a vehicle for the purpose of camping while that vehicle is parked in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or as permitted pursuant to section 1111.07 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Any park; 
(2)  Any street, alley, sidewalk, easement and/or right-of-way; 
(3)  Any creek bed, riverfront property or beneath bridge abutments; or 
(4)  Any publicly owned or maintained parking lot or other publicly owned or maintained area, improved or unimproved. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon any private property within the city, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or as permitted pursuant to section 1111.07 of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
1111.05 - UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities (Other than vehicles) and camp paraphernalia, in the following area, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or a permitted pursuant to section 1111.07 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Any park; 
(2)  Any street, alley, sidewalk, easement and/or right-of-way; 
(3)  Any creek bed, riverfront property or beneath bridge abutments; or 
(4)  Any publicly owned or maintained parking lot or other publicly owned or maintained area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
1111.06 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Upon receipt of information indicating the likelihood of a violation of any provision of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington regarding camping within the city limits, the enforcement official shall investigate the facts and may, to the extent permitted by law, make an inspection of the site for the health, safety and welfare of the occupants. 
(b)  If an investigation reveals that a code violation exists, the enforcement official may issue a citation for such violation. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer, code enforcement official or other employee duly authorized, shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this article and shall be referred to herein collectively as "enforcement officials." 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
1111.07 - EXCEPTIONS AND PERMIT. 
(a)  Sections 1111.04 and 1111.05 shall not apply to persons lawfully camping within campgrounds or trailer parks specifically designated and/or approved for such use pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Sections 1111.04 and 1111.05 shall not apply to persons camping upon their own land or camping with the owner of the land, or to persons camping with the written permission of the owner of the land; provided, that such written permission is in the possession at the time and is shown upon demand of any enforcement official, and provided that all local zoning ordinances of the city are met and all health regulations of the city, county and state are complied with. 
(c)  Any organization, group, or individual who has obtained an event permit or a special permit pursuant to any other article of the ordinances of the City of Huntington shall be exempt from this article. 
(d)  A permit may be obtained for the purposes of camping within the city limits. A permit application shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and other general information as the permit application shall require. 
(2)  An accurate description or map of the location where the individual/group intends to camp. 
(3)  The total number of individuals who will be in the group camping. 
(e)  The mayor and/or his or her designee may approve a permit as provided under this section when, from a consideration of the application, reports from other city departments and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that: 
(1)  Adequate sanitary facilities are provided and accessible at or near the proposed camp site; 
(2)  Adequate trash receptacles and trash collection are provided; and 
(3)  The camping activity will not unreasonably disturb or interfere with the safety, peace, comfort and repose of private property owners. 
(f)  The application may be approved if, in his/her opinion, such approval would not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. Upon approval, the applicant shall pay a permit fee of $10. The permit shall be valid for upon issuance for a period not to exceed seven days. 
(g)  The mayor and/or his or her designee is authorized to revoke a permit that has been issued if he or she finds lack of compliance with any requirement of subsection (d) or (e) above, or of any rule or regulation promulgated or any ordinance or statute. 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
1111.08 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS 
    Violation of any of the provisions of this article is a misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days in jail, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each continuing day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-13-14(1)) 
ARTICLE 1113 - MASSAGE PARLORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Sexual misconduct, Art. 517. 

1113.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Massage parlor" means any shop, establishment or place of business wherein any person receives or alleges to receive all or any one or more of the following methods of treatment: oil rubs, salt glows, hot or cold packs, all kinds of baths including steam rooms, body massage, either by hand or by any mechanical or electrical apparatus or device, applying such movements as stroking, friction, rolling, vibration, kneading, cupping or rubbing. 
(b)  "Masseur" and/or "masseuse" means a person who practices or administers all or any one or more of the named subjects or methods of treatments defined in subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, copartnership, joint adventure, association or any group or combination acting as a unit and owning, operating or working in a massage parlor. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-8) 
1113.02 - PERMIT. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in the operation of a massage parlor within the meaning of this article without securing a permit from the division of finance office in accordance with the provisions established herein. Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to licensed practical nurses, orderlies, attendants or nurses aides working in hospitals, nursing homes and other establishments who are under the direction, control and supervision of a licensed physician nor shall this article be construed as to apply to a licensed massage therapist. 
(b)  Application. Any person applying for a permit to engage in the operation of a massage parlor under the provisions of this article shall first file with the division of finance office a written application for such permit, on a form to be provided, stating the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the massage parlor, the name and address of the person the applicant represents, and the names and addresses of all the masseurs and masseuses employed in the massage parlor. 
(c)  Fee; transferability; annual application. Any person making an application for a permit shall be required to pay an annual permit fee in the amount of $15. The permit shall be nontransferable, and the applicant shall in addition to the annual fee file a new application annually, which shall be filed before the first operating day in the month of July of each year. 
(d)  Investigation prior to issuance. Prior to the issuance or renewal of any permit to operate a massage parlor: 
(1)  The fire chief or his designee shall inspect the site and the facilities to be used thereon to determine whether or not such facilities meet all requirements of the City Fire Code, and to establish any regulations for the operation of such massage parlor to conform therewith. 
(2)  The housing inspector shall inspect the site to determine whether the adequacy of sanitary facilities, rest rooms and such meet all of the Housing Code requirements. 
(3)  The health department shall have the site inspected to determine whether the facilities meet the Health Code requirements. 
(4)  The director of the division of finance shall not issue or renew any permit to operate a massage parlor hereunder until favorable recommendations from the fire chief, housing inspector and health department are received by him. 
(e)  Display. All permits issued hereunder shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the massage parlor. 
(Ord. 9-13-99) 
1113.03 - OPEN FOR INSPECTION. 
    Every massage parlor shall, during business hours, be held open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of the various city departments concerned with the supervision and enforcement of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-14) 
1113.04 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    In addition to any other law, rule or regulation adopted by the city or health department, the holder of any permit under this article shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(a)  No person who has any visible symptoms of a communicable disease, such as a rash, discharge or fever, or who is complaining of a sore throat may be attended by any person under this article or any person engaged in the practice of massage. 
(b)  Each applicant for a permit under this article shall present a certificate from a registered physician, certifying that he or she and his or her employees are free from communicable disease. 
(c)  No massage parlor shall be conducted in direct connection with living quarters, unless especially approved by the board of health. 
(d)  The premises used for a massage parlor shall be well ventilated and lighted. They shall be kept clean, and the furniture and equipment shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. There shall be an adequate supply of running hot and cold water during business hours. Bathing devices shall be thoroughly cleaned before the use of each patron. 
(e)  All robes, towels, blankets and linens furnished for the use of one patron shall be thoroughly laundered before being offered to another. 
(f)  Uniforms or garments worn by an owner, instructor, operator or apprentice while attending partrons shall be of washable material and shall be kept in clean condition. The sleeves shall not reach below the elbow. 
(g)  The skin of the hands of those attending patrons shall be clean and in a healthy condition, and the nails shall be kept short. The hands shall be washed thoroughly before giving the patron any attention. 
(h)  The permit holder shall notify the director of the division of finance of any change of name or address of his or her home or business. 
(i)  A holder of a permit, under this article, shall exercise every precaution for the safety of patrons. He shall watch for early signs of fatigue or weakness and immediately discontinue whatever form of service is being given upon the appearance of such signs. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-15) 
1113.05 - ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the operation of a massage parlor without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall operate any massage parlor which does not conform to the sanitary or health regulations adopted by the Health Department. 
(c)  No person shall operate any massage parlor where any of the following activities take place: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Masturbation; 
(3)  Oral sexual activity; 
(4)  Touching or any manipulation of breasts or the touching of the genital area; 
(5)  Other sexual activity contrary to the laws of the state or laws and ordinances of the city. 
(d)  No establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, shall operate as a massage salon, bath parlor, or any similar type business, where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. 
    This subsection shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the state, or to a licensed nurse acting under the direct prescription and direction of any such physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath. Also, this section shall not apply to barbershops or beauty parlors in which massage is given to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. 
(e)  No permit holder shall permit disorderly conduct or the use of any immoral, profane or indecent language; or permit the sale, giving away or use of beer or intoxicating liquors, or narcotics or marihuana; or permit the premises to be a place of resort of thieves, prostitutes, narcotics addicts, narcotics peddlers or other disorderly persons. 
(f)  No person employed by a massage parlor shall at any time solicit business on the public streets. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-16) 
1113.06 - HOURS OF OPERATION. 
    No person shall open or cause to be opened or operated within the city limits any massage parlor between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., official city time. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-17) 
1113.07 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the police department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-18) 
1113.08 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
    Any permit issued under this article may be revoked for the violation of any laws of the state, ordinances of the city or the provisions of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-19) 
1113.09 - RETROACTIVE APPLICABILITY. 
    It is the intent of council that the requirement of securing a permit to operate a massage parlor within the city limits shall apply retroactively to all existing massage parlors now operating within the city limits. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-22) 
1113.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each day a violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1964 Code Sec. 17-20) 
ARTICLE 1115 - FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Removal of refuse, § 951.14. 
State Law reference- Restaurants, W. Va. Code, Art. 16-6. 

1115.01 - STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED. 
    The definitions; the inspection of food-service establishments; the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate food-service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food or drink; and the enforcement of this article shall be regulated in accordance with the 1980 edition of the West Virginia Food Service Sanitation Regulations, which is hereby adopted by reference, and three copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2-13-84) 
1115.02 - RESTAURANT PERMITS. 
    No person shall operate a restaurant in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the health officer. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. A person conducting an itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a permit. 
    Such a permit may be temporarily suspended by the health officer upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the health officer upon serious or repeated violation. 
    The annual fee for a permit for a food-service establishment from the health authority shall be $5, which fee shall be due and payable to the director of the division of finance on or before July 1 of each year; such permit shall, unless suspended or revoked, continue in effect until June 30 next following. No permit shall be issued until such fee has been paid. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-2) 
1115.03 - RETAIL FOOD STORE SANITATION. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein for the purpose of regulating retail food store sanitation that certain code known as the West Virginia Board of Health Legislative Rules, Chapter 16-1, Series XX, 1985 edition of which code, not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 8-26-85) 
ARTICLE 1117 - MEAT AND FOWL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Pure food regulations, W. Va. Code, Art. 16-7; inspection of meat and meat products, W. Va. Code, Art. 19-2B. 

1117.01 - PROCESSING INEDIBLE MEAT PRODUCTS. 
    No person shall boil, heat, cook, steam, evaporate, dry, render or reduce any inedible meat products unless the process is carried on and conducted in modern tanks or equipment with suitable and efficient pumps and apparatus to condense, burn and destroy the obnoxious odors created in such process. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-4) 
1117.02 - UNINSPECTED AND UNBRANDED MEAT. 
    No person shall ship, send, bring or cause to be brought into the city, the meat of any cattle, sheep, lambs, goats or swine which do not bear the meat inspection brand or other mark of identification recognized by the health officer. No person shall expose, offer for sale, or sell, or otherwise dispose of, or have in his possession within the city, any meat of any cattle, calves, sheep, lambs, goats or swine which does not have upon it the meat inspection brand or other mark of identification, representing an inspection standard equal to and recognized by the United States Department of Agriculture. In the event any carcass of any animal hereinbefore named, or part thereof, is found offered for sale or exposed within the city, which does not bear any meat inspection brands or marks, as hereinbefore described, the Department of Health shall take possession of and destroy such meat; provided, that this section shall not apply to any bona-fide farmer who shall ship, send, bring or cause to be brought into the city the meat of any cattle, sheep, lamb, goats or swine, as hereinbefore set forth; and, in such cases, this section shall not be so construed as to require any meat inspection brand or other mark of identification whatsoever; provided further, that such products may be exposed, offered for sale, sold or otherwise disposed of within the city without such meat inspection brand or other mark of identification thereon; provided further, that any person offering such products for sale shall, at all times upon demand, disclose to the health officer the source from which such product was derived; provided further, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to relieve such bona-fide farmer from complying with all of the other applicable sections of this article in all respects. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-5) 
1117.03 - REINSPECTION. 
    All meats or meat food products offered for sale in the city shall be subject to reinspection and condemnation at any time and at all times by the health officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-6) 
1117.04 - WRONGFUL USE OF STAMPS, MARKS, BRANDS OR TAGS. 
    No person, or officer, agent or employee thereof, shall forge, counterfeit, simulate or falsely represent, or without proper authority, use or detach, or knowingly or wrongfully alter, deface or destroy any of the stamps or marks or brands or tags or other mark of identification which has been placed upon any meat of any cattle, calves, sheep, lambs, goats or swine, as set forth in this article, or which may be upon any parts of the carcasses of such animals. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-7) 
1117.05 - AGE AND WEIGHT OF ANIMALS SLAUGHTERED GENERALLY; UNWHOLESOME BIRDS OR FOWL. 
    No pig or the meat thereof shall be brought into the city or held for human food, which, when killed, was less than five weeks old. No lamb or the meat thereof shall be brought into the city or held for human food, which, when killed, was less that eight weeks old. No meager, sickly or unwholesome birds or fowl shall be brought into the city or held for human food. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-8) 
1117.06 - KILLING YOUNG CALVES FOR SALE. 
    No person shall by himself or his agents kill, for the purpose of sale, any calf less than four weeks old, or sell or have in his possession with the intent to sell, the meat of any calf which he knows to have been killed when less than four weeks old. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-9) 
1117.07 - MEATS CONTAINING PRESERVATIVES. 
    No person shall sell, ship, consign, offer for sale, expose for sale or have in possession with intent to sell as fresh, any meat, poultry, game or shellfish which contains any substance, article or ingredient possessing a preservative character or action, or which contains any coal-tar dye, or any other substance or ingredient possessing a coloring character or action; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of ice as a preservative or the use of refrigeration. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-10) 
1117.08 - ARTIFICIAL COLORING OF MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS. 
    Meats, meat products and meat food products, when manufactured, sold or exposed for sale for human consumption in the city, shall not be artificially colored with any dye, chemical or other substance, except natural wood smoke, sugar, salt, pepper, saltpeter or borax. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-11) 
1117.09 - ADULTERATED ARTICLES TO BE FORFEITED AND DESTROYED. 
    All articles adulterated in violation of the provisions of sections 1117.07 and 1117.08 shall be forfeited by the owner and destroyed by the health officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-12) 
1117.10 - OVERHEATED AND DISEASED ANIMALS. 
    No cattle shall be killed for human food while in an overheated, feverish or diseased condition, and all such diseased cattle in the city, the place where found, and their disease shall be at once reported to the health officer by the owner or custodian thereof, so that the proper order may be made relative thereto, or for the removal thereof from the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-13) 
1117.11 - TRANSPORTATION OF CARCASSES. 
    The body of any animal or any part thereof which is to be used as human food shall not be carted or carried through the streets unless it is so covered as to protect it from dust and dirt, or other contaminating matter, and no meat, poultry or game shall be hung or exposed for sale in any doorways within the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-14) 
1117.12 - COOLING BEFORE SALE; REMOVAL OF ENTRAILS, HEAD AND FEET. 
    No meat or dead animal above the size of a rabbit shall be offered for sale or be sold for human food until the same has been fully cooled after killing, nor until the entrails, head and feet, except of poultry and game, and except the heads and feet of swine, shall have been removed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-15) 
1117.13 - BUTCHERS TO PERMIT INSPECTION. 
    Every butcher, and his various agents, shall allow the parties authorized by the provisions of this article to freely and fully inspect the cattle and meats held or kept by him or them, or intended for sale, and shall truthfully answer all reasonable and proper questions asked by such persons relative to the condition thereof and of the places where such articles may be. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-16) 
1117.14 - REMOVAL OF OFFAL AND BUTCHERS' REFUSE. 
    The owner of any meat market or place of business where fresh meat or fish, or both, are sold in the city shall, at the end of each day's business, remove from his place of business, all of the offal or butchers' refuse that may have accumulated during the day, and such person shall convey such offal or butchers' refuse through the city only when placed in tight boxes, barrels or receptacles and tightly covered, so that no odor shall escape therefrom. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-17) 
1117.15 - HEALTH OFFICER TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The health officer is hereby authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations in reference to the processing of meat, the sale of meat and slaughterhouses. No person shall fail to comply with any reasonable regulation of the health officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 14-18) 
1117.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
ARTICLE 1131 - HOTELS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Removal of refuse, § 951.14; hotel occupancy tax , Art. 769; posting notice of setting fires, § 1529.04. 
State Law reference- Hotels, W. Va. Code, Art. 16-6. 

1131.01 - DEFINED; HOTELS TO WHICH ARTICLE NOT APPLICABLE. 
    For the purposes of this article, "hotel" means every building where food and lodging are usually furnished to guests and payment is required therefor. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any hotel wherein there are fewer than ten bed chambers, nor to any hotel known as a "summer hotel" which is not open for guests from November 15 to May 15. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-1) 
1131.02 - LIGHTING, PLUMBING AND VENTILATION. 
    Every hotel in the city shall be properly lighted by day and by night, shall be properly plumbed and ventilated and shall be conducted in every department with strict regard for the health, comfort and safety of its guests. Such proper plumbing and draining shall be done and maintained according to approved sanitary principles. Such proper ventilation shall be construed to require at least one door and one window in every sleeping room, which window shall permit easy access to the outside of the building, light well or court. No room shall be used as a sleeping room which does not open to the outside of the building or light wells, air shafts or courts. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-2) 
1131.03 - WATER CLOSETS AND BATHROOMS. 
    Every hotel shall be equipped with suitable water closets for the accommodation of guests, which water closets shall be connected by proper plumbing with the sewer system, and so constructed that they may be flushed with water in such manner as to prevent sewer gas or effluvia arising therefrom. All lavatories, bathtubs, sinks, drains, closets and urinals in such hotels shall be furnished and equipped in a similar manner. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-3) 
1131.04 - WASHROOMS AND TOWELS. 
    All hotels in the city shall be provided with a general washroom convenient and of easy access to guests, and in each bedroom and general washroom there shall be furnished for each registered guest clean, individual towels, of cotton or linen, so that no two or more registered guests will be required to use the same towel, unless it has first been washed. Such individual towel shall not be less than 12 inches wide and 18 inches long after being washed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-4) 
1131.05 - BED COVERINGS; CLEANING CARPETS AND BEDDING. 
    Every hotel shall provide each bed, bunk, cot or other sleeping place for the use of guests with pillow slips and under and top sheets, the under sheets to be of sufficient size to completely cover the mattress and springs, and the top sheet to be of like width and at least 99 inches long and not to be less than 90 inches in length after having been laundered. Such sheets and pillow slips shall be made of white cotton or linen, and all such sheets and pillow slips, after being used by one guest, shall be washed and ironed before being used by another guest, a clean set being furnished each succeeding guest. All bedding, including mattresses, quilts, blankets, pillows and all carpets and floor covering used in any hotel in the city shall be thoroughly aired, disinfected and kept clean. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-5) 
1131.06 - VERMIN. 
    In every hotel, any room infected with vermin or bed bugs shall be fumigated, disinfected and renovated until such vermin or bed bugs are extirpated. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-6) 
1131.07 - EMPLOYMENT OF PERSON HAVING COMMUNICABLE DISEASE. 
    No person engaged in conducting a hotel shall knowingly have in its employ any person who has an infectious or communicable disease. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-7) 
1131.08 - DISINFECTION OF ROOMS AND BEDS. 
    Every person keeping or conducting a hotel shall see that every room or bed which has been occupied by any person known to have an infectious or communicable disease at the time of such occupancy, is thoroughly disinfected by methods to be prescribed by the state public health council before such room or bed is occupied by any other person. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-8) 
1131.09 - HALLWAYS AND FIRE ESCAPES. 
    Whenever it is proposed to erect a building three stories or more in height, intended for use as a hotel in the city, it shall be the duty of the owner or proprietor of such hotel to construct the same so that one main hallway on each floor above the ground floor shall run to an opening in the outside wall of the building. Every building used as a hotel shall comply with the provisions of the West Virginia Code, pertaining to fire escapes. All fire escapes shall be indicated by a red light and a placard in each hallway leading to such fire escapes. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-9) 
1131.10 - FIRE ESCAPES. 
    Each keeper of a hotel in the city shall provide and keep constantly in each room of the hotel, above the second floor, a knotted rope, wire ladder or other proper fire escape of sufficient strength and length, strongly attached or fastened to some outside window in such room, by which any person in any of the rooms in such building may escape from the windows in case of fire; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any hotel that has a regular and proper fire escape, connected with each hall in such hotel. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-10) 
1131.11 - FIRE EXTINGUISHERS. 
    Every hotel shall be provided with one fire extinguisher, of style and size approved by the National Fire Protection Association, on each floor containing 2,500 square feet of floor area and one additional fire extinguisher on each floor for each additional 2,500 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof. Every such extinguisher shall be placed in a convenient location in the public hallway, outside of sleeping rooms, at or near the head of stairs and shall always be in condition for use. 
(1964 Code Sec. 18-11) 
1131.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 101.99 for general Codified Ordinances penalty. 
PART THIRTEEN - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE 
CHAPTER ONE - PLANNING 
ARTICLE 1305 - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Comprehensive Plan, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-16 et seq. 

1305.01 - SHORT TITLE. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Comprehensive Plan of Huntington, West Virginia, 1963." 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-1) 
1305.02 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a single unified code, consisting of all plans, reports and ordinances, plus supplemental details, as contained in the report of the City Planning Commission, entitled "Comprehensive Plan of the City of Huntington, West Virginia" that deal with the subject of planning and zoning, as a comprehensive guide for the future growth and development of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-2) 
1305.03 - ADOPTION. 
    The maps, charts, plans and reports which compose the Comprehensive Plan are on file in the office of the planning director in the City Hall, and are available for public inspection during all regular office hours of the director, and the same are hereby adopted as the "Comprehensive Plan Ordinance of the City of Huntington, West Virginia, 1963," which is hereby referred to, adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4, and also in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-24-21. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-3) 
1305.04 - CONTENTS. 
    The Comprehensive Plan consists of a descriptive report dated October, 1962, entitled "Comprehensive Plan of the City of Huntington, West Virginia", together with the provisions of the maps, charts, plans and ordinances which have heretofore or may hereafter be prepared concerning the following subject: zoning, subdivision control, thoroughfares, schools, parks, recreation and public areas and a separate plan entitled "Comprehensive Development Plan". 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-4) 
1305.05 - COMPLIANCE. 
    The layout, location, relocation, extension or widening of thoroughfares, the general design of neighborhoods and their street patterns, the use of land and the general locations of sites for schools, parks, recreational and other public uses, shopping centers and community facilities shall conform to the principles, policies and provisions of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-5) 
1305.06 - EFFECT. 
    Council and all municipal boards, commissions and all other agencies of the city shall be guided by and give consideration to the general policy and pattern of development set out in the Comprehensive Plan prior to the authorization, construction, alteration or abandonment of any public installation, required or necessitated in the interest of the physical development of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-6) 
1305.07 - CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION. 
    The planning commission shall, from time to time, consider and review proposals with respect to changes in or amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and, upon conclusion of such consideration, including a public hearing thereon, shall certify to council their reports on such matters. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-7) 
1305.08 - DUTIES OF PLANNING DIRECTOR. 
    The planning director shall keep on file for public inspection, during all regular office hours, two copies of the Comprehensive Plan, including maps, charts, plans and ordinances referred to in this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-8) 
1305.09 - AMENDMENT. 
    The Comprehensive Plan of the city may be amended from time to time following a report thereon by the planning commission, prepared either upon the direction of council or upon its own initiative. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-9) 
ARTICLE 1309 - THOROUGHFARE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Comprehensive Plan, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-16 et seq. 

1309.01 - SHORT TITLE. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Thoroughfare Plan, A Section of the Comprehensive Plan of Huntington, West Virginia, 1963." 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-10) 
1309.02 - ADOPTION. 
    The Thoroughfare Plan and ordinance, maps, charts, plans and reports comprising the Thoroughfare Plan shall be kept on file in the office of the planning director in the City Hall and shall be available for public inspection and examination, the same being marked and designated as "The Thoroughfare Plan Ordinance," and the same is hereby adopted as the "Thoroughfare Plan Ordinance of the City of Huntington" and is hereby referred to, adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this article in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4, and also in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8-24-21. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-11) 
1309.03 - CONTENTS. 
    The Thoroughfare Plan of the city consists of a map entitled "Thoroughfare Plan, Huntington, West Virginia, 1962," which shows the location of existing and proposed thoroughfares within the city and its immediate environs and is hereby declared to be a part of this article. Notations, references, indications and other details shown on the Thoroughfare Plan are as much a part of this article as if they were fully described in the text thereof. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-12) 
1309.04 - DESIGNATION OF THOROUGHFARES; RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND IMPROVEMENT. 
    The thoroughfares within the city are classified as to width and type in accordance with their function as a part of the thoroughfare system and are designated as arterial, feeder and residential streets, as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. Such streets are to be provided with the right-of-way widths shown on the plans set out in section 1309.05 and are to be improved as required by the city ordinance providing for the control of the subdivision of land. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-13) 
1309.05 - POLICIES AND DIRECTIVES. 
(a)  Opening and widening of streets. Whenever a street designated on the Thoroughfare Plan is to be platted as a part of a subdivision of land, the right-of-way width designated for such street shall be measured at 90 degrees to the centerline thereof. 
(b)  Location of streets. Whenever the locations of streets are indicated on the Thoroughfare Plan as following existing roads or streets or established property lines, they shall conform to such locations; however, streets lying wholly within a subdivision and not designated as following an existing road or property line may be varied in their alignments when such variance promotes the orderly and harmonious planning of a neighborhood development unit in accordance with good site planning principles, and if such alignment provides for the continuity of traffic movement. 
(c)  Irregular alignments. Streets which follow irregular alignments or indicate revised alignment, or which are not referenced to established property lines, shall follow in a general manner the alignments, shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. Their alignment shall be subject to detailed surveys which may be made by the owners of land to be subdivided. Such surveys shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission prior to the acquisition of land for right-of-way or the filing of subdivision plats affecting such streets. 
(d)  Consideration of public agencies. After adoption of the Thoroughfare Plan and this article, council and all municipal boards, commissions and all other agencies of the city shall be guided by and give consideration to the general policy and pattern of development set out in the Thoroughfare Plan in the authorization, construction, alteration or abandonment of public highways and structures which might interfere with their alignment. 
(e)  Issuance of permits. In the case of permits authorized by the city for the erection or alteration of structures and other improvements, permits shall be issued only if the proposed street and thoroughfare rights-of-way, as set forth in the Thoroughfare Plan, will be protected from encroachment and, for planning and zoning purposes, the proposed right-of-way lines will be considered as the front lines of lots and tracts bordering such streets and thoroughfares. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-14) 
1309.06 - CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION. 
    Subsequent to the adoption of the Thoroughfare Plan, the planning commission may: 
(a)  Determine lines for new, extended, widened or narrowed thoroughfares in any portion of the city. 
(b)  Certify to council the amended or additional plans under the same procedure as established for the certification and approval of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-15) 
1309.07 - AMENDMENT. 
    In addition to the provisions of section 1309.06, amendments to the Thoroughfare Plan and this article may be made by council following a report thereon by the planning commission, prepared either upon direction of council or upon its own initiative. 
(1964 Code Sec. 25-16) 
CHAPTER THREE - GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The Huntington Zoning Ordinance codified as Chapters Three to Nine of this Part Thirteen - Planning and Zoning Code was adopted December 14, 1998. Subsequent amendments to the Zoning Ordinance will be indicated by legislative histories placed at the end of the affected sections. 

ARTICLE 1313 - ZONING PURPOSES AND AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning authority generally, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-39; conflict of laws, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-70. 

1313.01 - SHORT TITLE. 
    This ordinance and ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto, shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Huntington, West Virginia". 
1313.02 - PURPOSES. 
    This ordinance is enacted pursuant to a Comprehensive Plan for the following purposes: 
A.  To promote, protect, and facilitate one or more of the following: the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical community development, proper density of population, civil defense, disaster evacuation, airports, and national defense facilities; and the provision of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public grounds, and other public requirements. 
B.  To prevent one or more of the following: over crowding of land; blight; danger and congestion in travel and transportation; loss of health; life or property from fire; flood; panic; or other dangers. 
1313.03 - AUTHORITY. 
    This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the Urban and Rural Planning and Zoning Act, Chapter Eight of the Code of West Virginia, as amended, and in accordance with the Charter of Huntington, West Virginia, 1960. 
1313.04 - USE OF PROPERTY. 
    No building, land area, or water body shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or relocated unless in conformance with the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located. The use or occupation of any building, land area, or water area, or part thereof, which is not specifically permitted by any rule or regulation of the ordinance, is a violation of this ordinance. 
1313.05 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    This ordinance shall take effect on the day of enactment. 
1313.06 - STATEMENT OF CONSISTENCY. 
    This ordinance is enacted with consideration for the natural and manmade environment of the city, the character of this community, its various parts and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures. Furthermore, this ordinance is enacted in accordance with an overall program, the City of Huntington Comprehensive Plan. 
1313.07 - BUILDING CODE. 
    The City of Huntington, in accordance with State Code, has enacted a Building Code. The Building Code and this zoning ordinance are complimentary and the requirements of each document must be considered with the most restrictive applying. 
1313.08 - VALIDITY. 
    Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, and the parts of or sections remaining shall remain in effect as though the part or section declared invalid or unconstitutional has never been a part thereof. 
ARTICLE 1315 - DEFINITIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- General definitions, § 101.02. 
State Law reference- Statutory definitions, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-3. 

1315.01 - INTERPRETATION OF WORDS. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future. 
2.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural. 
3.  Words used in the plural shall include the singular. 
4.  The word "person" includes a profit or non-profit corporation, company, partnership, individual or an association of individuals. 
5.  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
6.  The terms "shall" and "will" are always mandatory. 
7.  The word "may" is permissive. 
8.  The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, "arranged" or "designed" to be used or occupied. 
9.  The word "building" includes the word "structure". 
10.  Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally. 
11.  The masculine shall include the feminine. 
1315.02 - MEANING OF WORDS. 
    Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this ordinance have the following meanings: 
5.  ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building. 
10.  ACCESSORY USE - A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
15.  ADULT DAY CARE CENTER - A use providing supervised care and assistance primarily to persons who are over age 60, mentally retarded or physically handicapped who need such daily assistance because of their limited physical abilities, Alzheimer disease or mental retardation. This use shall not include persons who need oversight because of behavior that is criminal or violent. This use may involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not primarily be a residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60 hours per week. 
20.  ADULT BOOKSTORE - Any commercial establishment in which is offered for sale as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade video cassettes, movies, books, magazines or other periodicals or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on nudity or sexual conduct or on activities which if presented in live presentation would constitute adult entertainment. 
25.  ADULT BUSINESS - An adult bookstore, commercial movie theater or movie house, or other adult entertainment as defined herein. In the event that an activity or business which might fall under a use category other than adult business is combined with and/or includes activities which constitute an adult bookstore, adult movie theater or movie house or adult entertainment as defined herein, then such activity or business shall constitute an adult business and shall be governed by those provisions in this ordinance applicable to any other use category. 
30.  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT - A commercial establishment providing, either as a sole use or in connection with or in addition to other uses, entertainment consisting of any exhibition, display, or dance which involves the exposure to view of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, male genitals, female genitals, or the pubic hair, anus, or cleft of the buttocks of any person or male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
35.  ADULT MOVIE THEATER OR MOVIE HOUSE (including adult mini-theaters or adult arcades) - Any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited, where for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photograph reproductions are regularly shown depicting actual acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy or displaying human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence, or depicting excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this section. 
40.  AGRICULTURAL USE - Any portion of land used for agriculture including horticulture truck gardening, floriculture, trees, grain, forage crops, or any use of the same general character, but not the raising of livestock. 
45.  ALLEY - A public service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
50.  ALTERATION - Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of a structure. 
55.  ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL - Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls. 
57.  ANIMAL HOSPITAL/CLINIC - A use or structure intended or used primarily for the testing and treatment of animals on an emergency or outpatient basis; synonymous with veterinary hospital. 
60.  ANTENNA, STANDARD - A device, partially or wholly exterior to a building, that is used for receiving and /or transmitting short-wave or citizens band radio frequencies or for receiving television, radio or similar frequencies, but not including a satellite dish antennae or a commercial communication antennae. This includes any accessory supporting structures. 
65.  AREA, BUILDING - The total of the exterior areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main floor of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps. 
70.  AREA, LOT - The total area within the lot lines. 
75.  BAR - Premises used primarily (gross revenue from alcoholic beverages sale are greater than one-half of total revenue) for sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages by the drink for on site consumption, and where food may be available for consumption on the premises as accessory to the principal use. 
80.  BASE FLOOD -The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the flood plain management provisions of this and other ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this ordinance, the 100-year flood. 
85.  BASEMENT - A space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average adjoining grade and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half feet. However, for the purposes of flood plain management a basement is any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
90.  BED AND BREAKFAST OR TOURIST HOUSE - A house or portion thereof, where short term lodging rooms and meals are provided. The operator of the house shall live on the premises or in adjacent premises. 
95.  BEDROOM - A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom. 
100.  BILLBOARD - See SIGN, BILLBOARD. 
105.  BLOCK - A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity to development. 
110.  BOARD - The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Huntington. 
115.  BOARDING HOUSE - A residential use in which: a) two or more individual rooms that do not meet the definition of a dwelling unit are rented for habitation or b) a dwelling unit that includes greater than the permitted maximum number of unrelated persons. A boarding house shall not include a use that meets the definition of hotel, dormitory, motel, life care center, personal care center, group residential facilities, or nursing home. A college fraternity or sorority house used as a residence shall be considered a type of boarding house. A boarding house may either involve or not involve the providing of meals to residents. This use shall only involve renting living accommodations for minimum periods of five consecutive days. 
118.  BREWPUB - A restaurant which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use for sale at the same premises of not more than 5,000 barrels per year for either consumption on premises or sold directly to the consumer. (A barrel is equivalent to 31 U.S. gallons.) 
120.  BUFFER YARD - A strip of land that a) separates one use from another use or feature, and b) is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage or any use other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways. A buffer yard may be part of the minimum setback distance, but land within an existing or future street right-of-way shall not be used to meet a buffer yard requirement. 
125.  BUILDING - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature. When separated by party walls, without any opening through walls, each portion of a building shall be considered a separate structure. 
130.  BUILDING CODE - The Building Code of the City of Huntington as adopted by article 1711 of the Huntington Codified Ordinances. 
135.  BUILDING COVERAGE - The horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot. 

Figure 1315.A
140.  BUILDING HEIGHT - The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade of the structure to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 

Figure 1315.B Building Height
145.  BUILDING LINE - A line parallel to the street line that passes through the point of the principal building nearest the front lot line. See SETBACK LINE. 
150.  BUILDING PERMIT - A permit signed by the code official stating that proposed improvement, development, or use compare with the provisions of this ordinance and the Building Code. 
155.  BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. Where a part of an accessory building is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the principal building, provide that a carport shall not be considered a part of the principal building. 
160.  BUILDING WIDTH - The horizontal measurement between two structural walls of one building that are generally parallel, measured in one general direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For a townhouse, this width shall be the width of each dwelling unit. 
165.  BUSINESS - The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or services; the maintenance or operation of offices, or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit. 
170.  CAMP, PUBLIC - Any area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate two or more camping parties, including cabins, tents, or other camping outfits. 
175.  CARPORT - An open space for the storage of one or more vehicles in the same manner as a private garage, which may be covered by a roof supported by columns or posts except that one or more walls may be the walls of the main building to which the carport is an accessory building or extension. 
180.  CEMETERY - Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
185.  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS - A certificate issued by the Huntington Historic Preservation Commission indicating its approval of plans for additions to a landmark, building, structure or site; removal or demolition of a landmark, building, structure or site; or new construction within a designated historic district zone. 
190.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY - A certificate signed by the code official as defined by city ordinances stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or structure complies with the provisions of this ordinance and the Building Code. 
193.  CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS - As regards "exempt" tax status, such includes: Corporations, and any community chest, fund, or foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or to foster national or international amateur sports competition (but only if no part of its activities involve the provision of athletic facilities or equipment), or for the prevention of cruelty of children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to benefit of any private shareholder or individual, no substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to influence legislation. 
195.  CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE - The triangular area formed by two intersecting street centerlines and a line interconnecting points established on each centerline and further described by section 1341.03 of this ordinance. 
200.  CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER - An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by two or more licensed physicians, dentists, psychologists, chiropractors, or social workers, and their professional associates, and where patients are not usually lodged overnight. 
205.  CLUB - Buildings or lands owned or operated by a corporation, association, or persons for a social, education, or recreational purpose; but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on as a business. 
210.  CODE OFFICIAL - The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, the Building Code, or other pertinent city development codes. 
215.  COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER/ANTENNAE - A structure, partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or retransmitting electronic signals, such as but not limited to antenna used for transmitting commercial radio or television signals or cellular telephone communications. This shall not include a standard antenna. 
220.  COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of the City of Huntington. 
225.  COMMON OPEN SPACE - A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water suitable for recreational purposes or a combination of such land and water within a development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain such improvements as are in the development plan as finally approved and as are appropriate for the recreation of residents. 
227.  COMMUNITY CENTER - A building (1) used for recreational, social, educational, and/or cultural activities, open to the public or a designated part of the public, and (2) owned or operated by a public, non-profit group or agency, or for-profit agency that provides services to the residential area. This does not include retail, personal, or professional services. 
230.  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
235.  CONDOMINIUM - An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common with other purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential building, such as an apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. A condominium is an ownership arrangement, not a land use; therefore, it is allowed in any district and under the same restriction as the land uses that it comprises. A condominium shall not negate lot nor other requirements intended to provide adequate light, air, and privacy. 
240.  CONGREGATE HOUSING - A residence for four or more elderly persons (age 60 and older) within which are provided living and sleeping rooms, meal preparation, laundry services, and room cleaning. Congregate housing may also provide other services, such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
245.  CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION - A subdivision in which all or most of a plot or parcel is divided into lots and streets with little or no area reserved as common open space. 
247.  CRAFT PRODUCTION FACILITY 
(MICROBREWERY/MICRODISTILLERY/MICROCIDERY) - A facility in which beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented, or distilled for distribution and consumption, and which possesses the appropriate license from the State of West Virginia. On premise production includes more than 500 barrels per year. Tasting rooms for the consumption of on-site produced beer, wine, or distilled products are permitted on premises as an accessory use. Retail sales are also permitted in hand-capped or sealed containers in quantities up to one-half barrel or 15.5 gallons sold directly to the consumer. 
250.  DAY CARE, CHILD - A use involving the supervised care of children under age 16 outside of the children's own home primarily for periods of less than 18 hours during the average day. This use may also include educational programs that are supplementary to state-required education, including a "nursery school." The following three types of day care are permitted without regulation by this ordinance: 1) care of children by their own relatives or 2) care of one to three children within any dwelling unit, in addition to children who are relatives of the care giver. See also the definition of ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. 
A.  CHILD DAY CARE CENTER, AS AN ACCESSORY USE. A type of day care use that provides care for six or fewer children at one time who are not a relative of the care giver. See section 1341.13. 
B.  CHILD DAY CARE CENTER, AS A PRINCIPAL USE. A type of day care use that provides care for seven or more children at any one time who are not relatives of the primary operator. See section 1341.25. 
255.  DECK - A constructed open area, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from, a building. 
260.  DENSITY - A measure of the number of dwelling units which occupy, or may occupy, an area of land. 
265.  DEVELOPER - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land. 
270.  DEVELOPMENT - The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land. 
275.  DEVELOPMENT PLAN - A drawing, including a legal or site description, of the real estate involved which shows the location and size of all existing and proposed lots, building, structures, and yards; location and dimension of the building lines and easements; widths and lengths of all entrances and exits to and from said real estate; location of all adjacent or adjoining streets; all of which presents a unified or organized arrangement of streets, lots, buildings and public and service facilities and other improvements such as landscape development, and public parking areas, all of which shall have a functional relationship to the real estate comprising the planned development and to the use of properties immediately adjacent thereto. 
280.  DISABILITY - A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities or a record of such impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. This term does not include the illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
285.  DISTRICT OR ZONING DISTRICT - An area constituted by or pursuant to this ordinance and delineated by text and map as to location, extent, nature, and contents. 
290.  DORMITORY - A building used as group living quarter for students, religious order, or other groups as an associated use to a college, university, boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery, or other similar use. Individual dormitory rooms do not include kitchens, except a group kitchen is permitted in each dormitory to serve all residents. 
295.  DRIVE-IN USE - An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
300.  DWELLING - A building or portion thereof, used primarily as a place of abode for one or more human beings, but not including hotels, motels, lodging or boarding houses, or tourist homes as defined in this ordinance. 
305.  DWELLING TYPE: 
(a)  RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION UNIT - To be considered a conversion, any proposed alteration must be confined to the interior of an already existing structural shell. Any proposal to extend the sides or increase the height of an existing structure or to alter the foundation shall not be considered a conversion and shall be required to meet the appropriate provisions established in that district for that particular use. 
(b)  ATTACHED - A one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical or "party" walls and also referred to as row houses or fee-simple townhouses. 
(c)  SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED - A dwelling unit which is designed for and occupied by not more than one-family and surrounded by open space or yards. 
(d)  SINGLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED - Two dwelling units accommodating two families which are attached side by side through the use of adjoining walls, and having one side yard adjacent to each dwelling unit. 
(e)  TWO-FAMILY DETACHED - Two dwelling units accommodating four families, two units of which are located directly over the other two units. A combination of both the single-family semi-detached and the two-family detached structures. 
(f)  MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS - Any building or structure having more than two dwelling units. 
(g)  MANUFACTURED HOME - A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401, et seq.), which became effective June 15, 1976. 
(h)  MODULAR HOME - A factory-fabricated, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure, to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the CABO one- and two-family building code or the BOCA code and other building codes adopted by the City of Huntington by ordinances. 
(i)  MOBILE HOME - A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. 
310.  DWELLING UNIT - Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used exclusively for residential purposes of one family, and includes complete kitchen and bathroom facilities. 
315.  EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION - Public or parochial pre-primary, primary, grade, high, preparatory school or academy; junior college, college or university, if public or founded or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization. 
320.  EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this ordinance. 
325.  EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
330.  FAMILY - One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit; provided that a group of four or more persons who are not within the second degree of kinship shall not be deemed to constitute a family. Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding sentence, a family shall be deemed to include four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are disabled persons as defined in this ordinance. (See DISABILITY) 
335.  FENCE - An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
340.  FLEA MARKET - An occasional or periodic sales activity held within a building, structure, or open area where groups of individual sellers offer goods, new and used, for sale to the public, not to include private garage sales. 
345.  FLOOD - A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
350.  FLOOD PLAIN - 1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any source. 
355.  FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
360.  FLOOD PROOFING - Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their content. 
365.  FLOOR AREA, GROSS - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. 
370.  FLOOR AREA, GROUND - The square foot area of a residential building within its largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the ground floor level exclusive of open porches, breeze-ways, terraces, garages, and exterior stairways. 
375.  FLOOR AREA, NET - The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public. 
380.  FLOOR AREA RATIO - The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area. 
390.  FRATERNITY OR SORORITY - See "Boarding House". 
395.  FRONTAGE - That side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line. 
400.  FRONT YARD - See "Yard, Front." 
405.  GARAGE, PRIVATE - An enclosed building for the storage of one or more motor vehicles. No business, occupation or service shall be conducted in a private garage that is accessory to a dwelling, except as may be allowed as a home occupation. 
410.  GARAGE, PUBLIC - Any building, except those defined herein as a private garage, used for the storage, or care of motor vehicles, or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
415.  GARAGE SALE - The accessory use of any lot for the occasional sale or auction of only common household goods and furniture and items of a closely similar character. 
420.  GOVERNING BODY - The City Council of the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
425.  GRADE - The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. 
430.  GRADE, ESTABLISHING - The elevation of the centerline of the streets as officially established by the municipal authorities. 
435.  GRADE, FINISHED - The completed surfaces of lawns, walks, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto. 
440.  GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY - A facility which provides residential services and supervision for individuals who are listed as having a disability or is occupied as a residence by individuals who are disabled. 
445.  HALFWAY HOUSE - A licensed home for inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. Such placement is pursuant to the authority of the West Virginia Department of Corrections. 
450.  HEIGHT - See "Building, Height Of." 
455.  HELIPORT - An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the loading and takeoff of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
460.  HISTORIC STRUCTURE - 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historical district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
465.  HOME OCCUPATION - A routine, accessory and customary non-residential use conducted by a resident within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its permitted accessory. 
470.  HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION - A community association, other than a condominium association which is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities. 
475.  HOSPITAL - An institution providing health services primarily for in-patient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, heliport and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility, provided such institution is operated by, or treatment is given under direct supervision of licensed physicians. 
Types of hospitals include general, mental, chronic disease, and allied special hospitals such as cardiac, contagious disease, maternity, orthopedic, cancer and the like. 
480.  HOTEL, MOTEL or INN - A building or buildings including rooms rented out to persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such use that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time longer than 30 days shall be considered a "boarding house" and shall meet the requirements of that use. A hotel, motel or inn may include a restaurant, nightclub, newsstand or tavern, provided that such uses are clearly accessory to the principal use of overnight accommodations. 
485.  HOUSEHOLD PET - Animals that are customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pets shall include but not be limited to domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, and rodents. 
490.  ILLUMINATED SIGN - See "SIGN, ILLUMINATED". 
495.  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT - See "Building Permit". 
498.  INDOOR SHOOTING RANGE - An indoor facility in which the supervised discharging of firearms is authorized by city permit along with other related activities such as the sale of legal firearms, legal ammunition and targets and the instruction of the use of firearms. 
500.  INDUSTRY - Those fields of economic activity including forestry, fishing, hunting, trapping; mining; construction; manufacturing; transportation, communication, electric, gas and sanitary services; and wholesale trade. 
510.  INSTITUTIONAL USE - A non-profit or quasi-public use or institution such as a church, library, public, or private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public purpose. 
515.  JUNKYARD - Any place at which personal property is or may be salvaged for reuse, resale, or reduction or similar disposition and is owned, possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or assorted; including, but not limited to used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, lumber millwork, brick and similar property except animal matter; and used motor vehicles, machinery or equipment which is used, owned or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom. 
520.  KENNEL - An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing four or more dogs, cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of animals is conducted as a business. 
525.  LANDOWNER - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land. 
530.  LIGHTING: 
(a)  DIFFUSED - That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the source through a translucent cover or shade. 
(b)  DIRECT OR FLOOD - That form of lighting wherein the source is visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to be illuminated. 
(c)  INDIRECT - That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector from which it is reflected to the object to be illuminated. 
532.  LIMITED VIDEO LOTTERY/KENO ESTABLISHMENT - Any establishment offering limited video lottery/Keno forms of entertainment. This shall include any establishment which requires a license from the West Virginia Lottery Commission to operate. 
535.  LOADING SPACE - An off-street space or berth used for the loading or unloading of commercial vehicles. 
540.  LOT - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. See Figure 1315.C. 
545.  LOT AREA - The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
550.  LOT, CORNER - A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. See Figure 1315.C. 

Figure 1315.C
555.  LOT COVERAGE - The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features. 
560.  LOT DEPTH - The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth should be measured by drawing lines from the front to rear lot lines, at right angles to the front lot line, every ten feet and averaging the length of these lines. See Figure 1315.C. 
565.  LOT, FLAG - A lot not fronting on or abutting a public road and where access to the public road is a narrow, private right-of-way. See Figure 1315.C. 
570.  LOT, FRONTAGE - The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line. See Figure 1315.C. 
575.  LOT, INTERIOR - A lot other than a corner lot or through lot. See Figure 1315.C. 
580.  LOT LINE - A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
585.  LOT LINE, FRONT - The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. A corner or through lot shall have two front lot lines. 
590.  LOT LINE, REAR - The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
595.  LOT LINE, SIDE - Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. See Figure 1315.C. 
600.  LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF - The smallest lot area established by the zoning ordinance on which a use or structure may be located in a particular district. 
605.  LOT OF RECORD - A lot which exists as shown or described on a plat or deed which is recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the County Court of either Cabell or Wayne County. 
610.  LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE - A through lot which is not accessible from one of the parallel or non-intersecting streets upon which it fronts. 
615.  LOT, THROUGH - A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. See Figure 1315.C. 
620.  LOT WIDTH - The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. See Figure 1315.C. 
625.  LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
630.  MANUFACTURED HOMES - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
635.  MANUFACTURED HOME PARK - A site with required improvements and utilities for the long-term parking of mobile homes which may include services and facilities for the residents. 
640.  MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
645.  MARINA - A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing and launching of private pleasure craft that my include the sale of fuel and incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews, and guests. 
650.  MEDICAL OFFICE - A use involving the treatment and examination of patients by state-licensed physicians or dentists, provided that no patients shall be kept overnight on the premises. This use may involve the testing of tissue, blood or other human materials for medical or dental purposes. 
655.  MOTEL - See HOTEL. 
660.  MULTI-USE BUILDING - A building containing two or more distinct uses. 
663.  NANOBREWERY - A facility in which beer is brewed, fermented, and produced in quantities not to exceed 500 barrels per year and which meet the requirements of the zoning district and possess the appropriate license from the State of West Virginia. Tasting rooms for the consumption of on-site produced beer, wine, or distilled products are permitted on premises as an accessory use. Retail sales are also permitted in hand-capped or sealed containers in quantities up to one-half barrel or 15.5 gallons sold directly to the consumer. 
665.  NEW CONSTRUCTION - Structures for which the start of construction as herein defined commenced on or after the effect date of this ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
670.  NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this ordinance. 
675.  NIGHTCLUB - A commercial establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and in which dancing or other forms of entertainment are permitted and includes the term cabaret. 
680.  NONCONFORMING LOT - A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
685.  NONCONFORMING SIGN - Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of an ordinance, or an amendment thereto, which renders such sign nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended ordinance. 
690.  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING - A structure or building the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to a zoning ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
695.  NONCONFORMING USE - A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails, by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
700.  NURSING HOME - A facility licensed by the state for the housing and intermediate or fully-skilled nursing care of three or more persons. 
705.  OFFICE - A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government. 
710.  OFFICE BUILDING - A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity, that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand. 
715.  OFFICE PARK - A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
720.  100-YEAR FLOOD - A flood that has one chance in 100 or a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
725.  OPEN SPACE - Any parcel of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. 
730.  OWNER - The duly authorized agent, attorney, purchaser, devisee, fiduciary or any person having vested or equitable interest in the lot in question. 
735.  PARKING AREA - Any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets. 
738.  FIREARMS SALES ESTABLISHMENTS - An establishment engaged in the sale, manufacture for sale, or repair of fire arms, ammunition and ammunition components, and hunting or shooting equipment. 
740.  PARKING AREA, PRIVATE - A parking area for the private use of the owners or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located. 
745.  PARKING AREA, PUBLIC - A parking area available to the public, with or without compensation, or used to accommodate clients, customers, or employees. 
750.  PARKING BAY - The parking module consisting of one or two rows of parking spaces and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and leave the spaces. 
755.  PARKING LOT - An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
760.  PARKING SPACE - A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public parking area. 
763.  PAWNSHOP - Any business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property. 
765.  PERSON - Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
770.  PERSONAL CARE HOME - A facility licensed or registered by the state for the housing and intermediate care of three or fewer persons. 
775.  PERSONAL SERVICE- An establishment that provides a service oriented to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily retail or wholesale sales or service to businesses. Personal services include barber and beauty shops, massage therapy, photography studios, shoe repair shops, household appliance repair shops, dry cleaning and laundry, and other similar establishments. 
780.  PETS, KEEPING OF - The keeping of domestic animals that are normally considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the pleasures of the resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, small birds, gerbils, rabbits and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops. 
785.  PLACE - An open, unoccupied, officially designated space other than a street or alley, permanently reserved for use as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
790.  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - A development of land that is under unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development stages. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and other site features and improvements. 
795.  PLAT - A map or chart indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of land, either filed or intended to be filed for record. 
800.  PONDING BASIN - A designated area to store excess storm run off or stream water. 
805.  PORCH - A roofed open area, which may be screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from, a building. 
810.  PRINCIPAL BUILDING - The building in which the principal use of a lot is conducted. Any building that is physically attached to a principal building shall be considered part of that building. 
815.  PRINCIPAL USE - A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an accessory use. 
820.  PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND - Where at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of a structure, less land value, is above ground. 
825.  PRIVATE SCHOOL - Private, primary, grade, high, preparatory school or academy, but not including trade or business schools. 
830.  PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - Any office or business conducted by an individual or association including engineers, lawyers, doctors, dentists, architects, chiropractors and veterinarians who or that must be licensed under the laws of the state. 
835.  PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY - Land reserved for use as a road, street, alley, crosswalk, pedestrian way or other public purpose. 
840.  PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS - The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, transmission towers or poles, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utility or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health or safety or general welfare. 
845.  RECREATION, PUBLIC - Recreation facilities and/or programs operated by the government or non-profit organization. 
850.  RECREATION, PRIVATE - Recreation facilities and/or programs operated by business for profit. 
855.  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis. 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection. 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck. 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
860.  RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER - A use for collection and temporary storage of more than 500 pounds of common household material for recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling other than routine sorting, baling and weighing of materials. This term shall not include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclables and their customary collection, which is a permitted by-right accessory use in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A recycling collection center is also a permitted by-right accessory use to a public or private primary or secondary school, a religious use, a city-owned use, an emergency services station or a college or university. 
865.  RELIGIOUS USES - Buildings, synagogues, churches, religious retreats, monasteries, seminaries and shrines used primarily for religious and spiritual worship and that are operated for non-profit and non-commercial purposes. A religious use may include one dwelling unit as an accessory use for housing of employees of the religious use and their family. If a religious use is primarily residential in nature, it shall be regulated under the appropriate dwelling type. 
870.  REPAIR SHOP - Shops for the repair of appliances, watches, guns, bicycles and other household items. 
875.  RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE - A use or structure that is clearly accessory, customary and incidental to a principal residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses that are very similar in nature: garage (household) carport, tennis court, garage sale, basketball backboard, household swimming pool, volleyball court, gazebo, storage shed, greenhouse, children's playhouse and children's play equipment. 
880.  RETAIL SERVICES - Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public; including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries. 
885.  RESTAURANT - Premises used primarily for the on site preparation, sale, serving, and/or consumption of food and non-alcoholic beverages, and where alcoholic beverages by the drink also may be served for consumption on the premises as an accessory to the principal use. 
890.  RIGHT-OF-WAY - Land reserved for the public or others for use as a street or other purpose. Unless otherwise stated, "right-of-way" shall mean the existing street right-of-way. 
(a)  RIGHT -OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL - The line separating a lot from the established official street right-of-way that either the city or the state will own after the completion of any proposed land use or development of a use under this ordinance. 
(b)  RIGHT-OF-WAY, FUTURE OR ULTIMATE - Land that is dedicated or is required to be defined or reserved for future dedication for uses as a street and for related public improvements. The terms "ultimate right-of-way", "right-of-way reserved for future dedication", and "future right-of-way" shall have the same meaning. 
895.  RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES - The lines that form the boundaries of a right-of-way. 
900.  SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA OR SATELLITE ANTENNA - A ground-based reflector, usually parabolic in shape, that receives electronic signals from a satellite. This term shall also include any pedestal or attached structure. 
905.  SCHOOL - A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, and high schools. 
910.  SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT - A building or group of buildings divided into individual separate access units which are rented or leased for the storage of personal and small business property. 
911.  SELF-STORAGE, INDOORS - A structure containing separate, individual and private storage spaces of varying sizes that are leased or rented by individual lease for varying periods of time, with the use contained within one building and the storage bays accessed primarily from the interior of the building. 
915.  SETBACK - The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the related front, side, or rear property line. 
920.  SHELTER/EMERGENCY - A facility whose general purpose is to provide temporary food, clothing, or sleeping arrangements to persons, families, or parts of families on a temporary occupancy who are homeless or displaced due to urgent events, such as fire, flood, or incidents of domestic violence. The shelter shall have appropriate supervisory personnel. The maximum occupancy for an emergency shelter is 20 persons. Such facility must meet all applicable standards of the department of health, State Fire Marshal, and any other federal, state, county or city agency which has regulatory power over the said facility. 
925.  SHELTER/MISSION - A facility whose general purpose is to provide temporary food, clothing or sleeping arrangements to persons, families, or parts of families on a temporary occupancy who are homeless or displaced. Short term counseling during stay may also be provided. The shelter shall have appropriate supervisory personnel. Such facility must meet all applicable standards of the department of health, State Fire Marshal, and any other federal, state, county or city agency which has regulatory power over the said facility. 
930.  SHOPPING CENTER - A group of three or more retail business and service uses on a single site with common parking facilities. 
935.  SIGN - Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images excluding national or state flags, window displays, graffiti, athletic scoreboards, or the official announcements or signs of government. See Figure 1315.D. 
940.  SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING - Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation or which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. 
945.  SIGN AREA - The entire face of a sign including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding, but not including the supporting structure. The copy of signs composed of individual letters, numerals, or other devices shall be the sum of the area of the smallest rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing each of said letter or device. 
950.  SIGN, AWNING, CANOPY OR MARQUEE - A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, an awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by ordinance. See Figure 1315.D. 
955.  SIGN, BACK TO BACK - A off-premise sign consisting of two sign facings oriented in opposite directions with not more than one face per sign facing. 
960.  SIGN, BILLBOARD OR OFF-PREMISE - A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. The following shall not be considered an off-premise sign: Directional or official sign authorized by law, real estate signs, or on-premise signs. 
965.  SIGN, BUSINESS - A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
970.  SIGN, BUSINESS PARK IDENTIFICATION - A sign which identifies the name of the integrated business park and/or the individual tenants and addresses of the individual tenants of the business park. Such signs are usually located at the principal access points of the business park. 
975.  SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY - A sign which is designed to be changed on a regular basis and does not have one permanent message. Such signs usually have a sign board with interchangeable letters, numbers, and/or logos can be attached in order to advertise special sales or advertise special items for sale. Also ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARDS. 
980.  SIGN, CONSTRUCTION - A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 

Figure 1315.D
985.  SIGN, DIRECTIONAL - Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way", "entrance", and "exit". 
990.  SIGN, FACE - The area or display surface used for the message and visible in one direction at one time. 
995.  SIGN, FLASHING - Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. 
1000.  SIGN, FREE STANDING - Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building. 
1005.  SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL - A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental functions, or required by law, ordinance or other governmental regulation. 
1010.  SIGN, GROUND - Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure. See Figure 1315.D. 
1015.  SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION - A sign containing only the name and occupation of a permitted home occupation. 
1020.  SIGN, IDENTIFICATION - A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark or other identifying symbol; address, or any combination of the name, symbol and address of a building, business, development or establishment on the premises where it is located. 
1025.  SIGN, ILLUMINATED - A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign. 
1030.  SIGN, MEMORIAL - A sign, tablet or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or site. 
1035.  SIGN, NAME PLATE - A sign, located on the premises, giving the name or address, or both, of the owner or occupant of a building premises. 
1040.  SIGN, OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL - A sign of any nature which is located not on the site it is advertising or directing customers to. 
1045.  SIGN, ON-SITE DIRECTIONAL - A sign of any nature which is located on the site it is advertising or directing customers to. 
1050.  SIGN, POLE - A sign that is mounted on a free-standing pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above ground. See Figure 1315.D. 
1055.  SIGN, POLITICAL - A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election. 
1060.  SIGN, PORTABLE - A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure or the ground. See Figure 1315.D. 
1065.  SIGN, PRIVATE SALE OR EVENT - A temporary sign advertising private sales of personal property such as "house sales," "garage sales," "rummage sales" and the like or private not-for-profit events such as picnics, carnivals, bazaars, game nights, art fairs, craft shows and Christmas tree sales. 
1070.  SIGN, PROJECTING - A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such building. See Figure 1315.D. 
1075.  SIGN, REAL ESTATE - A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located. 
1080.  SIGN, RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DESIGNATION - A permanent sign which is erected to indicate the name of a residential subdivision or development. Such signs are usually located at the principal access points of such a development. 
1085.  SIGN, ROOF - A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. See Figure 1315.D. 
1090.  SIGN, TEMPORARY - A sign of any nature which is designed and erected to advertise or bring attention to a temporary event, sale, issue, or item. Such signs are usually not erected of a permanent material and in a permanent manner contrary to permanent signs. 
1095.  TRI-VISION SIGN - An off-premise sign comprised of sections which rotate to display a series of advertisements, each advertisement being displayed for at least six seconds continuously without movement; of section between advertisements not exceeding two seconds. 
1100.  "V" TYPE SIGN. An off-premise sign structure which consists of sign facings placed at angles to each other, oriented in different directions and not exceeding ten feet apart at the nearest point to each other. 
1105.  SIGN, WALL - A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project more than 12 inches from such building or structure. See Figure 1315.D. 
1110.  SIGN, WINDOW - A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or interior of a window or located in such manner within a building that it can be seen from the exterior of the structure through a window. See Figure 1315.D. 
1115.  SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING - See DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. 
1120.  SITE PLAN - A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land. Site development features include sanitary sewers, drainage, grading, pavement, walkways, electric lines, communication lines, water lines, gas lines, adjacent roadway, and landscaping features. 
1125.  SPECIAL PERMITS - Uses that are publicly operated and those uses traditionally affected with a public interest and those uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property and public facilities. 
1130.  SPECIAL SCHOOL - Any school which has as its primary purpose the instruction, care and rehabilitation of typical or exceptional children or adults such that the usual statutory educational requirements expressly or implicitly do not apply. 
1135.  START OF CONSTRUCTION - For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, Pub. Law 97-348, includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of the slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory building, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
1140.  STORY - That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. 
1145.  STORY, HALF - That portion of a building under a sloping gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates on at least two opposite exterior walls of which are not more than three feet above the floor level of such half-story. 
1150.  STORY, HEIGHT OF - The vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is no ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. 
1155.  STREET - Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct, and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private. 
1160.  STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - Any change in either the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders, or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls. 
1165.  STRUCTURE - A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. However, regarding flood plain management a structure is a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
1170.  SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
1175.  SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", as defined herein, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
b.  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
1180.  SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD - A manmade area with walls of manmade material intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for recreational bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests. 
1185.  SWIMMING POOL, NON-HOUSEHOLD - A manmade area with walls of manmade material intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for recreational bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a "household" swimming pool. This includes: 1) a "semi-public" pool that serves only residents of a development or members of a club and their occasional guest or 2) a "public" pool intended to serve the general public. 
1190.  TEMPORARY STRUCTURE - A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
1195.  TEMPORARY USE - A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
1200.  TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL - Secretarial or business school or college when not publicly owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious, charitable or non-profit organization; or a school conducted as a business enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering or hair dressing, drafting or for the teaching of industrial or technical arts. 
1205.  TRAILER (TRAVEL AND RELATED CAMPING AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT) - Shall include travel trailers, pickup coaches, motorized homes and recreational equipment as follows: 
(a)  TRAVEL TRAILER - A portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be towed and used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation purposes, and permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer. 
(b)  PICKUP COACH OR RECREATION VEHICLE - A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or other truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation purposes. 
(c)  MOTORIZED HOME OR RECREATION VEHICLE - A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(d)  BOAT - A vessel designed to travel on water. 
(e)  BOAT TRAILER - A trailer designed to haul a boat as defined above. 
1210.  USE - The specific purpose for which land, water or a building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 
1215.  VARIANCE - A modification of the specific requirements of this ordinance granted by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the terms of this ordinance for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and district. 
1220.  YARD - An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in the zoning ordinance. See Figure 1315.E. 
1225.  YARD DEPTH - The shortest distance between a lot line and a yard line. 
1230.  YARD, FRONT - A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. Such front yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts, and similar appurtenances. Covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. See Figure 1315.E. 
1235.  YARD LINE - A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard. 
1240.  YARD, REAR - A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. Such rear yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward other than by accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30 percent of the required space, and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts, and similar structures. See Figure 1315.E. 
1245.  YARD, REQUIRED - The open space between the lot line and the buildable area within which no structure shall be located except as provided in the zoning ordinance. See Figure 1315.E. 
1250.  YARD, SIDE - A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. Such space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward other than by architectural appurtenances projecting not more than 24 inches from the building, or open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes or fireproof outside stairways, projecting not more than four feet, and certain accessory uses in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. See Figure 1315.E. 

Figure 1315.E
1255.  ZONE DISTRICTS - A specifically delineated area or district within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. 
1260.  ZONING - A legal and administrative process whereby a municipality divides its territory into districts and applies to each district a number of regulations to control the use of land, the height and bulk of buildings, and the area of ground built upon. 
1265.  ZONING MAP - The map or maps, which are a part of this zoning ordinance, and delineate the boundaries of the zone districts. 
ZONING ORDINANCE OR THIS ORDINANCE - The zoning ordinance enacted December 14, 1998, as amended. 
(Ord. 12-14-98; Ord. 3-13-00; Ord. 2-9-04; Ord. 3-8-04; Ord. of 1-24-11(2); Ord. of 11-28-11(1); Ord. of 6-25-12(3); Ord. of 4-27-15(1) ; Ord. of 5-26-15(1) ; Ord. of 9-28-15(3) ; Ord. of 11-23-15(1) ; Ord. of 2-22-16(1) ) 
CHAPTER FIVE - ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1317 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND ZONE MAP[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning districts generally, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-40. 

1317.01 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS. 
    The following zoning districts are hereby established in the City of Huntington: 
R-1 Single-family Residence District 
R-2 Single-family Residence District 
R-4 Two-family Residence District 
R-5 Multi-family Residence District 
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District 
C-2 Highway Commercial District 
C-3 Central Business District 
I-1 General Industrial District 
H-1 Historic Preservation District Overlay 
1317.02 - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts hereby established are shown on the official zoning map bearing the date of adoption of this ordinance. The official zoning map is hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance, shows the boundaries of and the area covered by the districts, notations, reference, indications and other matters shown on the official zoning map are as much a part of this ordinance as if they were fully described herein. 
1317.03 - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  District boundary lines, unless otherwise indicated on the map, follow or are parallel to the centerline of streets and streams; and to lot or property lines as they exist on a recorded deed or plan of record in the clerk of the county court of either Cabell County or Wayne County at the time of the adoption of this ordinance. 
B.  Where streets, streams, property lines, or other physical boundaries and delineation are not applicable, boundaries shall be determined by the scale shown on the official zoning map. 
C.  Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it approximately follows lot lines, and where it does not scale more than ten feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise. 
D.  In unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the maps. 
1317.04 - INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
    In circumstances not covered by section 1317.03, district boundaries, the board of zoning appeals shall interpret the intent of the official zoning map as to location of district boundaries. 
1317.05 - PROCEDURE RELATING TO ANNEXED OR VACATED AREAS. 
A.  When the city initiates an ordinance for the annexation of property to the city, the planning commission shall prepare an ordinance to amend this zoning ordinance embracing the proposed zoning provisions to be established for such area proposed to be annexed. Procedure on the proposed ordinance to amend this ordinance shall progress concurrently with the procedure on the annexation ordinance in order that the zoning amendment may be adopted by the city council at the same time as the annexation ordinance. 
B.  Whenever any street, place, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other similar area is vacated by proper authority, the districts adjoining each side of such street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, or similar area shall be extended automatically to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and thenceforth be subject to all appropriate provisions of the extended districts. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining district, or district nearest the portion vacated, shall be extended automatically to include all of the vacated area. 
ARTICLE 1319 - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Remedies and penalties, Art. 1367. 
State Law reference- Zoning districts generally, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-40. 

1319.01 - USE OF PROPERTY. 
A.  No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and specified in a district in which such building or land is located. 
B.  Environmentally Sensitive Lands Regulations. In order to prevent inappropriate development from taking place and to protect persons and property from hazards resulting from the inappropriate development of lands containing environmentally sensitive areas, the environmentally sensitive lands requirements impose a set of regulations in addition to those of the zoning district. The environmentally sensitive lands areas regulations apply to all applications for a zoning permit, a building permit or a land development permit. Any use classified as a permitted use, or special exception in an underlying zoning district may be allowed within the designated zoning district provided that no more than the stated percent of the following types of areas may be altered, regraded, cleared, or built on: 
1.  Floodplain - subject to Article 1349 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  Naturally occurring or manmade lakes; ponds; watercourses; and perennial streams in which water has a definite channel, bed, and banks, and includes any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water - 0 percent. 
3.  Wetland margins consisting of the area for 50 feet from a wetlands to an uplands integral to the wetlands providing temporary refuge for wetlands fauna during high water episodes, critical habitat for animals dependent upon, but not resident in wetlands, and slight variations of wetland boundaries over time due to hydrologic or climatologic effects - no more than 20 percent. 
4.  Steep slopes where the inclination (vertical distance over horizontal distance) is 25 percent or more - no more than 20 percent. 
5.  Steep slopes of 15 percent to 25 percent - no more than 30 percent. 
6.  Wetlands consisting of those lands in the city subject to inundation of soils which are characteristic and categorized as being alluvial or high water table soils by the Soil Survey of Cabell County or Wayne County West Virginia prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture (Soil Conservation Service) - 0 percent. 
7.  Ponding basins as designated by the Huntington Flood Wall Advisory Board and subject to article 1349 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Application procedure. All applications for a zoning permit, a building permit or a land development permit shall include an inventory and analysis of the site. The inventory shall include the total acreage of the tract, to the nearest tenth of an acre, consisting of the environmentally sensitive lands listed in part B of this section. The following site features shall be inventoried and mapped in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the inventory by the city relative to the intent of the overlay district. 
1.  Topographic contours at 20-foot intervals, showing slopes of between 15 percent and 25 percent and slopes of more than 25 percent. 
2.  Location of wetlands and areas subject to inundation of soils which are characteristic and categorized as being Alluvial or High Water Table Soils by the Soil Survey of Cabell County or Wayne County West Virginia prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture (Soil Conservation Service). 
3.  Hydrologic characteristics of the site, including surface water bodies, floodplain, and hydric soils as per the Cabell County Soil Survey and the Wayne County Soil Survey. 
4.  Vegetation of the site, defining locations and boundaries of woodland area and vegetation associations in terms of species and size. 
5.  Areas designated as ponding basins by the Huntington Flood Wall Board. 
1319.02 - EFFECT OF ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. 
    Following the effect date of this zoning ordinance: 
A.  Any use not permitted by this zoning ordinance shall be deemed to be prohibited, unless such use is deemed by the planning commission to not be contrary to the spirit of this ordinance. 
B.  Where the provisions of this zoning ordinance impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or regulation, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this zoning ordinance, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling. 
ARTICLE 1321 - R-1 RESIDENCE AND R-2 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Districts established, § 1317.01; height, yard and lot modifications, § 1341.01 et seq.; accessory uses, § 1341.06; swimming pools, § 1341.16; fences and walls, § 1341.19; garage sales, § 1341.21; home occupations, §1341.22; satellite dish antennas, § 1341.24 

1321.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the R-1 and R-2 districts is to establish and maintain areas where the use consists of largely single-family residential use at low densities generally in a range of five to nine units per acre. These areas are to be developed compatible and respectful of the scale, texture and quality of existing housing and related uses. 
1321.02 - PERMITTED USES. 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
B.  Home occupations in agreement with section 1341.22 of this zoning ordinance. 
C.  Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot. 
D.  Public utility installations. 
E.  Special permits listed in section 1321.04 and in agreement with article 1359 of this ordinance. 
1321.03 - BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
R-1 District R-2 District Minimum Lot Area 8,400 square feet 4,800 square feet Minimum Lot Width 70 feet 40 feet Minimum Front Yard Setback Principal Structure - 20% of lot depth (see also Section 1341.02.C) 
Accessory Structure - behind rear wall of Principal Structure Principal Structure - 20% of lot depth (see also Section 1341.02.C) 
Accessory Structure - behind rear wall of Principal Structure Minimum Side Yard Setback Principal Structure - 20% of lot width with neither side yard being less than 5 feet (see also Section 1341.02.D) 
Accessory Structure - 3 feet Principal Structure - 20% of lot width with neither side yard being less than 5 feet (see also Section 1341.02.D) 
Accessory Structure - 3 feet Minimum Rear Yard Setback Principal Structure - 20 feet (see also Section 1341.02.D) 
Accessory Structure - 3 feet Principal Structure - 20 feet (see also Section 1341.02.D) 
Accessory Structure - 3 feet Maximum Lot Coverage 40 percent 40 percent Maximum Building Height Principal Structure - not to exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet 
Accessory Structure - 15 feet Principal Structure - not to exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet 
Accessory Structure - 15 feet  
1321.04 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    (See article 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses identified as permitted special permits.) 
A.  Fire station or police station. 
B.  Municipal or government building. 
C.  Public park or public recreational. 
D.  Redevelopment of closed school, public building, community center, or church in accordance with section 1341.51 general regulations. 
E.  Community center. 
F.  School. 
G.  Religious uses. 
H.  Telecommunication tower or antenna. 
I.  Planned unit development. 
J.  Parking for uses within the zone when not located on the same lot it was designed to serve. 
( Ord. of 11-23-15(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1323 - R-4 RESIDENCE DISTRICT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Districts established, § 1317.01; height, yard and lot modifications, § 1341.01 et seq.; accessory uses, § 1341.06; swimming pools, § 1341.16; fences and walls, § 1341.19; garage sales, § 1341.21; home occupations, § 1341.22; satellite dish antennas, § 1341.24. 

1323.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the R-4 district is to establish and provide areas for primarily single-family residential land use at moderate densities of no more than two units per lot. These areas are to be developed compatible and respectful of the scale, texture and quality of existing housing and related uses. 
1323.02 - PERMITTED USES. 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
B.  Conversion apartments of no more than two units and two-family dwellings in agreement with section 1323.04 of this ordinance. 
C.  Home occupations in agreement with section 1341.22 of this zoning ordinance. 
D.  Personal care home. 
E.  Public utility installations. 
F.  Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot. 
G.  Special permits listed in section 1323.05 and in agreement with article 1359 of this ordinance. 
1323.03 - BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
Minimum lot area 3,000 square feet Minimum lot width 30 feet Minimum front yard Principal structure - 20% of lot depth (See also section 1341.02.C) 
Accessory structures - behind rear wall of principal structure Minimum side yard Principal structure - 20% of lot width with neither side yard being less than 5 feet (see also section 1341.02.D) 
Accessory structures - 3 feet Minimum rear yard Principal structure - 15 feet (see also section 1341.02.D) 
Accessory structure - 3 feet Maximum lot coverage 50% Maximum building height Principal structures - not to exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet 
Accessory structures - 15 feet  
1323.04 - RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION OF SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS. 
A.  The maximum number of dwelling units after conversion is limited to two. 
B.  Each dwelling unit shall contain within the unit a complete kitchen, toilet and bathing facility; shared facilities shall not be permitted. 
C.  The appearance of a single-family dwelling unit shall be maintained. For the converted structure necessary changes in the number or placement of windows to provide adequate light and air will be allowed, but shall be minimized; any changes which occur shall be of one manner consistent with the architectural character of the dwelling. No stair cases shall be allowed in the front of buildings to access upper floors. 
D.  Except for parking in driveways, no parking spaces shall be located in the front yard. Parking areas shall be designed so that each vehicle has access to the street without the necessity of moving another vehicle. All newly constructed driveways and parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. Off-street parking shall be designed to be accessible from the lowest order street on which the property fronts. Except for driveway and walkway accesses, buffering shall be placed around off-street parking areas which contain three or more spaces. Plant material or fences shall be used. Material used in screen plantings shall be multi-stemmed evergreen species and shall be at least three feet in height when planted. The plant material shall produce a visual screen of at least four feet in height within two years. Fences shall be four to five feet in height and shall provide a visual screen. 
    Off-street parking improvements shall be provided based on the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit with one and one-half spaces for one sleeping room plus one-fourth space for each additional sleeping room. All parking areas shall also comply with article 1343 of the City of Huntington Zoning Ordinance. 
E.  Garbage and refuse pickup and other utility areas shall be provided and shall be located so as not to detract from the aesthetic character of the neighborhood and shall be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing, walls, or shrubbery. Planted material or fences shall meet the standards for buffering of parking areas specified above. 
F.  Certification of adequate sewer and water services shall be provided by the applicant. 
G.  Basement or cellar dwelling units shall be permitted only if all exterior walls of the dwelling unit are at least four feet above the average finished grade level of the adjoining ground. 
1323.05 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    (See section 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses identified as permitted special permits.) 
A.  Fire station or police station. 
B.  Municipal or government building. 
C.  Public park or public recreational. 
D.  Child care center. 
E.  Bed and breakfast. 
F.  Nursing home. 
G.  Adult day care. 
H.  Parking for permitted uses within the zone when not located on the same lot it was designed to serve. 
I.  Schools. 
J.  Religious uses. 
K.  Commercial communication tower or antenna. 
L.  Planned unit development. 
M.  Boarding house. 
N.  Manufactured home park. 
O.  Redevelopment of closed school, public building, community center, or church in accordance with 1341.51 general regulations 
( Ord. of 11-23-15(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1325 - R-5 RESIDENCE DISTRICT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Districts established, § 1317.01; height, yard and lot modifications, § 1341.01 et seq.; accessory uses, § 1341.06; swimming pools, § 1341.16; fences and walls, § 1341.19; garage sales, § 1341.21; home occupations, § 1341.22; satellite dish antennas, § 1341.24. 

1325.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the R-5 district is to accommodate, in central locations convenient to services and city institutions, higher density multi-family housing consisting of three or more units. 
1325.02 - PERMITTED USES. 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
B.  Single-family attached/fee-simple townhouse dwellings. 
C.  Multi-family dwellings. 
D.  Conversion apartments and two-family dwellings in agreement with section 1323.04 of this ordinance. 
E.  Home occupations in agreement with section 1341.22 of this zoning ordinance. 
F.  Personal care home. 
G.  Congregate housing. 
H.  Shelter/Emergency. 
I.  Boarding house. 
J.  Religious uses. 
K.  Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot. 
L.  Special permits listed in section 1325.04 and in agreement with article 1359 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-24-11(3)) 
1325.03 - BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
Single or two-family dwellings Multi-family dwellings Single-family attached/Fee-simple townhouse dwellings Minimum lot area 3,000 square feet 3,600 square feet 2,000 square feet Minimum lot width 30 feet 30 feet 20 feet Minimum front yard Principle structure - 20% of lot depth (see also section 1341.02.C); accessory structure - must be located beyond rear wall of principle structure Principle structure - 20% of lot depth (see also section 1341.02.C); accessory structure - must be located behind rear wall of principle structure Principle structure - 25 feet (see also section 1341.02.C); accessory structure - must be located behind rear wall of principle structure Minimum side yards Principle structure - 20% of lot width, with neither side yard being less than 5 feet (see also section 1341.02.D); accessory structures - 3 feet Principle structure - 20% of lot width, with neither side yard being less than 5 feet (see also section 1341.02.D); accessory structures - 3 feet Principle structure - 0 feet (see also section 1341.48.C) Accessory structure - 3 feet Minimum rear yard Principle structure - 15 feet; accessory structure - 3 feet Principle structure - 15 feet; accessory structure - 3 feet Principle structure - 15 feet; accessory structure - 3 feet Maximum lot coverage 60 percent 60 percent 60 percent Maximum height Principle structure - 3 stories, not to exceed 35 feet; accessory structure - 15 feet Principle structure - 5 stories, not to exceed 55 feet; accessory structure - 15 feet Principle structure - 3 stories, not to exceed 35 feet; accessory structure - 15 feet  
A.  Supplemental regulations. A site plan shall meet the following requirements, in addition to the requirements set forth in this ordinance: 
1.  Structures having a height of more than three stories shall increase side yard by one foot for each additional story above two stories. 
2.  In the event that more than one building is proposed, they shall be designed to be located so that not more than two buildings are in a straight, unbroken line. Each multi-family use building shall be designed with setbacks or breaks of not less than six feet to all exterior walls for every two building units. Each apartment complex of dwelling units shall have a compatible architectural theme with variations in design to provide attractiveness to the development, which shall include consideration of landscaping techniques, building orientation to the site and to other structures, topography, natural features and individual dwelling unit design, such as varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing different exterior materials, changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building heights, and changing types of windows, shutters, doors, porches, colors, and vertical or horizontal orientation of the facades, singularly or in combination of each dwelling unit. 
3.  Regulations found in section 1323.04 shall apply for residential conversions. 
(Ord. of 1-24-11(3)) 
1325.04 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    (See article 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses identified as permitted special permits.) 
A.  Fire station or police station. 
B.  Municipal or government building. 
C.  Public park or public recreational. 
D.  Manufactured home park. 
E.  Country club or golf course. 
F.  Commercial greenhouse. 
G.  Day care, child or adult. 
H.  Nursing home. 
I.  Nursing home conversions. 
J.  Outdoor commercial recreation enterprise. 
K.  School. 
L.  Public camp. 
M.  Special school. 
N.  Stadium or coliseum. 
O.  Redevelopment of closed school, public building, community center, or church in accordance with section 1341.51 general regulations. 
P.  Shelter/Mission. 
Q.  Halfway house. 
R.  Commercial communication tower or antenna. 
S.  Planned unit development. 
T.  Parking for uses permitted within the zone when not located on the same lot it is designed to serve. 
U.  Offices for charitable organizations. 
(Ord. 12-14-98; Ord. 3-13-00; Ord. of 11-23-15(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1327 - C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- District established, § 1317.01; height, yard and lot modifications, § 1341.01 et seq.; accessory uses, § 1341.06; adult day care, § 1341.09; religious uses, § 1341.14. 

1327.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the C-1 district is to conveniently provide goods and services to the residents of the neighborhoods while maintaining and promoting the sense of community provided by the commercial hub located in the neighborhood. 
1327.02 - PERMITTED USES. 
A.  Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business, excluding drive-in establishments and provided that a retail store in the C-1 Districts shall not include a store in excess of 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
B.  Personal service establishments. 
C.  Offices for professional services. 
D.  Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through. 
E.  Minor repair and servicing operations, indoor only, of any article for sale which is permitted in this district. 
F.  Attended laundry and retail dry cleaning service, not including bulk processing on or from other premises. 
G.  Religious uses. 
H.  Financial institutions. 
I.  Funeral homes. 
J.  Schools. 
K.  Day care, child or adult. 
L.  Commercial greenhouses. 
M.  Fraternal organizations, private clubs, lodges, and social halls which do not serve alcoholic beverages. 
N.  Single-family, two-family, and multi-family uses in conformance with articles 1321, 1323, and 1325 of this ordinance. 
O.  Residential flats above permitted non-residential uses. 
P.  Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot. 
Q.  Special permits listed in section 1327.05 and in agreement with article 1359 of this ordinance. 
1327.03 - BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
Minimum lot area 2,500 square feet Minimum front yard None (see also section 1341.02.C) Minimum side yard, if adjoining a residential district 5 feet Minimum side yard, if not adjoining a residential district None Minimum rear yard 15 feet (see also section 1341.02.D) Maximum lot coverage 75 percent Maximum building height, principal uses 3 stories, not to exceed 45 feet Maximum building height, accessory uses 15 feet  
A.  Parking: See article 1343. 
B.  Signs: See article 1345. 
C.  Landscaping: See article 1347. 
1327.04 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS. 
A.  Any principal commercial building may contain more than one use and organization. Any lot may contain more than one principal structure, provided that each principal structure is located in a manner which will allow the possibility of subdividing the lot in a manner that each structure and resulting lot would conform to the zoning requirements, including frontage on a public street. Where any lot contains more than one principal building, all buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of time. 
    All building walls facing a street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block or concrete block walls. Preferred building materials include brick, wood, stone or other natural materials. 
B.  No merchandise, products, waste equipment or similar material or objects shall be displayed or stored outside except for the display of fresh produce. Temporary displays of merchandise for special promotions or events may be permitted by the mayor's office. 
1327.05 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    (See article 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses identified as permitted special permits.) 
A.  Public park or public recreational. 
B.  Clinic or medical health center. 
C.  Outdoor commercial recreation enterprise. 
D.  Practice golf driving range. 
E.  Private recreational development. 
F.  School. 
G.  Public camp. 
H.  Railroad right-of-way and uses essential to railroad operation. 
I.  Stadium or coliseum. 
J.  Convenience store with gas sales. 
K.  Parking lot designed to serve a use not located on same lot. 
L.  Commercial communication tower or antenna. 
M.  Shopping center. 
N.  Hospital. 
O.  Automotive service station in agreement with section 1341.11 of this ordinance (includes convenience store offering sale of gasoline). 
P.  Car wash. 
Q.  Drive-in or drive-thru establishments. 
R.  Stores in excess of 10,000 square feet. 
S.  Hotel and motel. 
T.  Restaurants (alcoholic beverages). 
U.  Animal hospital. 
V.  Self-storage, indoors in accordance with section 1341.49 of this ordinance. 
W.  Nanobrewery. 
X.  Brewpub. 
(Ord. 12-14-98; Ord. 3-8-04; Ord. of 11-28-11(2); Ord. of 6-25-12(4); Ord. of 9-28-15(3) ; Ord. of 12-28-15(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1329 - C-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- District established, § 1317.01; height, yard and lot modifications, § 1341.01 et seq.; accessory uses, § 1341.06; adult day care, § 1341.09; religious uses, § 1341.14; drive-thru restaurant, § 1341.08; auto service station, § 1341.11. 

1329.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the C-2 district is to provide varied professional, personal, and retail services convenient to the neighborhoods in an attractive setting and considerate of traffic safety concerns resulting from location along the major corridors of the city. 
1329.02 - PERMITTED USES. 
A.  General retail and personal service uses. 
B.  Restaurants including drive-in operations. 
C.  Automotive service stations in agreement with section 1341.11 of this zoning ordinance. 
D.  Automobile and other vehicular sales and services establishments including major and minor repairs and body repairs. 
E.  Hotels and motels. 
F.  Enclosed commercial recreational facilities such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, pool rooms, game rooms, movie theaters. 
G.  Fraternal organizations, private clubs, lodges and social halls which do not serve alcoholic beverages. 
H.  Funeral homes. 
I.  Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and kennels. 
J.  Clinic or medical health center. 
K.  Car washes in agreement with section 1341.10 of this zoning ordinance. 
L.  Governmental buildings. 
M.  Self-storage operations in agreement with section 1314.15. 
N.  Commercial greenhouses. 
O.  Day care, child or adult. 
P.  Nursing homes. 
Q.  Religious uses. 
R.  Radio and television stations and studios. 
S.  Dry cleaning plants and laundries. 
T.  Shopping center. 
U.  Public or private recreational. 
V.  Printing or publishing. 
W.  Laboratory. 
X.  Bus terminal. 
Y.  Financial institution. 
Z.  Firearms sales establishments. 
AA.  Office for business and professional uses. 
BB.  Uses permitted in articles 1321, 1323 and 1325. 
CC.  Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot. 
DD.  Special permits listed in section 1329.06 and in agreement with article 1359 of this ordinance. 
EE.  Nano brewery. 
FF.  Brewpub. 
( Ord. of 5-26-15(1) ; Ord. of 9-28-15(3) ) 
1329.03 - BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
Minimum lot area 2,500 square feet Minimum front yard 15 feet (see also section 1341.02.C) Minimum side yard, if adjoining a residential district 15 feet Minimum side yard, if not adjoining a residential district 5 feet Rear yard 15 feet Maximum lot coverage 90% Maximum building height, principal uses 150 feet Maximum building height, accessory uses 20 feet  
1329.04 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS. 
A.  Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or organization. Any lot may contain more than one principal building structure, provided that each principal structure is located in a manner which will allow the possibility of subdividing the lot in a manner that each structure and resulting lot would conform to the zoning and subdivision regulations, including frontage on a public street. 
B.  All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block walls. 
C.  All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces shall be landscaped, utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to either maintain or re-establish the tone of the vegetation in the area and lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The established grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting, as well as assuring that the capacity of natural or manmade drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both from the site and contributing upstream areas. Additional landscaping regulations of article 1347 of this zoning ordinance shall apply. 
1329.05 - GENERAL CIRCULATION DESIGN STANDARDS. 
    All applications for a zoning permit, a building permit in an area of the city in the C-2 districts shall provide a traffic circulation plan. The plan shall indicate how the traffic and circulation plan for the land development relates to existing and proposed development adjoining the land development, to the site's terrain, the overall design of the land development and the road network of the city. 
1329.06 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    (See article 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses identified as permitted special permits.) 
A.  Public park or public recreational. 
B.  Bars or night clubs. 
C.  Cemetery or crematory. 
D.  Mobile home park. 
E.  Outdoor theater. 
F.  Outdoor commercial recreation enterprise. 
G.  Private recreational development. 
H.  Public camp. 
I.  Railroad right-of-way and uses essential to railroad operation. 
J.  Stadium or coliseum. 
K.  Halfway house. 
L.  Penal or correctional institution. 
M.  Commercial communication tower or antenna. 
N.  Tattoo parlor. 
O.  Adult uses. 
P.  Hospital. 
Q.  Limited video lottery/keno establishment. 
R.  Pawnshop. 
S.  Craft production facility. 
T.  Indoor shooting range in agreement with section 1341.52. 
(Ord. 12-14-98; Ord. 2-9-04; Ord. of 4-27-15(1) ; Ord. of 9-28-15(3) ; Ord. of 2-22-16(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1331 - C-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- District established, § 1317.01; height, yard and lot modifications, § 1341.01 et seq.; accessory uses, § 1341.06; adult day care, § 1341.09; religious uses, § 1341.14. 

1331.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the C-3 district is to ensure continuation of the highly diverse and integrated land uses serving a variety of missions to an assortment of persons. It also serves to provide a cohesive and viable central business district for the City of Huntington, while preventing the intrusion of certain incompatible commercial or industrial uses. 
1331.02 - PERMITTED USES. 
A.  General retail. 
B.  Offices for business and professional uses. 
C.  Financial institutions. 
D.  Hotels and motels. 
E.  Clinic or medical health center. 
F.  Restaurants, not including drive-thru. 
G.  Funeral homes. 
H.  Personal service establishments. 
I.  Fraternal organizations, lodges and social halls. 
J.  Philanthropic institutions. 
K.  Parking lots and garages (public and private). 
L.  Professional business and teaching schools. 
M.  Schools including colleges and universities and their accessory uses. 
N.  Governmental buildings, libraries, art galleries, and museums. 
O.  Indoor recreational uses such as theaters and billiard or pool parlors. 
P.  Religious uses. 
Q.  Day care, child or adult. 
R.  Nursing homes. 
S.  Small animal clinic. 
T.  Radio and television stations and studios. 
U.  Uses permitted in articles 1321,1323 and 1325 and residential flats situated on the floors above permitted non-residential uses. Residential flats shall be located on the floors above permitted commercial uses on the first floor. 
V.  Multi-family dwellings in agreement with article 1325. 
W.  Public or private recreational. 
X.  Printing or publishing. 
Y.  Laboratory. 
Z.  Bus rerminal. 
AA.  Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot. 
BB.  Special permits listed in section 1331.05 and in agreement with article 1359 of this ordinance. 
CC.  Nanobrewery. 
DD.  Brewpub. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(3) ) 
1331.03 - BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
Minimum lot area None Minimum front yard None (see also section 1341.02.C) Minimum side yard, if adjoining a residential district 5 feet Minimum side yard, not joining a residential district None Minimum rear yard 15 feet (see also section 1341.02.D) Maximum lot coverage 90 percent Maximum building height None  
A.  Parking: See article 1343. 
B.  Signs: See article 1345. 
C.  Landscaping: See article 1347. 
1331.04 - PARKING WAIVER IN THE CBD. 
    Off-street parking shall be waived in the C-3 district for the conversion of existing buildings and new construction. 
1331.05 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS. 
    Any principal commercial building may contain more than one use and organization. Any lot may contain more than one principal structure so long as all requirements of this section are met. Where any lot contains more than one principal building, all buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of time. All exposed building walls shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block or concrete block walls. Preferred building materials include brick, wood, stone, or other natural materials. 
1331.06 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    (See article 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses identified as permitted special permits.) 
A.  Bar or night club. 
B.  Railroad right-of-ways and uses essential to railroad operations. 
C.  Outdoor commercial recreation enterprise. 
D.  Private recreational development. 
E.  Penal or correctional institution. 
F.  Private school. 
G.  Special school. 
H.  Stadium or coliseum. 
I.  Halfway house. 
J.  Commercial communication tower or antenna. 
K.  Tattoo parlor. 
L.  Drive-thru restaurant. 
M.  Air development rights. 
N.  Shopping center. 
O.  Automotive service station in agreement with section 1341.11 of this ordinance (includes convenience store offering sale of gasoline). 
P.  Car wash. 
Q.  Hospital. 
R.  Limited video lottery/keno establishment. 
S.  Pawnshop. 
T.  Firearms sales establishments. 
U.  Craft production facility. 
(Ord. 12-14-98; Ord. 2-9-04; Ord. of 4-27-15(1) ; Ord. of 5-26-15(1) ; Ord. of 9-28-15(3) ) 
ARTICLE 1333 - I-1 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- District established, § 1317.01; accessory uses, § 1341.06; communication towers, § 1341.12; fences and walls, § 1341.19. 

1333.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the I-1 district is to provide an area where various industrial activities can be accommodated without creating undesirable or incompatible situations with surrounding land uses and to provide areas where industrial/office/warehouse activities can be accommodated in an integrated plan. 
1333.02 - PERMITTED USES. 
A.  Low-nuisance light manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, and assembly facilities not listed elsewhere as permitted or conditional uses that are able to conform to the performance standards herein: 
B.  Dwelling unit of caretaker or guard. 
C.  Mobile home sales. 
D.  Golf course or country club. 
E.  Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and other publicly owned space. 
F.  Building materials and supply facilities. 
G.  Warehousing, storage, or distribution facilities. 
H.  Food and kindred products processing, packaging, storage and distribution. 
I.  Laundry and clothes cleaning and dyeing establishments. 
J.  Railroads and public or quasi-public utilities including substation. 
K.  Laboratories for scientific, agriculture, or industrial research and development. 
L.  Bulk sales, product distribution centers, warehouses, and flex space within completely enclosed buildings. 
M.  Any office use. 
N.  Beverage distributors. 
O.  Carpentry, cabinet making, furniture repair and upholstery, electrical, metal working, tin smithing, welding, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning shops and other similar craft and/or repair facilities when such facilities are in a completely enclosed building and are primarily sales and service facilities and not manufacturing plants. 
P.  Appliance service facilities. 
Q.  Wholesale businesses, storage and warehousing. 
R.  Commercial communication tower or antennae. 
S.  Firearms sales establishments. 
T.  Uses permitted in articles 1327, 1328 and 1331, exclusive of residential uses. 
U.  Building structures and uses owned and operated by the City of Huntington. 
V.  Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot. 
W.  Special permit in section 1333.12 and in agreement with article 1359 of this ordinance. 
X.  NanoBrewery. 
Y.  Brewpub. 
Z.  Craft production facility. 
( Ord. of 5-26-15(1) ; Ord. of 9-28-15(3) ) 
1333.03 - BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet Minimum front yard 15 feet Minimum front yard when abutting residential street 25 feet Minimum side and rear yards when abutting another commercial or industrial zone 15 feet Minimum side and rear yards when abutting a residential zone 50 feet Maximum lot coverage 90 percent Maximum building height, principal uses 7 stories, not to exceed 75 feet Maximum building height, accessory building 20 feet  
A.  Parking: See article 1343. 
B.  Signs: See article 1345. 
C.  Landscaping: See article 1347. 
D.  Performance standards. The requirements herein are intended to provide a basis for determining the compatibility of land uses that may produce measurable adverse environmental effects on their surroundings. 
1.  Noise. At no point along a residential or commercial district or 125 feet from the plant or operation property line shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant (except as otherwise noted herein) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below: 
Octave bands frequency 
(cycles per second) Maximum permitted sound level (decibels) along residence district boundaries or 125 feet from plant or operation property line Maximum permitted sound level (decibels) along commercial district boundaries or 125 feet from plant or operation property line 0 to 75 72 79 75 to 150 67 74 150 to 300 61 68 300 to 600 56 62 600 to 1200 50 56 1200 to 2400 45 51 2400 to 4800 41 47 Above 4800 38 44  
A.  Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter and associated octave band filter, manufactured in compliance with the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
B.  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from noise performance standards: 
a)  Noises of construction or maintenance activities from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. 
b)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
c)  Transient noises of moving sources such as transportation vehicles. 
d)  Other noises not under the direct control of the property user. 
2.  Vibration. Any use creating intense earth-shaking vibrations such as are created by a heavy drop forge shall be set back from a residential district boundary at least 250 feet or at least 150 feet from a commercial district boundary. No perceptible vibrations shall be permitted at the property line. 
3.  Smoke, particulate matter and gases. The emission of smoke, dust, fumes, gases, and similar matter which can cause any damage to human or animal health or vegetation, or to other forms of property, or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at the point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission is prohibited. Standards concerning such emission shall be in accord with the rules and regulations of the West Virginia Division of Environmental Protection. 
4.  Odor. No activity or operation shall cause at any time the discharge of toxic or noxious odor beyond the lot line of the lot on which it is located. 
5.  Glare and heat. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from spot lights or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination, shall be not visible beyond the lot line of the lot on which the use is located. 
6.  Fire hazards. No activity or operation shall be established which fails to meet requirements of Life Safety 101, Fire Code. 
1333.04 - PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. 
    A planned industrial development (PID) is a flexible development of mixed uses permitted in the I-1 district, developed pursuant to an overall integrated plan. The purpose of a PID is to promote progressive development of land and construction thereon by encouraging planned industrial and business developments to achieve industrial and office development offering greater creativity and flexibility in site plan design than is provided under the strict application of zoning regulations, while at the same time preserving the health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the City of Huntington and its citizens. Any principal building in a PID may contain more than one use and/or organization provided that the total building coverage of the combined uses does not exceed the maximum improvement coverage specified for the district. Any lot developed as a PID may contain more than one principal building provided that the total improvement coverage specified for the district is not exceeded and the building separation requirements are met. All buildings, signs, walkways, and lighting fixtures shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of time. The following provisions shall apply to a PID in the I-1 districts. 
1333.05 - USE AREA REGULATIONS. 
    The aggregate land area devoted to flex building and I-1 districts uses shall not be more than 60% of the gross land area of the PID. The aggregate land area allocated to offices shall not be less than 15% of the gross land area of the PID not including office space in flex buildings. 
1333.06 - BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS. 
A.  Site size. The total site area shall not be less than five acres and shall have a frontage of at least 400 feet on an approved road. 
B.  Front yard requirements. All PID's shall have a front yard set back a minimum of 65 feet from the road right-of-way, except where reverse and/or side parking is utilized, in which event the front setback can be reduced to no less than 40 feet. 
C.  Side yard and rear yard requirements. Each PID shall have a minimum side yard of 20 feet, except where said property adjoins a residential zone when a minimum 35 feet side yard is required. A minimum rear yard of 40 feet is required. 
D.  Building height. No building shall exceed 60 feet and no more than five stories. 
E.  Minimum distances between buildings. Minimum distances between buildings in a PID shall be measured horizontally in feet and shall be measured away from the front, side and rear of each building. The total minimum separation between buildings shall be the sum of the two abutting distances. The minimum distances shall be 40 feet for the front of a building; 20 feet for the side of a building; and 25 feet for the rear of a building. No portion of any building shall be closer to any portion of any other building than the combined distances of the abutting requirements for each building, providing that the corner of a building offset more than a 20-degree angle from a line drawn parallel to another building shall be considered a side of the building. 
F.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR). The maximum FAR shall be allowed to vary according to the following schedule: 
1.  Uses in one story buildings: .23. 
2.  Uses in multi-story buildings: .28. 
G.  Maximum improvement coverage (MIC). The MIC shall be 65%. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading access aisles and driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with shrubs, ground cover, or similar plantings and maintained in good condition. A portion of the open space may contain a permanent water area. 
H.  Incentive options for increased FAR/MIC. 
1.  For the provision of a landscaped plaza or interconnecting plaza(s) having pedestrian access from off-street parking areas and/or streets, with the largest dimension of such plaza area fronting on at least 25% of the principal structures on the lot, the maximum permitted FAR/MIC may be increased up to 5%. 
2.  For the provision of varied building(s) sitting on the lot other than in a single line such that an open landscaped pedestrian area is achieved bounded on three sides by the principal structures on the lot, the maximum permitted FAR/MIC may be increased up to 5%. 
Increases under subparagraphs (a) and (b) above may be cumulative. However, the increases permitted above shall not exceed the maximum permissible FAR of .25/.31 for one-story or two- or more story buildings, respectively; the MIC shall not exceed 72%. 
1333.07 - MINIMUM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS. 
    Minimum buffer requirements as follows, designed in accordance with section 1347.05. 
A.  Front property line, except for a permitted driveway: 40 feet. 
B.  Side yard: 20 feet, except where said property adjoins a residential zone, in which event a 35-foot buffer is required. 
C.  Rear yard: 15 feet, except where said property adjoins a residential zone, in which event a 30-foot buffer is required. 
1333.08 - SITE CIRCULATION. 
    Access to and from a PID shall be controlled in the interest of public safety. Each separate use, grouping of attached buildings or groupings of uses permitted as part of a single integrated PID shall have not more than two access ways to the road on which it is located. Insofar as practicable, the use of common access ways by two or more permitted uses shall be provided in order to reduce the number and closeness of access points along the highway. The internal street system shall be an integral feature of the overall design of a PID. It shall be designed for the efficient and safe flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive element to the development. 
    It shall be required that a comprehensive and detailed vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan be submitted and approved. The circulation plan shall include vehicular access to and from major and collector streets, methods of adequately vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns, and separation of service and delivery areas from customer and employee areas. 
1333.09 - SIGNS. 
    Each development in the I-1 districts developed in accordance with the requirements of a PID establishments may have a maximum of two signs, except as otherwise permitted below, in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  One attached and one freestanding sign is permitted. 
B.  If there is one business or use on the lot, the single business may elect to use two attached signs and no freestanding sign. 
C.  For each PID where more than one business or use is located in a particular building or buildings, where said businesses or uses use a common parking lot and/or a common driveway or roadway, no freestanding signs shall be permitted, and instead there shall be one multiple occupancy and tenancy (MOT) sign. A MOT is a sign identifying where there is more than one occupancy and tenancy use a common parking facility and/or a common private drive or roadway and where the names and professions or business names of the various tenants and/or occupants are displayed. The sign shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the curb line. The sign may be illuminated by uplights located in surrounding planting beds or internally illuminated. 
D.  Developments located at the intersection of two public rights-of-way may have one freestanding or MOT sign perpendicular to each. 
E.  Each building within a PID may have a sign on its facade which cannot exceed 15 percent of the front wall area. The facade sign shall be flush with the wall surface and may be lighted with properly directed spotlights. Permanent lettering on a window or door is permitted provided that the letters are not more than four inches in height that only the name and specialty of the business is inscribed. 
F.  Attached sign: 10% of the wall surface area of the wall on which the sign is to be placed. 
G.  Freestanding sign: 24 square feet on any one side; height not to exceed 20 feet. 
H.  MOT sign: One-half square foot for each foot of linear building frontage on the principal street, with a maximum size of 50 square feet on any one side of the sign; height not to exceed 20 feet. 
I.  All signs shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the road right-of-way. 
1333.10 - SERVICE AREA SCREENS. 
    All service areas in a PID, loading docks, trash receptacles, etc., whether located to the side or to the rear of the building, shall be screened from public view by an evergreen vegetative buffer at least six feet in height at the time of planting or a seven-foot high solid or louvered wooden fence may be used where space is prohibitive. 
    No merchandise, products or similar material or objects shall be displayed or stored outside unless appropriately screened and maintained. Any use resulting in the storage of vehicles outside shall have such area entirely enclosed by a solid wood fence, wall, plant material or combination thereof in order to provide a visual barrier between the storage areas and any street, residential zoning district or existing residential use. Such outside storage area shall not exceed 10% of the lot area and shall be located in the rear yard only. 
1333.11 - LANDSCAPE PLAN. 
    A landscaping plan of a PID shall be provided. Landscaping shall be integrated into building arrangement, topography, parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture, art and the use of building and paving materials in an imaginative and aesthetic manner. 
A.  Natural topography and vegetation. The applicant shall use natural topography and vegetation where possible. Large parking areas are not to be stripped of vegetation without requiring reseeding or replanting of all unpaved areas. 
B.  Saving of trees. Every attempt shall be made by the applicant to save existing trees even at the loss of parking spaces. Clumps of trees should be saved over single trees. Care should be taken by the approving authority to properly evaluate site clearing proposals recognizing that wild trees often do not survive when their habitat is drastically altered. Where loss of trees is suggested, replacement should be required. 
C.  Slopes. Slopes in excess of 3:1 shall be avoided unless necessitated by unusual site limitations. All slopes shall be stabilized in a manner acceptable to the approving authority engineer. 
D.  Parking areas in front of buildings. Parking lots located in front of buildings shall be landscaped to separate it from adjacent roadways. 
E.  Screen areas and buffers. Tall dense screens are required along non-penetrable side lines, rear property lines and where commercial or industrial parking areas abut residences or residential zones. Evergreens such as, but not limited to, White pine, Austrial pine, Canadian hemlock, Servian spruce, Arborvitae, and upright yews may be used provided they meet specified height requirements. 
F.  Driveways. The areas adjacent to the driveways shall be planted with low plants or grass. 
G.  Other required landscaped areas. Where a development plan indicates raised walkways between opposing rows of cars, areas at the end of bays, or where proposed or required by the approving authority, specific planting islands are indicated, these areas shall be landscaped. Planting strips may be as narrow as five feet, with a 15 to 20 feet width most desirable. All should be raised and protected by permanent concrete curbing. The applicant shall landscape five to ten percent of the parking areas provided. 
H.  Natural setting. In proposing a landscaping plan, an applicant shall take care, and the approving authority in reviewing shall require, that a natural setting consistent with prevailing community standards be preserved. Recognizing that a major community asset lies in the preservation of the natural condition of property, all efforts in the area of landscaping shall be exercised to provide consistent landscaping proposals with existing foliage. 
I.  Landscaping in parking and loading areas shall be shown on the landscaping plan. Trees shall be staggered and/or spaced so as not to interfere with driver vision, have branches no lower than six feet, and placed at the rate of at least one tree for every 20 parking spaces. All areas between the parking area and the building shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground cover. Any plantings which do not live shall be replaced within two years, or two growing seasons. A majority of the parking areas shall be obscured from streets by buildings, landscaped berms, natural ground elevations, or plantings, singularly or in combination. All landscaping in parking and loading areas shall also meet the objectives of the landscaping section of this ordinance. 
    All other provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
1333.12 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    (See article 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses identified as permitted special permits.) 
A.  Airport or heliport. 
B.  Bars. 
C.  Junk yard. 
D.  Mineral extraction, borrow pit, top soil removal and their storage areas. 
E.  Oil and gas exploration. 
F.  Outdoor theater. 
G.  Penal or correctional institution. 
H.  Stadium or coliseum. 
I.  Motor, rail, or air freight terminal. 
J.  Cemeteries. 
K.  Crematories. 
L.  Fuel storage, bulk. 
M.  Landfills, dumps, incinerators. 
N.  High-nuisance manufacturing and processing operations involving: 
a.  Slaughterhouses or stock yards. 
b.  Arsenals. 
c.  Batch asphaltic concrete, Portland Cement, or mortar mixing plants. 
d.  Distillation of tar. 
e.  Fat rendering. 
f.  Manufacture or treatment of: acid; natural or synthetic rubber, caoutchouc, or gutta percha; creosote; fertilizer; sauerkraut; soap; synthetic polymers; tallow, grease, or lard. 
g.  Ore reduction. 
h.  Processing or refining of petroleum or coal oil. 
i.  Smelters. 
j.  Tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins. 
O.  Any manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or assembly facilities that are not listed elsewhere as a permitted use or special permit, including facilities for abrasive products; boilers and tanks; chemicals; clay; coal; coke and tar products; fiberglass; foundries; glass; metal; textiles; transportation equipment; and any other facilities that are able to conform to the Performance Standards herein for industrial uses. 
P.  Planned unit developments. 
Q.  Radio and television towers. 
R.  Recycling centers. 
S.  Transfer station for solid waste. 
T.  Adult uses. 
U.  Tattoo parlor. 
V.  Uses that are not otherwise permitted uses or special permits in this or any other district and that are similar in the judgment of the planning commission to special permits in this district. 
W.  Limited video lottery/keno establishment. 
X.  Pawnshop. 
Y.  Indoor shooting range in agreement with section 1341.52. 
(Ord. 12-14-98; Ord. 2-9-04; Ord. of 4-27-15(1) ; Ord. of 2-22-16(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1335 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Planned unit development defined, § 1315.02. 

1335.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The provisions of this section are intended for special situations in which: 
a.  Adequate space, light, air, and other objectives of this Code relating to the public health, safety, and welfare can be achieved without the literal application of the detailed zoning and subdivision requirements otherwise applicable, and 
b.  Special amenities and benefits to the community beyond those required by this and other city ordinances can be achieved by allowing more flexible design than is otherwise permitted by such requirements. 
    These objectives can be achieved where an area of land is planned for development as an integrated unit and where its design is subject to more detailed review and approval by the city than is normally required. The objective of planned unit development (PUD) is therefore not simply to allow exceptions to otherwise applicable regulations. It is instead to encourage a higher level of design and amenity than it is possible to achieve under the usual land development requirements. 
    It is accordingly the intent of the city to suspend the application of detailed zoning and subdivision standards as provided herein only where such special amenity is achieved. In this way the city may grant the creative developer a desirable flexibility and at the same time not only protect but enhance the welfare of the residents and other users of a development as well as the rest of the community. 
1335.02 - QUALIFICATION FOR FILING AS A PUD. 
    A planned unit development may be developed in any district subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Is at least two acres in size, and 
b.  Contains more than two detached buildings accommodating principal uses, and 
c.  Is initially under the same ownership or control. 
    A planned unit development may be residential, commercial, office, industrial, or a combination thereof. Flexibility to suspend requirements imposed elsewhere is not conferred upon the PUD applicant as a matter of right but is in all cases subject to a finding by the city that the objectives of these provisions will be served thereby. 
1335.03 - INCENTIVES FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. 
    To further a superior level of design and amenity in new development, the following incentives are offered in planned unit developments: 
1)  Variable density and dimensional zoning standards. Standards for minimum lot area, minimum lot area per dwelling unit, lot width, building height, floor area ratio, yard dimensions, off-street parking and loading, landscaping and screening, fences, and signs may vary from those established elsewhere in this ordinance. 
2)  More than one principal building per lot. In a planned unit development more than one principal building may be located on a lot. 
3)  Variable subdivision design standards. Dimensional and design standards for subdivisions and subdivision improvements such as streets, blocks, sidewalks and parkways, but not improvement construction standards, may vary from those established in the city subdivision regulations. 
4)  Mixed land uses. Land uses other than those allowed as permitted or special exceptions in the applicable zoning districts may be permitted on up to 30 percent of the net site area of a planned unit development. 
1335.04 - REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. 
1)  Site plan review. Whether or not a land subdivision is involved, preliminary and final plans for the development shall be filed and approved by the city in conformance with the provisions of article 1351 of this ordinance. 
2)  Required common open space. A minimum of 20 percent of the net site area in residential use in each phase shall be set aside for permanent common open space as defined herein. 
3)  Quality of Design. To be granted the flexibility permitted hereunder, a planned unit development must evidence a level of design and amenity exceeding that typical of conventional development. Among the features that may evidence such amenity are: 
a)  Amount and quality of landscaping; 
b)  Amount, quality, and interconnectedness of common open space; 
c)  Provision of pedestrian or bicycle paths separated from streets; 
d)  Preservation of drainage ways and other natural features; 
e)  Provision of common recreational facilities; 
f)  Enclosed, underground, depressed, or outstandingly landscaped parking areas; 
g)  Varied building setbacks or other measures to reduce monotony in design; and 
h)  Other features as determined by the planning commission or city council. 
4)  Maintenance of land intended for future phases. Land designated for future construction phases and other land not intended for immediate improvement shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained with a neat and orderly appearance as specified by the planning director. 
1335.05 - APPROVAL PROCESS. 
    Preliminary plans and final plans for planned unit developments shall be approved only in conformance with W. Va. Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 18 and the approval criteria provided in Section G of this article. No permit for a PUD or phase thereof shall be issued before approval by the city council of a final plan as provided herein. 
1335.06 - PUD REVIEW COMMITTEE. 
    A PUD review committee is hereby authorized to review planned unit development filings. 
    The membership of the committee shall include the mayor, the chairperson of city council, the director of development and planning, the planning director, the director of public works, the fire chief, the chairman of the board of zoning appeals, the chairman of the planning commission, and may include any others appointed thereto by the mayor. The committee may seek technical assistance from such other sources as it deems necessary. 
    The committee may advise and assist applicants in meeting city objectives but shall have no power to approve or disapprove any filing or in any way restrict the applicant's right to seek formal approval thereof from the planning commission and city council. 
    The committee shall, within 30 days after completing its review of any filing, submit to the planning commission the complete filing together with a written report noting any deficiencies in compliance with the requirements herein and any recommendations for improvement of the planned unit development to better reflect the objectives of these provisions. A copy of the committee's report shall also be sent to the applicant. 
1335.07 - FINAL PLAN. 
1)  Filing of final plan. The city council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny a final plan of a planned unit development, or any phase thereof, for which it has approved a preliminary plan. The final plan may be filed, and may be approved, simultaneously with the preliminary plan. 
    The general terms, conditions, and requirements set forth in a preliminary plan, or any phase thereof, approved by the city council shall not be modified, revoked, or otherwise impaired by action of the city. Except that the city council may rescind approval of a preliminary plan, or any phase thereof, and thereby revoke such terms and conditions, if the applicant has failed to file within three years of the date of approval of the preliminary plan either a final plan in conformance therewith or a revised plan together with an application for an amendment. The city council may grant an extension of this time period. 
    A financial surety shall be submitted with the final plan and shall provide for the phasing of the installation and improvement of public or common areas and improvements, open spaces, and amenities in a manner generally proportionate to the number of dwelling units or the amount of non-residential floor space, as applicable, to be built in each phase together with the phases that preceded it. 
2)  Recording of final plan. The final plan as approved by the city council shall be filed with the county recorder as the final plat for the PUD under provisions of the city subdivision regulations whether or not the PUD involves any subdivision of land. No building permit shall be issued before the approved final plan is recorded. The applicant shall pay all recording costs. 
3)  Amendments to approved plan. Approval of an amendment shall be required for: 
a.  Any material change, deletion, or addition made to: 
1.  An approved preliminary plan, or 
2.  An approved final plan, or for: 
b.  A final plan that does not conform to the preliminary plan approved by the city council. 
    An applicant seeking approval of an amendment shall file an application therefor with the planning director. The application shall describe the amendment sought and provide such other information as the planning commission or city council may require. It shall be accompanied by ten copies of the proposed amendment and a filing fee. 
    If the planning director determines that the amendment sought is a minor amendment as defined herein, he or she shall refer it to the planning commission for final action. No public hearing shall be required for a minor amendment. An applicant may appeal a decision of the planning commission on a minor amendment to the city council. 
    For amendments other than minor amendments, the full approval process set forth herein for preliminary plans and final plans shall be followed. 
    A minor amendment to a planned unit development shall be any change from the previously approved Plan that involves: 
1.  No change in land use type or housing type; and 
2.  No change in the location of any structure, off-street parking or loading area, common open space area, or any area or right-of-way to be conveyed to or reserved for a public body, by more than ten feet in any direction, nor a change in the spacing between any two structures by more than 10%; and 
3.  No change of more than 10% in any non-locational quantitative specification of the previously approved plan, including: 
a.  Any dimension of any lot, yard, structure, or pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare; 
b.  Any residential density; 
c.  Amount of common open space acreage; 
d.  Utility line capacity; 
e.  Amount of floor area of non-residential development; 
f.  Amount of land to be conveyed to or reserved for any public body; 
g.  Size or capacity of any off-street parking or loading area; 
h.  Amount or dimensions of proposed tree or ground cover, landscaping, or screening; and 
4.  No other change that causes the development to fall short of meeting the requirements of any applicable zoning district to any greater degree than already provided on the previously approved plan. 
    The planning commission may disallow minor amendment status if a proposed amendment fails to meet the foregoing criteria when it is considered together with one or more minor amendments previously approved for the same development. 
    The planning commission or city council shall approved, conditionally approve, or disapprove an amendment. An amended final plan shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions herein governing recording of a final plan. 
1335.08 - APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. 
    In recommending approval or conditional approval of a preliminary or final plan for a planned unit development (PUD), the planning commission shall transmit to the city council written findings of fact that the application meets all of the criteria below, or will meet them when the commission's conditions are complied with. The city council shall not be bound by the recommendation of the planning commission, but in granting approval or conditional approval, the council shall also find that all of the following criteria are met or will be met when any conditions to which the approval is made subject are complied with: 
1)  Superior design. The PUD represents a more creative approach to the unified planning of development and incorporates a higher standard of integrated design and amenity than could be achieved under otherwise applicable zoning district and subdivision regulations, and solely on this basis modifications to the use and design standards established by such regulations are warranted. 
2)  Meets PUD requirements. The PUD meets the requirements for planned unit developments set forth in this Code, and no modifications to the use and design standards otherwise applicable are allowed other than those permitted herein. 
3)  Consistent with city plan. The PUD is generally consistent with the objectives of the city Comprehensive Plan as viewed in light of any changed conditions since its adoption. 
4)  Public welfare. The PUD will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. 
5)  Compatible with environs. Neither the PUD nor any portion thereof will be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other properties in its vicinity, seriously impair property values or environmental quality in the neighborhood, nor impede the orderly development of surrounding property. 
6)  Natural features. The design of the PUD is as consistent as practical with the preservation of natural features of the site such as flood plains, wooded areas, steep slopes, natural drainage ways, or other areas of sensitive or valuable environmental character. 
7)  Circulation. Streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, off-street parking, and off-street loading as appropriate to the planned land uses are provided. They are adequate in location, size, capacity, and design to ensure safe and efficient circulation of automobiles, trucks, bicycles, pedestrians, fire trucks, garbage trucks, and snow plows as appropriate without blocking traffic within the PUD, or unduly interfering with the safety or capacity of adjacent streets. 
8)  Open spaces and landscaping. The quality and quantity of common open spaces and landscaping provided are consistent with the higher standards of design and amenity required of a PUD. The size, shape, and location of a substantial portion of total common open space provided in residential areas render it useable for recreation purposes. 
Open space between all buildings is adequate to allow for light and air, access by fire fighting equipment, and for privacy where walls have windows, terraces, or adjacent patios. Open space along the perimeter of the development is sufficient to protect existing and permitted future uses of adjacent property from adverse effects from the development. 
9)  Covenants. Where individual parcels are to be later sold, adequate provision has been made in the form of deed restrictions, homeowners or condominium associations, or the like for: 
a.  The preservation and maintenance of any open spaces, thoroughfares, utilities, water retention or detention areas, and other common elements not to be dedicated to the city or another public body. 
b.  Such control of the use and exterior design of individual structures, if any, as is necessary for continuing conformance to the PUD Plan, such provision to be binding on all future ownership. 
10.  Public services. The land uses, intensities, and phasing of the PUD are consistent with the anticipated ability of the city, the school system, and other public bodies to provide and economically support police and fire protection, water supply, sewage disposal, schools, and other public facilities and services without placing undue burden on existing residents and businesses. 
11.  Phasing. Each development phase of the PUD can, together with any phases that preceded it, exist as an independent unit that meets all of the foregoing criteria and all other applicable regulations herein even if no subsequent phase should ever be completed. The provision and improvement of public or common area improvements, open spaces, and amenities - or the provision of financial sureties guaranteeing their improvement - is phased generally proportionate to the phasing of the numbering of dwelling units or amount of non-residential floor area. 
ARTICLE 1337 - SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICTS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference- District boundaries, § 1317.03; effect of establishment of districts, § 1319.02. 

1337.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide special regulations where, due to specific local conditions, the normal district requirements of this ordinance do not adequately provide the most appropriate development options. 
1337.02 - B&O RIGHT-OF-WAY SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICT. 
A.  Statement of intent. The intent of the B&O right-of-way special zoning district is to recognize the unique development issues related to building construction and land use along the former B&O right-of-way in the Westmoreland area of the City of Huntington and to promulgate zoning restrictions which will allow property owners the maximum use of their property while protecting the interests of other property owners in the vicinity. 
B.  District boundaries. The boundaries of the B&O right-of-way special zoning district are Bradley Road to the south, Waverly Road to the north, Huntington floodwall to the west, and Camden Road to the east. 
C.  Primary permitted uses. 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Public park or open space. 
D.  Permitted accessory building uses. 
1.  Accessory uses, such as walks, driveways, curbs, retaining walls, mail boxes, lamp posts, and structures of like nature and trees, shrubs, or plants are permitted in any required yard. Vision clearance shall be maintained on corner lots. 
2.  Fences not more than seven feet in height shall be allowed in any side or rear yard. No fence shall be allowed in the front yard. 
3.  Accessory buildings, not to 150 square feet, are permitted in any side yard. Such buildings shall not occupy more than 20% of the side yard. 
4.  An attached carport may extend ten feet into the required side yard. 
5.  Swimming pools may be located in any side yard. A pool with a depth exceeding 24 inches must be surrounded by a fence at least four feet in height. 
6.  An open porch or deck may be located in may required yard, however, such structure shall not extend more than four feet into a required front or rear yard or ten feet into a side yard. 
E.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size within the district shall be 4,800 square feet, with no less than 120 feet lot frontage. 
F.  Height. No structure shall exceed one story in height. 
G.  Setbacks. The following minimum setback shall be required. The front yard shall abut Bradley Road, while the Waverly Road frontage shall be considered the rear yard. 
1.  Front yard setback - 20% of lot depth. 
2.  Rear setback - 20% of lot depth. 
3.  Side setback - 20 feet, each side. 
H.  Parking. There shall be two off-street spaces per dwelling. Driveway access shall only be permitted from Bradley Road. 
1337.03 - SPECIAL PERMIT. 
    See article 1359 for special permit procedures and regulations applicable to specific uses as permitted special permits. 
(a)  Parking lot designed to serve a use not located on the same lot. 
(Ord. 4-26-04) 
ARTICLE 1339 - H-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT OVERLAY[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- District boundaries, § 1317.03; effect of establishment of districts, § 1319.02. 

1339.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of the H-1 district overlay is to acknowledge the special and unique character of the City of Huntington's historic districts. These districts include the residential and non-residential land uses representing the community's growth and change during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The H-1 district overlay is also established to provide special provisions designed to preserve and protect the historical nature of the community, while at the same time encouraging renovation, rehabilitation and new construction compatible with existing aesthetic patterns to promote and continue the revitalization of the city's historic areas. The intent of all standards and guidelines in the H-1 district overlay is to safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving that part of the city which reflects elements of its cultural, social, economic and architectural history and to promote the use of the historic areas for the education, pleasure and welfare of the city and its visitors. Finally, the H-1 district overlay serves to implement Part One, Chapter Five of the Codified Ordinances of Huntington allowing for the preservation and long-term protection of historic structures in the city. 
1339.02 - SCOPE. 
    All owners, occupants, tenants and other persons or entities in control or possession of structures must apply for review by the historic preservation commission and issuance of a "Certificate of Appropriateness" prior to any building permit being issued; or in the event no such permit is required, then prior to any work or activity being commenced. This includes the following activities within the H-1 district overlay or on any historic property (including structure and archaeological resource) or for any structure surveyed or identified in the City of Huntington as listed on the National Register. Activities to be regulated by a "Certificate of Appropriateness" include: demolition, relocation, repair, changes in exterior appearance by means of repainting (whether in the same or in a different color), or addition or new signage or exterior lighting; or excavation or ground disturbance. The "Certificate of Appropriateness" is in addition to any other approvals necessitated by the development proposal and as approved by the planning director, planning commission, or board of zoning appeals. 
    Application procedures. The procedure for application for a certificate of appropriateness for development and redevelopment in the City of Huntington H-1 district overlay including demolition, relocation, repair, changes in exterior appearance by means of repainting (whether in the same or in a different color), or addition or new signage or exterior lighting; or excavation or ground disturbance are outlined in article 1353 of this chapter. 
1339.03 - PERMITTED USES AND BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS. 
    The H-1 district overlay imposes a set of requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district within those areas determined to be historic resources designated by the historic preservation commission. All applicable use and bulk and area regulations of the underlying zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations outlined in the additional sections of this article. Only land which is identified on the zoning map which is in the H-1 Historic Preservation District Overlay is regulated by this section. 
1339.04 - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION. 
    A new building in the H-1 districts overlay should be visually compatible with its neighbors in spacing, setback, massing, materials, roof shape, window divisions and siding emphasis. A new building must not be identical with its neighbors in these respects, but attention shall be given to the immediate architectural environment of the new building. Any new building shall support and enhance a block's design unity and sense of character through consideration of silhouette, spacing, setbacks, proportions, volume/mass, entryway, material/surface, shadow/texture, and style/image. In addition, these guidelines apply only to the parts of the building visible from a public way. Within the city's requirements and the requirements of the Building Code, the designer should have free rein. 
A.  Where the underlying zoning is residential the use shall present a residential atmosphere. To accomplish this, new buildings should be compatible in size, scale, and mass with existing buildings. 
B.  Rhythms of building spacing should be maintained. In the historic district where there is a pattern of buildings the pattern shall continue. 
C.  Front of buildings facing the street. The buildings in Huntington are characterized by their linear appearance. The front of nearly every building faces the street. Although this may not be achievable on every site due to other constraints, architectural treatments can achieve the same effect. Parking should be located at the rear and side of buildings. 
D.  Entrances and porches are often the focus of buildings, particularly when they occur on primary elevations. Together with their functional and decorative features such as doors, steps, balustrades, pilasters and entablatures, they can be extremely important in defining the overall character of a building. The porch treatment of new structures shall relate to the porch treatment of existing adjacent structures. Open porches are strongly encouraged, but screened in porches may be acceptable if well-detailed. 
E.  The roof, with its shape; features such as cresting, dormers and chimneys; and the size, color and patterning of the roofing material, can be extremely important in defining the building's overall character. 
Roof profiles contribute strongly to the character of a street, and new construction shall relate to the predominant roof shape and pitch of existing adjacent buildings. Where flat roofs appear historically, they almost always project beyond the facade line and are frequently supported by brackets. New roofs should follow the traditional types: gabled, gambrel, hipped and mansard. Roofing material shall be unobtrusive and not call attention to itself, except on buildings where pattern is a part of the overall design. 
Asphalt shingle is acceptable, provided it is a relatively dark shade. Random mingling of shingle shapes and colors should not be permitted, and consideration should be given to whether there is stylistic justification for the use of shaped shingles at all. 
F.  The proportion, size and detailing of windows in new construction should relate to that of existing adjacent buildings. Most windows in the city's historic districts have a vertical orientation. Also, wooden double-hung windows are traditional in the city's historic districts. 
The use of large picture windows shall not be permitted in domestic structures, nor should any window which is basically horizontal in orientation. Reflective glass is not allowed. 
Projecting bay windows with a polygonal plan are appropriate. If a bay window is added, a projecting bay window is preferable to a curving bow window. 
G.  Window type and materials are to be compatible with the front facade and the historic and architectural character of the buildings. Exterior storm windows and doors should be visually unobtrusive. Aluminum shall be painted in an appropriate manner. 
H.  Stylistic trim using cornices, scroll work, and the like is encouraged. Shutters are appropriate for new structures. Shutters should be paneled or louvered. Plank or board and batten shutters shall not be permitted. Shutters shall not be pierced with sawn initials or other motifs. 
Shutters shall be dimensioned to cover the window opening. The height of shutters shall be equal to the distance from the sill to the lintel, and the width of each unit shall be half the width of the frame, all measured on the exterior. Attachment of shutters to the building with hinges is preferable to an immovable mounting. 
I.  Exterior materials are to be natural in appearance. For siding of new structures, diagonal and vertical siding are generally unacceptable. Siding of new structures shall have the same directional emphasis as the siding on original structures. Clapboard is the preferred siding material of new buildings. Materials which imitate natural materials may be acceptable. Imitative materials such as asphalt siding, wood-textured metal siding or artificial siding stone or brick should not be used. Four-inch metal siding, when installed and carefully detailed, may be acceptable. 
J.  Paint color for a privately-owned building is essentially a personal choice. Several very good books have been published regarding historic paint colors at various periods in American architectural history (including Century of Color, published by the American Life Foundation in 1981); it would be desirable if these were consulted prior to choosing a color. Colors should be compatible with the historic district's atmosphere and typical of the period from which the architectural style was developed. 
1339.05 - DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR ARCHITECTURAL RESTORATION. 
    Restoration of buildings should comply with accepted historic preservation guidelines such as the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and Preservation Briefs published by the National Park Service 
A.  Windows and doors. Existing windows and doors, including the window sash, glass, lintels, frames, molding, shutters, and steps, should be retained and repaired whenever possible. If a new window or door must be used, it should be of a material compatible with the front facade. Changing the size or arrangement of windowpanes, muntins, and rails where they contribute to the historic and architectural character of the building is discouraged. Inappropriate window or door features on significant facades are discouraged. Replacement windows in restored and rehabilitated structures should retain the dimensions and pane divisions of the window being replaced. Paired casement windows, although not historically common, are generally acceptable because of their vertical orientation. The use of single-pane windows should not be permitted unless equipped with snap-in muntins. 
B.  Storm windows. Exterior storm windows and doors may be installed if they are visually unobtrusive, do not cause damage to existing frames, and can be removed in the future. Storm windows should match the trim color. Mill-finished aluminum can be painted to match. 
C.  Porches and steps. Porches and steps that are appropriate to the building and the site should be retained. The original material and architectural features of porches and steps should be retained whenever possible. 
D.  Roofs. The original roof shape should be preserved. All architectural features that give the roof its essential character should be preserved or replaced in a compatible manner. 
E.  Architectural metals. Architectural metals should be cleaned when necessary with an appropriate method that does not erode the surface. 
F.  Masonry surface and repointing. Original masonry should be retained whenever possible, without applying any surface treatment, including paint. When repointing of mortar joints is absolutely necessary, old mortar should be duplicated in composition, color, texture, method of application, and joint profile. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. 
G.  Wood frame buildings. Architectural features, such as cornices, brackets, window and door molding and details, clapboard, weatherboard, shingles, and other wood siding, are essential and parts of the character and appearance of frame buildings. They should be retained and preserved whenever possible. Frame buildings should not be resurfaced with new materials that are inappropriate for the building or that will cause deterioration of the original structure. 
H.  Structural systems. Existing foundations should not be disturbed with new excavations that could undermine the structural integrity of the building. 
I.  Mechanical systems. Exterior cables (e.g., electrical, telephone, and cable TV) should be installed in places where they will be visually unobtrusive. Audio/video antenna and mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning and solar panels) should be placed in as inconspicuous a location as possible. 
J.  Garages. If an ally is adjacent to the dwelling, a new garage should be located off the alley. Where alleys do not exist, garage facing the street or driveway curb cuts may be acceptable. Garage doors should not face the street. If this is found necessary, single garage doors should be used to avoid the horizontal orientation of two-car garage doors. 
Parking spaces should be screened from the street and sidewalk by landscaping. 
K.  Walls, fences, and railings. Removal or replacement with inappropriate material or design is discouraged where these are historically or architecturally important elements of the design and character of the structure and district. 
1339.06 - DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR STOREFRONTS. 
A.  The storefront opening. The storefront opening, where possible, shall be recessed six to 12 inches into the facade's storefront opening rather than applied to the face of the facade. 
B.  The storefront frame. The storefront design shall generally be composed of a hierarchical frame made up of vertical and horizontal elements. 
C.  The recessed entry. The storefront should have a recessed entry off the sidewalk to create a more intimate sense of entry at the door. The recessed entry should be three feet to six feet deep. 
D.  The windows. The storefront should be as transparent as possible. Large window areas emphasize display, maximize natural light and allow for visibility into and out of the store. 
E.  The storefront cornice. The storefront should have a strong horizontal form at its top to separate it from the upper facade and to help certain signage. 
F.  Materials, color and texture. These characteristics of the storefront design should flatter that of the upper facade and adjacent facades. 
G.  Proposed changes should be supported by historic photos, blueprints, etc. of the structure. 
CHAPTER SEVEN - ADDITIONAL ZONING STANDARDS 
ARTICLE 1340 - OUTDOOR DINING AND OUTDOOR SERVICE OF ALCOHOL 

1340.01 - PLANNING DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER ARTICLE. 
    The City of Huntington Department of Planning and Development ("planning department") is hereby authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations regarding the administration of the requirements of this article, to review all outdoor dining area permit applications and to either grant or deny such permits under this article. Copies of such regulations, as amended from time to time, shall be maintained by the planning department, posted on the city's website and filed in the city clerk's office, and shall be available to interested parties at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.02 - COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS. 
(a)  The operation of an outdoor dining area pursuant to a permit granted under this article shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, all provisions of state and local building and fire codes, as well as all state and local health laws and regulations regarding the service and preparation of food, and shall not unreasonably interfere with utility access. The operations of an outdoor dining area shall also be conducted in accordance with the code provisions and regulations of the West Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Administration (WVABCA). Nothing in this article shall be intended to alter or abridge any applicable federal, state and local laws or the operator's responsibility to comply with all code provisions and regulations of the WVABCA. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be intended to alter or abridge the prohibition of service of alcoholic beverages or possession thereof on public property in the city, as set forth in section 516.06 of the Huntington Revised Code, except that any permitted outdoor dining area operator and patrons of permitted operator's outdoor dining area shall be deemed to be exempt from said prohibition during the hours of operation of the outdoor dining area and only within the confines of said area. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.03 - NONDISCRIMINATION/RIGHT TO LIMIT OR DENY ADMISSION OR SERVICE. 
    No person shall be denied access or service to an outdoor dining area on the basis of race, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age or disability; notwithstanding the right of the operator to limit access and admission to an outdoor dining area to only bona fide paying customers of that operator's establishment who are behaving in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.04 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  "Operator" shall mean a person, organization, proprietorship, corporation or other similar entity lawfully operating a business located in a district zoned for commercial use that possesses a valid State of West Virginia food vendor's permit and serves at a minimum both lunch and dinner, and has been issued an outdoor dining area permit by the city's planning department. 
(b)  "Outdoor dining area" shall mean a confined area of the public sidewalk designated by a site plan approved by the city through its planning department and located in a commercial district, as shown on the City of Huntington's Official Zoning Map, where, if abutting a street, the street abutting the sidewalk is posted at a speed limit of 25 mph or less, and which area is adjacent to operator's building/permanent structure, where patrons may sit at tables while consuming food and beverages, which may include alcoholic beverages contingent on proper licensure by the WVABCA. 
(c)  "Small partitioned area" shall mean an outdoor dining area that is fenced or otherwise enclosed and occupies 30 or less of linear feet along the adjacent storefront. 
(d)  "Large partitioned area" shall mean an outdoor dining area that is fenced or otherwise enclosed and occupies greater than 30 feet of linear feet along the adjacent storefront. 
(e)  "Non-partitioned area" shall mean an outdoor dining area that is not fenced or otherwise enclosed. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.05 - PERMIT PROCESS. 
(a)  An applicant for an outdoor dining area permit shall file an application with the City of Huntington Planning office on such forms and subject to such procedures as the Planner may establish. An application for an outdoor dining area permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate administrative fee as listed in section 1340.05(c), a $5,000 surety bond for partitioned outdoor dining areas, and shall include: a site plan, drawn to scale showing the layout for the outdoor dining area which accurately depicts the existing sidewalk conditions, including sidewalk width from building face to curb; location and dimensions of tree wells; locations of lamp posts, traffic and parking signs, signal poles, trash receptacles, benches, and other sidewalk features or obstructions; as well as design, location, size and space of the dining area, chairs, tables, aisles between tables, and if applicable, enclosures; routes of ingress and egress; clearances between the seating area and the curb; and any such additional requirements of the planning department with respect to type, style, or specifications of the outdoor dining area, including those requirements subject to the approval of the WVABCA. 
(b)  After reviewing the application and site plan, the planner shall determine if the proposed outdoor dining area, consistent with the requirements of this article, is reasonable, promotes safe pedestrian and retail friendly vitality, and that there is adequate space remaining within the public right-of-way to facilitate safe circulation of pedestrian traffic, while promoting the overall public health, safety and welfare. The planner may require that the applicant obtain the approval of other departments or utilities before making a final determination. Thereafter, the planning department may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The approved plan and permit shall be posted at the operator's premises, visible to customers and the public. No material change to the approved plan shall be made without prior written approval by the planning department. The planning department shall provide separate guidelines regarding applicable standards for uniform aesthetics, design, installation, and maintenance of the outdoor dining area and the Planning Commission will review these guidelines annually. 
(c)  The outdoor dining area permit term shall be for one fiscal year, renewed July 1, unless revoked prior to expiration, and may be renewed on an annual basis. An annual administrative fee of $100 for a non-partitioned outdoor dining area, a $250 administrative fee for a small partitioned area or a $500 administrative fee for a large petitioned area, shall be assessed for renewal of an existing outdoor dining area permit. 
(d)  Any operator holding a valid existing permit for a particular outdoor dining area that continues to utilize that outdoor dining area, shall be deemed to have re-applied for permission to use the same space for a succeeding permit term. Such operator shall pay the applicable annual renewal administrative fee, complete all renewal paperwork and comply with any other renewal requirements of the planning department, within 30 days of the commencement of the succeeding permit term. If the operator fails to meet all renewal requirements within the 30 days, then the operator's permit shall be deemed to have expired. 
(e)  The issuance of an outdoor dining area permit does not grant or imply vested rights to use of the area by the operator, but instead is a privilege granted to the operator. The city retains the right to deny the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit for any lawful reason. The city shall have broad discretion to grant or revoke permits issued pursuant to this article in the interests of promoting pedestrian and retail friendly vitality, and improving the overall public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.06 - STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR DINING AREAS. 
(a)  The outdoor dining area shall be located adjacent to the property of an existing and lawful establishment of a permitted operator and shall be under the responsible direction and control of that operator. 
(b)  The outdoor dining area may be open to patrons between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily, but said outdoor dining area may only be open while the kitchen associated with such establishment is open and operating such that it is capable of serving food to patrons. In the event a permitted operator intends to serve any beverage regulated by the WVABCA in an outdoor dining area, all code provisions and regulations of the WVABCA regarding permitted days and hours of service shall be followed. If a bar is proposing to allow for outdoor drinking and do not meet the dining requirements listed above they may petition to go before the board of zoning appeals to allow for an expansion to their existing special permit/conditional use permit if all other site and location requirements can be met. 
(c)  All furniture or other personal property located on the public sidewalk/right-of-way by operator must be readily removable without damage to the surface of public sidewalk/right-of-way. Penetrations into or permanent fixtures placed upon the public sidewalk/right-of-way by operator are strictly prohibited. If a permanent fixture is placed upon the right-of-way by the operator, the outdoor dining area permit shall be revoked immediately and the public right-of-way returned to its original condition. 
(d)  As authorized by state law, including, but not limited to, W. Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(4), (20) and (44), all partitions or fencing required for the delineation, designation, or enclosure of the outdoor dining area on city right-of-way shall be provided, installed, maintained and removed by and at the discretion of the city, shall remain property of the city, and no other partitions or fencing shall be permitted absent a finding by the planning department that the city is unable to provide said partitions or fencing, and that the proposed partitions or fencing are consistent with applicable standards for uniform aesthetics, design, installation, maintenance and removal. 
(e)  The planning department shall have the authority to determine when furniture, personal property and associated enclosures must be removed from the public sidewalk/right-of-way. 
(f)  An unobstructed corridor space of 60 inches must be maintained between the outer dimension of the outside dining area and the curb or nearest obstruction, in order to ensure a clear pedestrian passageway along the sidewalk. Provided however that the planner may reduce this to a minimum of 36 inches of unobstructed corridor space with approvals from appropriate departments. In order to achieve a continuous pedestrian walk way, the pedestrian passageway shall be a straight line, parallel to the building face or curb line, for the entire length of the outdoor dining area. If the Americans with Disabilities Act requires a greater space, then the federal law shall control. 
(g)  An unobstructed clearance of 36 inches, must be maintained between a fire connection and any furniture or enclosures of an outdoor dining area. If the city's Fire Code requires a greater space, that Code shall control. 
(h)  The outdoor dining area must be kept sanitary, neat and clean at all times and shall be free from the accumulation of food, broken tableware, and litter. 
(i)  In order to control litter, the use of disposable tableware and utensils is prohibited. 
(j)  In accordance with section 572.04 of the Huntington Revised Code, noise from an outdoor dining area which unreasonably disturbs neighboring commercial or residential occupants is prohibited. 
(k)  In order to serve any beverage regulated by the WVABCA in an outdoor dining area, the designated area must be included in the floor plan for the licensed premises as approved by the WVABCA. Any beverage regulated by the WVABCA shall be served and consumed only on the enclosed or bounded portion of the public sidewalk designated and permitted by the city as an outdoor dining area. Patrons are not permitted to carry any beverage regulated by the WVABCA out of the outdoor dining area. 
(l)  Smoking is prohibited within any outdoor dining area. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.07 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant must agree, in writing, that it shall indemnify, defend, and save harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from and against all liability, claims, suits, damages, losses, costs, attorneys' fees and expenses of any or all types arising out of, or related in any way to, the permitted outdoor dining area. 
(b)  The applicant shall maintain such general liability insurance with at least $1,000,000 coverage per each occurrence and shall the name as additional insured the City of Huntington, its agents, officers, directors and employees. A copy of said insurance policy shall be furnished to the City of Huntington. 
(c)  The authorization and privilege granted by a permit approved under this section shall be terminated due to the operator's failure to comply with any federal, state or local laws, any unabated nuisances or whenever the city desires to use the affected public right-of-way for any public purpose. In the event the city shall have a public need for use of the right-of-way or the property affected by the right-of-way, the city may terminate the use of such right-of-way by written notification to the applicant for the removal of any encroachments, and the operator shall cease use of the right-of-way unless and until such time the city has no public need for use of the right-of-way. Said removal shall be completed by the date specified in the notice and shall be accomplished by the applicant without cost to the city. If the applicant fails or neglects to remove the encroachment within the time specified, the city shall have the right to remove the encroachment, at the expense of the operator, and shall not be liable to the operator for any loss, financial or otherwise, or damage to the encroachment or personal property within the encroachment area. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.08 - DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
(a)  An outdoor dining area permit is a privilege granted to the operator that may be revoked by the city upon finding by the planning department that the operator has violated any federal, state or city law applicable to the outdoor dining area or the operation thereof, including but not limited to, compliance with all code provisions and regulations of the WVABCA, that the continued operation of the outdoor dining area poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or that the outdoor dining area constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  An applicant who has been denied a permit, or an operator whose permit has been revoked, may appeal the denial or revocation to the City of Huntington Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA). The provisions of Article 13 of the City of Huntington Zoning Ordinance shall apply. Such appeal may be made in writing within 30 days following the decision appealed from, on forms available at the planning department, and shall set forth the basis on which the person contests the decision. Within ten days of receipt of the appeal by the BZA, the BZA shall set a date and time for a public hearing. The public hearing shall be held within 45 days of receipt of the appeal to the BZA. The BZA shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal and may: deny the appeal and uphold the original order, requirement, decision or determination; grant the appeal and overturn the original order, requirement, decision or determination; or, issue an order which denies part of the appeal and grants part of the appeal. The BZA shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law on which the BZA based its decision. The decision of the BZA may be appealed by either party, within 30 days, to the Cabell County Circuit Court, as set forth in WV Code § 8A-9-1, et seq. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.09 - NO GRANDFATHER PROVISION. 
    All outdoor dining areas on city right-of-way in operation at the time of the enactment of this article, as well as all such areas that are licensed thereafter, shall be subject to each provision of this article. No grandfather provision is applicable. No act of any person or business entity prior to the effective date of this article, which would be considered a violation under this article if it were in effect, shall be subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.10 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Each section of this article shall be severable from the others, and if any section or portion thereof shall be determined to be unenforceable, then the remaining sections shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
1340.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any operator who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined up to $500 per day. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4- 9-18(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1341 - GENERAL REGULATIONS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Use of property, § 1319.01. 

1341.01 - HEIGHT AND ORIENTATION. 
(a)  Height. No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limits established and specified for the use and the district in which such building is located. In all districts, spires, church steeples, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, scenery lofts, transmission lines or towers and distribution poles and lines, and essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by other laws or ordinances. Standard antenna and similar appurtenances may not exceed the maximum building height by more than 25 feet. 
    The maximum building height requirement may be increased if buildings are set back from the side property lines, one foot for each two feet of additional height above the building height requirement, but in no case may height be increased by more than ten feet. 
(b)  Orientation. All new residential structures shall be required to have a front door facing the street unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the code official that the prevailing condition of the developed lots fronting the same street would warrant a different orientation. 
(Ord. 4-14-03) 
1341.02 - EXCEPTIONS TO MINIMUM LOT AREAS, LOT WIDTHS AND YARDS. 
A.  Corner lots. A setback area equal to the minimum front yard setback shall be provided along all portions of a corner lot abutting any public street, except where the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the planning director that the provisions of a smaller setback of a different yard for a residential building will conform with the clearly prevailing yard pattern on numerous existing developed adjoining lots fronting on the same street. The yard directly opposite the front door of the house shall be the designated rear yard. 
B.  Projections into required yards. 
1.  Cornices, eaves, sills or other similar architectural features, or other required means of egress, rain leads or chimneys or other similar structures that do not include space usable by persons may extend or project into a required yard not more than four feet. Unenclosed exterior stairways and fire escapes may extend or project into a required side or rear yard not more than four feet. 
2.  No front porch or deck shall extend into the required front yard unless development patterns within the block are such that a porch would be appropriate. In no case, shall a front porch extend more than eight feet into the required front yard. 
C.  Front yard setback exception. The front yard setback will conform to the clearly prevailing setback pattern of developed lots within the block fronting the same street. When an unimproved lot is situated between two lots with existing principal buildings that each have front yard setbacks less than the setback required in that district, then the front yard setback may be reduced to a depth equal to the average of the two adjacent lots, provided that in no case shall a front yard be reduced by more than 50 percent of the required front yard for that district. 
D.  Side and rear yard exceptions. One-half of an alley abutting a side or rear yard may be included in required setback. The required side yard may be reduced where the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the planning director that the provision of a smaller side yard setback will conform to the prevailing side yard pattern of the developed lots fronting the same street. In no event shall the required side yard be reduced to less than three feet. 
1341.03 - VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS. 
A.  Intent. To ensure that traffic passing through an intersection or turning onto a street can safely see on coming traffic. 
B.  A triangular area as described in this section shall be graded and shall be kept free of sight obstructions between a height of three feet and 12 feet above the established street grade, including structures, non-transparent fences, vegetation and signs, but not including sign posts of less than one foot in width or utility posts or the trunks of trees. 
C.  This sight distance shall be shown on development plans submitted to the city and be shown on any plan required to be recorded. Such triangle shall serve as a permanent setback line for all such visual obstructions and shall be binding upon present and future owners of the land. 
D.  The sight triangle shall be measured at the intersection of the right-of-way lines, and the triangular space is determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured 15 feet along each of the street right-of-way lines. This requirement may be reduced to eight feet in commercial zones. 
1341.04 - LOTS. 
A.  Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot with frontage upon a street. In no case shall there be more than one principal building used for residential purposes, and its accessory building, located on one lot, except as provided in this ordinance. 
B.  Use of existing lots deficient in area or width. A single-family dwelling may be located on any lot in any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted if the lot was a single parcel in a single ownership or a single parcel separately described or included in a deed which was or record in the office of the clerk of either Cabell or Wayne County, West Virginia, at the time of the passage of this ordinance, even though the lot does not have the minimum lot area specified for the district. Persons applying for a permit to develop a deficient lot must provide documentation as required by the planning director to prove such lot was in existence prior to the enactment of the city's zoning ordinance. 
1341.05 - PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES IN ALL DISTRICTS. 
    An accessory use of a dwelling is only permitted if such use is customarily incidental to the residential use. The following are permitted by-right as accessory uses to a lawful principal use in all districts, within the requirements of this article. 
A.  Antennas, standard as defined, and antennae for emergency service. 
B.  Day care center as an accessory use, within the limits on number of children in section 1341.13. 
C.  Fence or wall. (See section 1341.19) 
D.  Garage sale. (See section 1341.21) 
E.  Indoor storage that is customarily accessory to a permitted use. 
F.  Recreation facilities, non-commercial, limited to use by employees of a lot or a development, or residents of a development and their occasional invited guests. 
G.  Satellite antennae. (See section 1341.24) 
H.  Signs as permitted by article 1345. 
I.  Swimming pool, household. (See section 1341.16) 
J.  Home occupation. (See section 1341.22) 
K.  Outdoor lighting designed so as not to cause undue glare upon adjoining premises. Area lighting shall be shielded and directed upon owner's property. 
L.  Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the planning director is clearly customary and incidental to a permitted by-right, special exception or conditional principal use. 
M.  Accessory private garage and carport. (See section 1341.46) 
(Ord. 4-9-01) 
1341.06 - PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES TO BUSINESS AND INSTITUTIONAL USES. 
    The following are permitted by-right accessory uses only to a lawful principal business or institutional use, provided that all requirements of this ordinance are met. 
A.  Amusement machines, coin or token operated as accessory uses. 
B.  Food, beverage and toy machines, coin operated. 
C.  Newspaper sales machines, coin operated. 
D.  The following accessory uses, provided that the use is clearly limited to employees, patients, residents, and families of employees of the use and their occasional invited guests: 
1.  Standard or fast-food restaurant without drive-thru service. 
2.  Day care center. 
3.  Non-commercial recreation facilities. 
4.  Meeting facilities. 
1341.07 - TEMPORARY USES. 
A.  A temporary permit may be issued by the planning director for any of the following: 
1.  Any temporary use that meets the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
2.  Customary, routine and accessory short-term special events, provided that: 
a.  Only a well-established non-profit organization or lawful place of worship proposing a temporary use to clearly primarily serve a charitable, public service or religious purpose shall be eligible to receive approval of a commercial use in a district where that use is not permitted; and 
b.  The planning director shall establish a reasonable limit on the duration of the use. 
3.  Temporary construction-related trailers. 
4.  The temporary erection of a tent or similar temporary structure that is not totally enclosed for a maximum of 14 days in any four-month period for clearly routine customarily accessory uses such as the following: a wedding in the rear yard of a dwelling, a festival of a place of worship or a special sale within the lot of a lawful commercial use. The seasonal sale of plants, produce, and other lawn and garden supplies is permitted within any commercial or industrial zone. 
B.  Removal. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a temporary use or structure, the planning director may require an applicant to present a statement from the owner of record of the land recognizing the application and accepting responsibility to ensure that the use or structure is removed once the permit expires. Any temporary structure or use shall be removed completely upon expiration of the permit without cost to the city. If the structure or use is not removed in a timely fashion after proper notification, the city may remove the use or structure at the cost of the person who owns the land upon which the structure or use is located. 
1341.08 - DRIVE-THRU RESTAURANT. 
A.  If drive-thru service is provided, a maximum of two outdoor menu boards are permitted, beyond the signs normally permitted, with a maximum sign area of 40 square feet each. The words on such signs shall not be readable from a street or residential lot line. 
B.  Traffic circulation onto, within and off of the lot shall be clearly marked. Any drive-thru use shall be designed: 
1.  With adequate capacity for waiting vehicles, and 
2.  To avoid conflicts with traffic onto, around and off of the site. 
1341.09 - ADULT DAY CARE. 
A.  Shall be fully licensed by the state, if required by the state. 
B.  Shall include constant supervision during all hours of operation. 
1341.10 - CAR WASH. 
A.  Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets. 
B.  On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be clearly marked. 
C.  Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and convenient disposal of refuse. For a truck wash, the applicant shall provide evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or waterways. 
D.  Water from the operation shall not flow onto sidewalks or streets, to prevent hazards from ice. 
E.  Any chemicals that may be hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored within an area that will completely contain any leaks or spills. 
1341.11 - AUTO SERVICE STATION. 
A.  All storage areas, pits, lifts and working areas shall be within a building. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be performed in an enclosed building, and no dismantled parts shall be placed outside. 
B.  All gasoline pumps, air pumps and islands upon which pumps are normally located shall be set back from the street line at least 15 feet and at least 50 feet from other property lines. Layout of all pumps shall conform to the requirements of the Building Code. 
C.  No junked motor vehicle or part thereof or no unregistered motor vehicle shall be permitted outside an enclosed service station, except that not more than six motor vehicles may be located outside a building for a period not to exceed five days for each vehicle, provided that the owners are awaiting the repair of the motor vehicle. 
D.  The exterior display and parking of equipment or vehicles for rent or sale shall be permitted, provided that the area devoted to this purpose is in addition to the minimum lot size required for a service station, the area devoted to this purpose does not exceed 20% percent of the total area of the entire site, the maximum sign area for a service station is not exceeded and the location of the equipment or vehicles being rented or sold does not interfere with the required off-street parking requirements for the service station and does not interfere with the on-lot traffic circulation indicated on the approved land development plan. 
1341.12 - COMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR ANTENNAE, COMMERCIAL. 
A.  The following requirements apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities regardless of the zoning district in which they are to be located. These general standards are to be supplemented with the specific regulations for nonresidential and residential districts as set forth in the sections which follow: 
1.  When the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is to include a new tower, a plot plan at a scale of not less than one inch is equal to 100 feet shall be submitted. This plot plan shall indicate all building uses within 300 feet of the proposed facility. Aerial photos and/or renderings may augment the plot plan. 
2.  The location of the tower and equipment shelter shall comply with all natural resource protection standards established in the zoning code, including those for floodplain, wetlands and steep slopes. 
3.  Security fencing eight feet in height shall surround the tower, equipment shelter and any guy wires, either completely or individually as determined by the planning commission. 
4.  Buffer plantings may be located around the perimeter of the security fence as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
5.  Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
6.  Any applicant requesting permission to install a new tower shall provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers who supply service within a quarter mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall inquire about potential co-location opportunities at all technically feasible locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to the inquiry within 30 days. The applicant's letter(s) as well as response(s) shall be presented to the Planning Director as a means of demonstrating the need for a new tower. 
7.  Any application to locate an antenna on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register, or is in an historic district shall be subject to review by the Huntington Historic Preservation Commission. 
8.  The tower shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or similar color minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
9.  No advertising is permitted anywhere on the facility, with the exception of identification signage. 
10.  All providers utilizing towers shall present a report to the planning director notifying him or her of any tower facility located in the municipality whose use will be discontinued and the date this use will cease. If at any time the use of the facility is discontinued for 180 days, the planning director may declare the facility abandoned. (This excludes any dormancy period between construction and the initial use of the facility.) The facility's owner/operator will receive written notice from the planning director and instructed to either reactivate the facility's use within 180 days, or dismantle and remove the facility. If reactivation or dismantling does not occur, the city may remove or contract to have removed the facility and assess the owner/operator the costs. 
11.  No tower under 150 feet shall be artificially lighted except to assure safety or as required by the FAA. Any tower between 150 and 200 feet in height shall follow safety marking and obstruction lighting as prescribed by the FAA. Security lighting around the equipment shelter is permitted. 
12.  "No Trespassing" signs shall be posted around the facility with a telephone number of who to contact in the event of an emergency. 
13.  Applicants will provide evidence of legal access to the tower site thereby maintaining this access regardless of other developments that may take place on the site. 
14.  A special permit must be approved by the planning commission with a subsequent building permit issued by the city for construction of new towers in nonindustrial districts. Co-location of antennas on a single tower, antennas attached to existing structures/buildings, towers located in industrial districts, or replacement towers to be constructed at the site of a current tower are permitted uses and will not be subject to the special permit permitting process. 
15.  Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a wireless telecommunications antenna and/or tower shall be in writing and supported by evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of the planning commission. 
16.  Underground equipment shelters are encouraged, especially in nonindustrial districts, and may be requested by the planning commission. 
B.  Nonresidential districts. Wireless telecommunications facilities proposed for industrial and commercial districts are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Sole use on a lot. A wireless telecommunications facility is permitted as a sole use on a lot subject to the following: 
a)  Minimum lot size: Requirements of district. 
b)  Minimum yard requirements: 
Tower: The minimum distance to any residential use or district lot line shall be 300 feet. 
Equipment shelter: See requirements for district for accessory use. 
c)  Maximum height: 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna). 
Equipment shelter: See requirements for district for accessory use. 
d)  Maximum size of equipment shelter: 
300 square feet for a single shelter, or, if there is more than one, 750 total square feet. 
2.  Combined with another use. A wireless telecommunications facility is permitted on a property with an existing use subject to the following conditions: 
a)  The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the district or any lawful nonconforming use, and need not be affiliated with the wireless telecommunications provider. The wireless telecommunications facility will not be considered an addition to the structure or value of a nonconforming use. 
b)  The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance (except during construction or an emergency). 
c)  Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be the area needed to accommodate the tower (and guy wires, if used), the equipment shelter, security fencing and buffer planting. 
d)  Minimum yard requirements: 
Tower: The minimum distance to any residential use or district lot line shall be 300 feet. 
Equipment shelter: Shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the primary lot. 
e)  Access: The service access to the equipment shelter shall, whenever feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use. 
f)  Maximum height: 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna). 
Equipment shelter: See requirements for district for accessory use. 
g)  Maximum size of equipment shelter: 
300 square feet for a single shelter, or, if there is more than one, 750 square feet. 
3.  Combined with an existing structure. Where possible an antenna for a wireless telecommunications facility shall be attached to an existing structure or building subject to the following conditions: 
a)  Maximum height: 20 feet or 20% of the building height above the existing building or structure, whichever is greater. 
b)  If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in a separate shelter (not located on, or attached to, the building), the shelter shall comply with the following: 
1)  The minimum setback requirements for the subject zoning district. 
2)  A buffer yard may be planted in accordance with section 1341.12.D. 
3)  Vehicular access to the shelter shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the principle use. 
4)  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 750 total square feet. 
C.  Residential districts. Wireless telecommunications facilities that include towers are not permitted in residential districts with the exception of placement on any property with an institutional use (e.g., church, park, library, municipal/government, hospital, school, utility) located in a residential district. However, antennas attached to existing buildings or structures are permitted. In applying for a permit in any residential district, the applicant must present substantial evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate in a more appropriate nonresidential zone. Once those efforts have been exhausted, a wireless telecommunications facility may be located in a residential district subject to the following conditions: 
1.  General. The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance. This shall apply to B., C., D. and E. below. 
2.  Combined with a nonresidential use. An antenna may be attached to a nonresidential building or a structure that is a permitted use in the district; including, but not limited to, a church, a municipal or governmental building or facility, agricultural building, and a building or structure owned by a utility. The following conditions shall be met: 
a)  Maximum height, 20 feet above the existing building or structure. 
b)  If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in a separate shelter, the shelter shall comply with the following: 
1)  The shelter shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the subject zoning district. 
2)  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 750 total square feet. 
3)  A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance with section 1341.12.D. 
4)  Vehicular access to the shelter shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the principal use. 
3.  Located on a nonresidential-use property. A tower to support an antenna may be constructed on a property with a nonresidential use that is a permitted use within the district, including but not limited to a church, hospital, school, municipal or government building, facility or structure, and a utility use, subject to the following conditions: 
a)  The tower shall be set back from any property line abutting a single-family or two-family residential lot by 300 feet. 
b)  Maximum height: 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna). 
Equipment shelter: See requirements for district for an accessory building. 
c)  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 750 total square feet. 
d)  Vehicular access to the tower and equipment shelter shall, whenever feasible be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use. 
e)  In order to locate a telecommunications facility on a property that is vacant or with an agricultural use the tract shall be at least 2.5 acres. 
4.  Located on a residential building. An antenna for a wireless telecommunications facility may be attached to an apartment building exceeding four stories subject to the following conditions: 
a)  Maximum height: 20 feet above the existing building. 
b)  If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in a separate shelter (not located in, or attached to, the buildings), the shelter shall comply with the following: 
1)  The shelter shall comply with the maximum setback requirements for the subject zoning district. 
2)  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 750 total square feet. 
3)  A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance with section 1341.12.D. 
4)  Vehicular access to the shelter shall, if at all possible, use the existing circulation system. 
5.  Located in open space. A wireless telecommunications facility is permitted on land that has been established as permanent open space, or a park subject to the following conditions: 
a)  The open space shall be owned by the municipality, county or state government, a homeowners association, charitable organization, or a private, non-profit conservation organization. 
b)  Maximum height: 
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna). 
Equipment shelter: Maximum height for accessory building. 
c)  The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square feet, or, if there is more than one, 750 total square feet. 
d)  The tower shall be set back from any single-family or two-family property line 300 feet. 
D.  Criteria for a special permit: Wireless telecommunications facility. A wireless telecommunications facility which includes a tower may be permitted as a special permit in a commercial district or located on an institutionally-used property in any residential district. In order to be considered for review, the applicant must prove that a newly-constructed tower is necessary in that opportunities for co-location on an existing tower is not feasible. The following steps must also be taken for the application to be considered for review in this category: 
1.  The applicant shall present a landscaping plan that indicates how the wireless telecommunications facility will be screened from adjoining uses. 
2.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the telecommunications tower must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area. There shall be an explanation of why a tower and this proposed site is technically necessary. 
3.  Where the telecommunications facility is located on a property with another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property has granted an easement or entered into a lease for the proposed facility and that the vehicular access is provided to the facility. 
4.  Any applicant requesting permission to install a new tower shall provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers who supply service within a quarter mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall inquire about potential co-location opportunities at all technically feasible locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to the inquiry within 30 days. The applicant's letter(s) as well as response(s) shall be presented to the Planning Director as a means of demonstrating the need for a new tower. 
1341.13 - DAY CARE CENTER AS ACCESSORY USE TO A RESIDENTIAL USE. 
A.  A maximum of six children under age 15 may be cared for in any dwelling unit, in addition to children who are not residents of the dwelling. 
B.  The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use, other than cosmetic and any needed safety improvements. 
C.  Any day care center involving seven or more children shall be considered a principal use and meet the standards of section 1341.25 for such use, if permitted. 
D.  The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of the dwelling. 
E.  If over two children are kept, a minimum of 200 square feet of safe exterior play area shall be available, which shall be fenced. 
1341.14 - RELIGIOUS USE. 
A.  A primary or secondary school and/or a child or adult day care center are permitted on the same lot as a religious use provided that the requirements for such uses are also met. 
B.  One dwelling unit for a religious leader of the place of worship and their family may be accessory to a religious use on the same lot. 
1341.15 - SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT. 
A.  Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats and trailers. No "junk vehicles" shall be stored. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened in compliance with article 1347. 
B.  Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse, explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances, animal carcasses or skins, or similar items shall not be stored. 
C.  The interior traffic aisles, required off-street parking areas, loading areas and access ways shall be paved with a hard surface and shall be kept clear of stored items. 
D.  Maximum building length - 250 feet. 
E.  Minimum separation between buildings - 20 feet. 
1341.16 - SWIMMING POOL-HOUSEHOLD. 
A.  The swimming pool shall not involve any commercial use. 
B.  Enclosure around in-ground pools shall meet the requirements of the Building Code. 
C.  Enclosure around above ground pool. Any existing or new above ground pool shall include a secure fence, wall, or other enclosure a minimum of four feet high above the surrounding ground level. Such pools shall be equipped with an access ladder that can be raised and locked in a position so that it is a minimum of four feet above the surrounding ground level or otherwise completely inaccessible to children when the pool is unattended. 
D.  Location. A pool and any deck or shelter that is elevated above the average surrounding ground levels shall meet the applicable setback requirement for an accessory building. Patios around pools that are level with the average surrounding ground level are not required to meet setbacks. A pool is not permitted within a required front yard. 
E.  Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of the water from the pool that will not overload or flood any: 1) on-lot septic system or 2) portion of a building or property not owned by the owner of the pool. A pool shall not be located so as to interfere with the operation of a well or on-lot septic system. 
1341.17 - SWIMMING POOL, NON-HOUSEHOLD. 
A.  The water surface shall be setback at least 25 feet from any lot line. 
B.  Minimum lot area - two acres. 
C.  Any water surface within 100 feet of an existing dwelling shall be separated from the dwelling by evergreen screening in agreement with article 1347. 
D.  The water surface shall be surrounded by a secure, well-maintained fence at least six feet in height. 
E.  Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of the water from the pool that will not overload or flood any: 1) on-lot septic system or 2) portion of a building or property not owned by the owner of the pool. A pool shall not be located so as to interfere with the operation of a well or on-lot septic system. 
1341.18 - COMPOSTING-AS A PRINCIPAL OR ACCESSORY USE. 
A.  On a lot of less than five acres, composting shall be limited to the composting of biodegradable vegetative material, including grass clippings, trees, shrubs, leaves and vegetable waste, and shall not include animal wastes or fats. 
B.  Composting shall only be conducted in ways that fire, rodent or disease-carrying insect hazards or noxious odors are not created. 
C.  Composting of manure shall be setback a minimum of 150 feet from any dwelling on an adjacent lot, and be located and graded to prevent manure from being washed into a creek or lake by storm water. 
D.  Compost shall be kept free of other garbage. 
1341.19 - FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENS. 
A.  Fences and walls are permitted by-right in all districts. Any fence or wall shall be durably constructed and well-maintained. Privacy fences shall be constructed so that the finished side of the fence faces toward abutting properties or rights-of-way unless the fence is not visible from the adjoining property. Fences that have deteriorated shall be replaced or removed. 
B.  Sight distance, storm water and easements. No fence, wall or hedge shall obstruct the sight distance requirements of section 1341.03. No fence or wall shall obstruct the flow of storm water, except as part of a city-approved stormwater system. 
C.  Fences. 
1.  Front yard. Any fence located in the required front yard of a lot in a residential district shall have a minimum ratio of 1:1 of open to structural areas (such as a picket fence or split rail fence) and shall not exceed four feet in height. For the purposes of this section, on a corner lot each street frontage shall be considered a front yard. 
2.  A fence shall not be required to comply with minimum setbacks for accessory structures. 
3.  Height. A fence in a residential district that is not within a required front yard shall have a maximum height of seven feet, except a maximum height of ten feet is permitted to enclose a tennis or racquet sport court or a non-household swimming pool or an electric substation provided that such fence is setback a minimum of ten feet from all lot lines. A fence in a commercial district that is not within a required front yard shall have a maximum height of eight feet. A fence in a industrial district that is not within the required front yard shall have a maximum height of ten feet. 
4.  Setbacks. A fence may be constructed on a lot line, except: a) a fence shall not be placed within a street right-of-way and b) a fence of a business shall be setback a minimum of five feet from the abutting lot line of an existing dwelling or an undeveloped residentially zoned lot. Homeowners are encouraged but not required to setback fences at least two feet from an abutting lot line in order to allow for maintenance over the long-term, however, no fence shall be located closer than three feet from an adjoining residence. 
5.  Fence materials. A fence shall not be constructed out of fabric, junk, junk vehicles, appliances, tanks or barrels. Electric fences are prohibited in all zones. Barbed or razor fences are prohibited in all zones except industrial. 
D.  Walls. 
1.  Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes are exempted from setback regulations and the regulations of this section, and are permitted by-right as needed in all districts. 
2.  In a residential district, a freestanding wall (other than a necessary retaining wall) shall have: 
a.  A maximum height no greater than four feet within a required front yard or is within ten feet of a lot line other than a required front yard; and 
b.  Seven feet in other locations. 
1341.20 - RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER. 
A.  All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with appropriate sanitary measures and frequent enough emptying to prevent the attraction of insects or rodents and to avoid fire hazards. 
B.  Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks if needed and for off-street parking. 
C.  A 15 feet buffer yard with screening as described in article 1347 shall be provided between this use and any abutting "residential lot line." 
D.  This use may be a principal or accessory use, including being an accessory use to a commercial use, an industrial use, a public or private primary or secondary school, a place of worship or a city-owned use, subject to the limitations of this section. On residential properties, only recyclables produced by the resident family may be collected and stored. 
E.  Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the following materials: paper, fabric, cardboard, plastic, metal, aluminum and glass. No garbage shall be stored as part of the use, except for garbage generated on-site or garbage accidentally collected with the recyclables. Only materials clearly being actively collected for recycling may be stored on site. 
F.  The use shall only include the following operations: collection, sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning and closely similar work. Unless located in an industrial zone, no burning or melting or mechanical shredding of metal or land filling shall occur. No mechanical operations shall routinely occur at the site other than operations such as baling of cardboard and shredding of newspaper. 
G.  The use shall not include the collection or processing of pieces of metal that have a weight greater than 50 pounds, except within an industrial district. 
H.  The use shall include the storage of a maximum of 50 tons of materials on the site if the use is within a residential district and within 500 feet of an existing dwelling. 
1341.21 - GARAGE SALE (SEE DEFINITION IN ARTICLE 1315). 
A.  A garage sale shall not include sale of new merchandise (other than custom crafts). 
B.  Garage sales shall be limited to a maximum of two total days in any one month period. 
1341.22 - HOME OCCUPATION. 
A.  A home occupation shall be conducted completely indoors, and may be within a principal or accessory building. The total amount of floor area of all buildings used for a home occupation shall not be greater than 25 percent of the total floor area of the principal dwelling unit. 
B.  There shall be no outdoor operations or outdoor storage of materials, products or equipment. 
C.  Signs and displays. There shall be no use of show windows, business display or advertising visible from outside the premises, except for one non-illuminated sign with a maximum sign area of two square feet on each of two sides and a maximum height of six feet. 
D.  Truck traffic. The use shall not require the parking of, storage of or regular servicing by a vehicle with an aggregate gross vehicle weight of more than 12,000 pounds, except for one vehicle used by a resident whose primary occupation is as an over-the-road driver of such vehicle. Such vehicle shall be parked off-street beyond the front of the house. While parked on the residential lot, such vehicle shall not generate noise beyond normal neighborhood levels. 
E.  Uses permitted as a home occupation include, but are not limited to: art studio, home craft businesses (including home craft brewery production (nanobrewery) in accordance with section 1341.50), dressmaking, furniture making, office, custom sewing, clerical work, sales or survey over the telephone, tax preparation, musical instruction, tutoring of students, personal service businesses, trade businesses provided there is no on-site assembling, manufacturing, processing, or retail sales, repair service, day care in accordance with section 1341.13, or one chair beauty or barber shop with no products sold from the premise. 
F.  The following uses shall not be permitted as a home occupation: veterinarian office, stable, kennel, funeral home, industrial uses (other than custom crafts and sewing), wholesale or retail sales on the premises (except as accessory to custom crafts and except for sales over the phone, through the mail, or online), restaurant, repairs of motor vehicles or trucking company terminal, manufacturing, or repair of machinery, automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles. 
G.  Nuisances. No machinery or equipment shall be permitted that produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare, electrical interference or radio or electromagnetic interference beyond the boundary of the property. Only general types and sizes of machinery that are typically found in dwellings for hobby, domestic or sewing purposes shall be permitted. No use shall generate noise or glare in excess of what is typical in a residential neighborhood. 
H.  Parking and loading. The lot shall include sufficient parking for the maximum number of vehicles on-site at one time, plus parking for the dwelling unit. A defined driveway shall be provided, and shall be shown on the site plan. The applicant shall prove that such driveway provides for safe sight distance. 
I.  Building appearance. The exterior of the residential building and the lot shall not be changed in such a way as to decrease its residential appearance, except for permitted parking spaces and the permitted sign. 
J.  Hours. A home occupation shall not be conducted in a way that is perceptible from beyond the lot line between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This time limit shall also apply to any loading or unloading of vehicles on the property or on a street that causes noise to adjoining residents. 
K.  Hazardous substances. The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous, flammable or explosive substances, other than types and amounts commonly found in a dwelling. 
L.  Advertising. The address of the home occupation shall not be advertised in such a way that would encourage customers or salespersons to come to the property without an appointment. 
M.  Number of employees. No employees who are not permanent residents of the dwelling may work on the premise, except for businesses that involve field or on-site service, including salesmen, plumbers, cleaners, home repair, online services and other similar service activities. Such home occupations may employ up to four persons, provided that the home occupation may have one full time equivalent employee work at the home office. For the purposes of the home occupation full-time equivalent may include up to four employees provided that no more than one employee works on-site at any given time. A home occupation may apply for a special permit to have more than one employee at the home office provided it is found that based on physical characteristics of the lot the additional employees would not detract from the residential character. 
N.  Instruction. Any instruction or tutoring shall be limited to a maximum of four students on the property at any one time. 
O.  A permit from the planner or designee shall be required for any home occupation. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(4) ) 
1341.23 - FACTORY BUILT HOUSING. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential zone by permitting the use of new modular and manufactured homes as defined in article 1315, meeting the definition of single-family residences as defined in article 1315, in all zones in which similar dwellings constructed on the site are permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein to assure similarity in exterior appearance between such residentially designed modular and manufactured homes and dwellings which have been constructed under these and other lawful ordinances on adjacent lots in the same district, zoning classification or general area. 
    Modular and manufactured homes, as defined in article 1315, shall be permitted in all zones subject to the requirements and limitations set forth in this Ordinance which are applicable to modular and manufactured homes and the requirements and limitations applying generally to residential use is such zoning classifications or districts, including minimum lots, yard and building spacing, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking requirements, square footage requirements and approved foundations as describe herein. 
A.  Modular and manufactured homes qualifying as a single-family residence shall be compared to site built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the modular or manufactured home is substantially similar in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to (a) site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this ordinance or (b) existing development or (c) proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
B.  The home must measure in width and length at least 22 feet for the main body. 
C.  The modular or manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation in accordance with Appendix C of the CABO 1 and 2 Family Building Code and shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturers's installation instruction and in compliance with the rules and regulations of the West Virginia Manufactured housing Construction and Safety Board established by W. Va. Code, § 21-9 and regulations approved thereunder. All modular and manufactured homes are required to have a perimeter facia enclosure constructed of compatible masonry material that encloses the perimeter of the home. 
D.  All tow bars, wheels, and axles shall be removed when the dwelling is installed on the residential lot, as a permanent structure not suited to relocation. 
E.  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance but use of flat or corrugated sheet metal for the exterior walls or roof coverings is prohibited. 
F.  The roof shall have a minimum 2:12 roof composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other building materials approved by the building official. A roof overhang and rain gutters are required and must not be less than six inches including the rain gutters which may account for up to four inches of overhang, measured from the vertical side of the dwelling. The roof overhang requirements shall not apply to the area above porches, alcoves or other appendages which together do not exceed 25% of the length of the dwelling. 
G.  The code official may approve deviations from one or more of the developmental or architectural standards provided herein on the basis of finding that the materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. 
H.  Mobile homes, as defined in article 1315 shall be prohibited outside of mobile home parks as set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
I.  Use of mobile homes, manufactured homes, or modular homes for any purpose other than for residential use is hereby expressly prohibited. 
J.  Applications for approval of placement of manufactured homes and modular Homes shall be made on a form or forms developed for that purpose and shall be submitted to the City of Huntington Department of Development and Planning for review and approval in accordance with this ordinance. 
Such applications shall include all information necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this ordinance as applicable to each such structure and, as applicable, conformity with the standards herein, including photographs or renderings of the front and side of the modular and manufactured home, the exterior finish, and other information necessary to make determination required by this ordinance. 
Approval or denial of the application shall be within ten working days of receipt of the application and all required supporting materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application within five working days after such decision is made. Conditional approval shall require that the conditions and reasons therefore be stated in writing and be agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant. In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing. 
K.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of a code official or other officer; department board or bureau charged with the conditional approval or denial of the placement of modular homes or manufactured homes, may appeal such decision to the City of Huntington Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter and the appropriate ordinance governing such appeals. 
1341.24 - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. 
A.  No more than one satellite dish shall be allowed on any lot. 
B.  The construction and installation of satellite dish antennas shall conform to all applicable building codes and other regulations and requirements. 
C.  Subject to the provisions contained herein, satellite dish antennas in excess of 18 inches shall be located only in the rear yard of any lot. If a useable satellite signal cannot be obtained from such rear yard, the antenna may be located on the side or front of the property if a landscaped evergreen planting screen is provided for any ground mounted satellite dish antenna to screen it from the view of adjacent lots and public view. In the event that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained by locating the antenna on the rear, side, or front yard of the structure, such antenna may be placed on the roof of the dwelling structure. 
D.  Satellite dish antennas shall not be mounted on chimneys, towers, spires, or trees. 
E.  A ground-mounted satellite dish shall not exceed a grade height of 12 feet. 
1341.25 - CHILD CARE CENTER. 
A.  The use shall comply with any applicable county, state, and federal regulations including registration certificate or license. 
B.  Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of article 1343 shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for children. 
C.  The use shall have a lot area of at least 8,000 square feet. 
D.  The use shall include adequate measures to ensure the safety of children from traffic or other nearby hazards. This shall include a secure fence around outdoor areas routinely used for outdoor play to separate the areas from abutting streets or other nuisances or hazards on adjoining lots. 
E.  Outside play areas of a day care center involving the care of 25 or more children at any one time shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the lot line of an abutting dwelling. 
F.  In residential districts, any permitted day care center shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. 
G.  A day care center may occur in a building that also includes permitted or non-conforming dwelling units. 
1341.26 - NURSING HOMES. 
A.  Must be licensed by appropriate state department. 
1341.27 - NURSING HOME CONVERSIONS. 
A.  Minimum lot area - 7,500 square feet, but not less than 750 square feet per person cared for. 
B.  Minimum gross floor area of principal building(s) - over 1,000. 
1341.28 - HELIPORT. 
A.  Minimum lot area - one acre. 
B.  Fence - six-foot wire mesh when located at ground level. 
C.  Screen planning where abutting a residential use - see section 1347.05. 
D.  Distance of parking area from residential use - 25 feet. 
1341.29 - CEMETERY. 
A.  Minimum lot area - 20 acres. 
B.  Minimum yards: 
1)  Front - the requirements of the district shall apply. 
2)  Side - 50 feet each. 
3)  Rear - 50 feet. 
C.  Buffering requirements of section 1347.05 shall apply. 
D.  Covenant by owners to perpetuate maintenance and approve future improvements. 
1341.30 - JUNK YARD (INCLUDES AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD). 
A.  Storage of garbage of biodegradable materials is prohibited, other than what is customarily generated on-site and routinely awaiting pick-up. 
B.  Outside storage of junk shall be at least: 1) 100 feet from any residential lot line and 2) 50 feet from any other lot line and the existing right-of-way of any public street. Buffering requirements of article 1347 shall apply. 
C.  The site shall contain a minimum of two exterior points of access, each of which is not less than 20 feet in width. One of these accesses may be limited to emergency vehicles. 
D.  Industrial parking standards shall apply. Customer parking shall be one space per 10,000 square feet of storage area. 
E.  Secure fencing with a minimum height of eight feet shall be provided and well-maintained around all outdoor storage areas. The fencing shall be provided inside of the evergreen screening. 
F.  Burning or incineration of vehicles or junk is prohibited. 
G.  All gasoline and oil shall be drained from all vehicles and properly disposed of. All batteries shall be removed from vehicles and properly stored in a suitable area on an impervious, properly drained surface. 
H.  Minimum Lot Area - three acres; maximum lot area - 20 acres. 
1341.31 - MINERAL EXTRACTION, BORROW PIT, TOP SOIL REMOVAL, AND THEIR STORAGE AREAS. 
A.  Minimum front, side, and rear yards of 150 feet minimum. 
B.  Maximum number of principal entrances from major thoroughfare - one. 
C.  Buffering requirements, per article 1347. A six feet wire mesh fence is required when use abuts a residential district. 
1341.32 - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. 
A.  Minimum lot area - two acres, including 2,500 square feet per mobile home stand. 
B.  Minimum yards - not less than ten-foot buffer area in compliance with article 1347 surrounding development. 
C.  Building setback from center line of interior road - 50 feet. 
D.  Written statement from Huntington Sanitary Board or Cabell-Huntington Health Department certifying the adequacy of sanitary sewer facilities. 
E.  Parking spaces - one per two employees plus one per mobile home stand, which may be part of the square footage required for each mobile home stand. All parking areas shall be hard surfaced. 
1341.33 - OIL AND GAS EXTRACTION. 
A.  No well may be located closer than 200 feet of any residential use. 
B.  All oil and gas exploration shall be subject to the Oil and Gas Laws, Chapter 22, Article 4, Official Code of West Virginia and the regulations of the West Virginia Department of Mines. 
1341.34 - OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL ENTERPRISE, INCLUDES GOLF AND COUNTRY CLUBS. 
A.  Minimum yards - 0 feet, each yard. 
B.  Building setback from center line of interior road - 40 feet. 
C.  Fence - five foot wire mesh where accessible to public, in addition to requirements of article 1347. 
D.  Distance of loading and unloading berths from residential use - 300 feet. 
1341.35 - PRIVATE RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. 
A.  Minimum yards. 
If abutting residential zone: 
Front yard-Requirements of district. 
Side and rear-40. 
If abutting a commercial or industrial zone: Requirements of district. 
B.  Buffering requirements of article 1347 shall apply. 
C.  Parking spaces - one space per two customers or members. 
1341.36 - PUBLIC CAMP. 
A.  Minimum lot area - five acres. 
B.  Minimum yards - Requirements of district. 
C.  Buffering requirements of article 1347 shall apply. 
D.  Parking spaces - one per campsite and one per cabin. 
E.  Distance of parking area from residential use - 25 feet. 
1341.37 - PUBLIC SANITARY FILL. 
A.  Must have approval of the Solid Waste Division of the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection. 
1341.38 - STADIUM OR COLISEUM. 
A.  Minimum lot area - five acres. 
B.  Minimum yards: 
Front-Requirements of district apply. 
Side and rear-50 feet. 
C.  Distance of parking area from residential use - 25 feet. 
D.  Distance of loading and unloading berths from residential use - 50 feet. 
1341.39 - PENAL OR CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION. 
A.  Minimum lot area - 80 acres. 
B.  Minimum yards - 100 feet, each. 
C.  Distance from residential use - 300 feet. 
D.  Parking spaces - one per three employees plus one per ten inmates at estimated capacity. 
E.  Distance of parking from residential use - 200 feet. 
F.  Distance of loading and unloading berth from residential use - 300 feet. 
1341.40 - ADULT USES. 
A.  Legislative intent. It is the intent and purpose of this section to regulate the time, place, and manner in which adult entertainment is presented in adult businesses to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Huntington, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of adult businesses within the city and not to prohibit adult entertainment or to curtail constitutionally protected freedom of expression. 
B.  Findings of fact. 
1)  There is considerable local and national concern with many of the effects of adult uses, including their detrimental influence on children and increased criminal activity associated with these uses, including prostitution, narcotics, and liquor law violations, violent crimes against persons, and property crimes. 
2)  Adult businesses are frequently used for unlawful and unhealthful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. 
3)  The concern over sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, is a legitimate health concern of the city which demands reasonable regulation of adult businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the citizens. 
4)  Adult businesses have a deleterious effect on both neighboring businesses and surrounding residential areas causing an increase in crime and a decrease in property values. 
5)  It is recognized that adult businesses have serious objectionable characteristics, particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and downgrading the qualify of life in the adjacent area. 
C.  Location of adult business. 
1)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult business in any location except as provided in this zoning ordinance. 
2)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult business within 1,000 feet of another such business or within 500 feet of any religious institution, child care center, school or public park within the city or within 500 feet of any property designated for residential use. 
D.  Measurement of distance. The distance between any two adult businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any adult business and any religious institution, child care center, school or public park or any property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult business to the closest property line of the religious institution, child care center, school or public park or the property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes. 
E.  An adult business lawfully operating is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a religious institution, day care center, school, public park, or the property designated for residential use; however, if the adult business ceases operation for a period of 180 days or more regardless of any intent to resume operation, it may not recommence operation in that location. 
1341.41 - TATTOO PARLORS. 
A.  Proposed location must be at least 500 feet from a residential zone. The distance between any proposed tattoo parlor and any residential district shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult business to the closest property line of the tattoo parlor. 
B.  Proposed location must be at least 1,000 feet from any other such use. 
C.  No person shall engage in or carry on the business of operating a tattoo establishment without a permit from the Cabell-Huntington Health Department. 
1341.42 - MASSAGE THERAPY. 
A.  Establishments offering massage treatments shall be governed by article 1113 of the Code of the City of Huntington. 
B.  Applicant must show evidence of educational qualifications, including originals or certified copies of degrees, diplomas, or certificates, if any. 
1341.43 - SHOPPING CENTER. 
A.  Storm water management plan shall be required. 
B.  Traffic Impact Study may be required by the director of public works. 
C.  Statement from the Huntington Sanitary Board that adequate sanitary sewer facilities are available to handle additional load caused by development. 
D.  The development shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses, and grouping of buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open spaces, planned and designed as an integrated unit in such a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient retail shopping center or related planned business development. 
1341.44 - HOSPITAL. 
A.  Minimum lot area - five acres. 
B.  Minimum yards: 
Front-100 feet. 
Side-40 feet. 
Rear-40 feet. 
C.  Maximum height - 70 feet. 
D.  Landscaped buffer where abutting residential use - 25 feet. 
E.  Parking (see section 1343.02). 
F.  Distance of parking from residential use - 25 feet. 
G.  Loading and unloading berths - (see section 1343.02). 
H.  Distance of loading/unloading berths from residential use - 50 feet. 
1341.45 - OFFICES FOR CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS IN AN R-5 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE. 
(a)  Residential conversion. 
(1)  The appearance of a single-family dwelling unit shall be maintained. For the converted structure necessary changes in the number of placement of windows to provide adequate light and air will be allowed, but shall be minimized; any changes which occur shall be of one manner and consistent with the architectural character of the dwelling. No stair cases shall be allowed in the front of the building to access upper floors. 
(2)  Except for parking in existing driveways, no parking spaces shall be located in the front yard. All newly constructed driveways and parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. Except for driveway and walkway accesses, buffering shall be placed around off-street parking areas which contain three or more spaces. Plant material or fences shall be used. Material used in screen plantings shall be multi-stemmed evergreen species and shall be at least three feet in height when planted. The plant material shall produce a visual screen of at least four feet in height within two years. Fences shall be four to six feet in height and shall provide a visual screen. 
(3)  Garbage and refuse pick-up and other utility areas shall be provided and shall be located so as not to detract from the aesthetic character of the neighborhood and shall be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing, walls, or shrubbery. Planted material or fences shall meet the standards for buffering of parking areas specified above. 
(b)  New construction. 
(1)  New construction in an R-5 Residence District should be visually compatible with neighboring structures in spacing, setback, massing, materials, roof shape, window divisions and siding emphasis. A new building not be identical with its neighbors in these respects, but attention shall be given to the immediate architectural environment of the new building. Any new building shall enhance a block's design unity and sense of character through consideration of silhouette, spacing, setbacks, proportions, volume/mass, entryway, material/surface, shadow/texture, and style/image. 
(Ord. 3-13-00) 
1341.46 - ACCESSORY PRIVATE GARAGE AND CARPORT. 
    When the required rear yard is inaccessible due to topography or other barriers, the required side yard, except the side yard adjacent to a street of a corner lot, may be occupied by an accessory garage or carport use provided that: 
(a)  Such accessory garage structure, or use shall be situated not less than five feet from any lot line. 
(b)  Such accessory carport structure (as defined in section 1315.02), or use shall be situated not less than three feet from any lot line. 
(c)  That such accessory garage or carport structure, or use shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(Ord. 4-9-01) 
1341.47 - LIMITED VIDEO LOTTERY AND KENO ESTABLISHMENTS. 
(a)  Legislative intent. It is the intent and purpose of this section to regulate the time, place, and manner in which limited video lottery and keno is presented to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Huntington, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of limited video lottery and keno within the City of Huntington and not to prohibit the limited video lottery and keno industry. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  West Virginia law requires limited video lottery establishments to either hold or apply for, and receive, a liquor license before being granting a limited video lottery license to a particular individual or business location. 
(2)  Current West Virginia law governing limited video lottery/Keno establishments does not limit the number of limited video lottery/Keno establishments that may be licensed. 
(3)  There is considerable and growing local and statewide concern with many effects of limited video lottery establishments including, but not limited to: influence upon children, and increased criminal activity associated with bars/night clubs, including liquor law violations, violent crimes against persons, and property crimes. 
(4)  There is dilatory effect on property values and neighborhoods in the vicinity of the land use and it is a legitimate concern of the city to protect the property values of those in residential districts from encroaching commercial activity. 
(c)  Location of limited video lottery and keno establishments. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a limited video lottery and/or keno establishment in any location in the City of Huntington except as provided in this zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Petitioners seeking a special permit shall identify that it is pursuing licensure for a limited video lottery and/or Keno establishment through the State of West Virginia. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to operate a limited video lottery and/or keno establishment within 600 feet of an existing establishment that already provides limited video lottery and/or keno, within 500 feet of an existing religious institution, school, child care center, or public park, and 150 feet from a residentially zoned district. 
(4)  One parking space shall be required for each video lottery machine on premises, in addition to any other parking requirements in accordance with this zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Measurement distance. The distance between any two limited video lottery and/or keno establishment shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any limited video lottery and/or keno establishment and any religious institution, school, child care center, public park, or residentially zoned properties shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the limited video lottery and/or keno establishment to the closest property line of the religious institution, school, child care center, public park, or residentially zoned property. 
(e)  A limited video lottery and/or keno establishment lawfully operating is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a religious institution, school, child care center, public park, or change in property zoning designation; however, if a licensed limited video lottery and/or Keno establishment ceases operation for a period of 180 days or more regardless of any intent to resume operation, it may not recommence operation in that location. 
(f)  An existing licensed limited video lottery and/or Keno establishment (effective date of the adoption of this amendment) is not exempt from these requirements. If the structure housing an existing limited video lottery and/or Keno establishment becomes damaged or destroyed by any cause, the structure may be replaced or reconstructed as long as action to reestablish the facility is initiated within 90 days. 
    All prior ordinances or parts of ordinances, inconsistent herewith are hereby expressly repealed. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage. 
(Ord. 2-9-04) 
1341.48 - SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED/FEE-SIMPLE TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS. 
    Approval of single-family attached/fee-simple townhouse developments require the following: 
A.  Planning commission subdivision approval for the development - or phase of the development - in accordance with the Huntington Development Ordinance. 
B.  Each platted lot must have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage on a public or private road. 
C.  "Party walls" or zero side-yard setbacks between units must comply with applicable fire and building codes. 
D.  Each townhouse unit must meet the off-street parking standards listed in section 1343.02.A.2 for non single-family dwelling units. 
E.  Any development amenities (i.e. swimming pools, tennis courts) must also meet the off-street parking requirements as listed in section 1343.02. 
(Ord. of 1-24-11(4)) 
1341.49 - SELF-STORAGE, INDOORS. 
A.  Outdoor storage at the site is prohibited. 
B.  In cases where there is a proposed re-use of an existing building, the board of zoning appeals may require architectural features such as window treatments, etc. to protect the character of the building. 
(Ord. of 6-25-12(5)) 
1341.50 - NANOBREWERY AS ACCESSORY USE TO A RESIDENTIAL USE. 
A.  The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use, other than cosmetic and any needed health and safety improvements as required by the health department. 
B.  All state and county requirements are to be met. 
C.  The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of the dwelling. 
D.  Outdoor storage at the site is prohibited. 
E.  No retail sales or on premise consumption is permitted at the home. 
F.  Residential nanobreweries are only permitted to produce 1,000 gallons per year (32 barrels) on site by right and up to 15,750 gallons (500 barrels) with a special permit. 
G.  No adverse effect on neighboring properties may be caused by the scale of the home craft production facility. 
( Ord. of 9-28-15(4) ) 
1341.51 - REDEVELOPMENT OF CLOSED SCHOOL, PUBLIC BUILDING, COMMUNITY CENTER, OR CHURCH. 
A.  Purpose: To provide options for redevelopment of community and public structures that are surrounded by residential structures and within residential zoning districts. 
B.  Intent: To protect the residential character without allowing these structures to become dilapidated and/or abandoned. 
C.  The board of zoning appeals shall consider the following when determining whether to grant a special permit to a petitioner seeking to redevelop these structures: 
1.  The redevelopment serves the community or is imperceptible to the residential properties nearby; 
2.  The new development must preserve the historic character of the structure and maintain the development standards to be in line with the residential district character; 
3.  No negative noise and/or traffic may be created due to the reuse of the commercial structure; 
4.  A redevelopment of a community or public use may be extended throughout a building provided the size the of structure is not increased; 
5.  Signage: Minimal or unobtrusive to the residential character and scaled for the pedestrian; and 
6.  Parking: Reasonable accommodations to the required parking standards in article 1343 may be requested during the public hearing process based on the following: 
a.  Alternative transportation accommodations be improved such as sidewalk repair or bicycle parking, 
b.  Shared parking on nearby lots at complimentary times, 
c.  Special considerations regarding uses. 
( Ord. of 11-23-15(1) ) 
1341.52 - INDOOR SHOOTING RANGE. 
(a)  All indoor shooting ranges shall comply with all local, state, and/or federal regulations related to indoor shooting ranges. 
(b)  All indoor shooting ranges shall be of soundproof construction whereby the sound from the discharge of any firearm and the impact of projectile shall not be detectable by a person with average hearing ability, unaided by any mechanical or electronic device, across any adjoining property line or at a distance of 50 feet from the building, whichever distance is greater. 
(c)  Controlled access to the shooting range shall be maintained at all times. 
(d)  Hours of operation for any indoor shooting range may be negotiated through the special permit process and incorporated as a condition of said permit. 
( Ord. of 2-22-16(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1343 - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING REGULATIONS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference- Parking generally, Art. 361; parking lot and space defined, § 1315.02; parking lot landscaping, § 1347.06. 

1343.01 - GENERAL REGULATIONS. 
A.  Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the streets. In all zones in connection with every industrial, business, institutional, recreational, residential or any other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking for automotive and other vehicles in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. Such facilities shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The facilities required herein shall be available throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking lot space located off or beyond the public right-of-way. 
B.  Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street parking or loading area shall be maintained in good condition, free of hazards and deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs, landscaping, and other improvements shall be maintained in workable, safe and good condition. 
C.  The city council may authorize repairs for such improvements if, after proper notice, the owner fails to maintain such improvements and such conditions constitute a hazard to health and safety or where such improvements are governed by a development or other similar agreement. 
D.  In the case of a use not listed in this section, the minimum parking space requirement shall be determined by the planning director. In making such determinations, the planning director shall be guided by the requirements for similar uses, and studies of minimum parking space requirements for such use in other jurisdictions but in no event shall be less than two spaces. 
1343.02 - SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Any structure or building hereafter erected, converted, or enlarged for any of the following uses, or any open area hereafter used, shall be provided with not less than the minimum spaces, as set forth below. Said spaces shall be readily accessible to the uses served thereby. When the application of a unit of measurement results in a fractional space, a space shall be required for each such fraction. 
A.  Residential parking. 
1.  All single-family detached or semi-detached residential units shall be provided with one off-street parking space for each two bedrooms or fraction thereof. 
2.  All other dwelling units, except for units for the elderly shall be provided with off-street parking spaces as follows: 
a.  1.25 spaces for 1 bedroom unit, 
b.  1.50 spaces for 2 bedroom unit, 
c.  2.00 spaces for 3 bedroom unit or fraction thereof. 
3.  Residential structures in combination with permitted commercial uses shall provide parking spaces as required if both uses were established separately. 
4.  Boarding or rooming houses, hotels, motels, and tourist houses. At least one (1) parking space for each guest room in addition to the requirement for the dwelling unit for any family or household permanently residing therein. If a restaurant in connection with the above is open to the public, the off-street parking facilities for the restaurant may be reduced by one-half. 
5.  Nursing homes. At least one parking space per four patients, plus one per each staff person and/or doctor. 
6.  Shelter. At least one space per five occupants. 
B.  Commercial parking. 
1.  Theaters, auditoriums, churches, schools, stadiums or any other places of public or private assembly with fixed seating: one space for six fixed seats in main auditorium. Churches may reduce the number of required parking spaces, provided that the number of spaces thus required may be reduced to by not more than 50 percent if the place of worship is located within 500 feet of any public parking lot or any commercial parking lot where sufficient spaces are available by permission of the owner(s) without charge during the time of services to make up the additional spaces required. 
2.  Places of public assembly without fixed seating such as exhibition halls, fraternal halls, etc.: one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area. 
3.  Retail stores and other places for trade or business other than furniture and appliance stores: one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area for public use. 
4.  Large item retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores: one space for each 600 square feet of floor area. 
5.  Integrated shopping centers: five parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
6.  Restaurants, taverns and night clubs: one parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area for public use. 
7.  Bowling alleys: three parking spaces for each alley. 
8.  General office, corporate office, research laboratories: 
a.  Under 49,999 sq. ft. GFA - 4.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA. 
b.  50,000-99,999 sq. ft. GFA - 4 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA. 
c.  100,000+ sq. ft. GFA - 3.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA. 
9.  Business and professional services: one parking space for each 250 square feet of building floor area or fraction thereof. 
10.  Wholesaling and warehousing: one for each 600 square feet of building floor area or one space per employee on the maximum shift, whichever is greater. 
11.  Automobile and gasoline service stations: at least one (1) parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, devoted to repair or service facilities, and one parking space for each employee on the largest shift. This shall be in addition to a minimum of two spaces for the normal storage of motor vehicles awaiting repair. Parking area at pump island may be included in required customer parking area. No parking shall be permitted on the public rights-of-way. 
12.  Hospitals: at least one (1) parking space for each three (3) beds. Such spaces shall be in addition to those necessary for doctors, administrative personnel and other regular employees. One parking space shall be provided for each employee on the largest shift. 
13.  Medical office or clinic: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area plus one space per exam room. 
14.  Dance halls, roller rinks, ice skating rinks, and other similar places: at least one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
15.  Swimming pools, non-household: one parking space for every 35 square feet of water surface, including areas for swimming, wading and diving. 
16.  Open areas used for commercial purposes: 
a.  Golf driving range: At least one parking space for each tee provided. 
b.  Miniature golf: At least one parking space for each tee. 
c.  Golf courses: Five parking spaces/hole. 
d.  Tennis, handball or other court game areas: Two parking spaces per court. 
e.  Other open areas: At least one parking space for each 2,500 square feet of area or fraction thereof. 
17.  Funeral homes: at least one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area for public use. Such space shall be in addition to a service area for mobile equipment, such as hearses and ambulances. 
C.  Industrial parking. These regulations shall apply to industrial expansion and industrial installations erected after the effective date of this ordinance. Off-street parking shall be provided on the premises in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  Industrial and manufacturing establishments: One parking space for each 600 square feet of building floor area or one space per employee on the maximum shift, whichever is greater. 
2.  Visitors and salesmen: Space shall be provided in addition to the above parking requirements according to specific needs. 
D.  Off-street loading requirements. In addition to the off-street parking space required above, any building erected, converted or enlarged in any district for commercial, office building, manufacturing, wholesale, hospital, or similar uses, shall provide adequate off-street areas for loading and unloading of vehicles. In no case shall the required space be less than one loading area, and additional space shall be provided as follows: 
1.  For retail stores, financial institutions, educational facilities, restaurants, wholesale, warehouse, general service, manufacturing or industrial establishments: the number of berths based on building floor area shall be as follows: 
a.  Up to 4,000 sq. ft. - 1 loading area. 
b.  4,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 berth. 
c.  10,001 to 20,000 sq. ft. - 2 berths. 
d.  Each additional 20,000 sq. ft. or major fraction thereof up to a maximum of 60,000 sq. ft. - 1 berth. 
e.  Each 50,000 square feet over 60,000 sq. ft. - 1 additional berth. 
2.  For motels, hotels, offices, schools, places of public assembly or similar uses: the number of berths based on building floor area shall be as follows: 
a.  Up to 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 loading area. 
b.  10,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. - 1 berth. 
c.  Each 100,001 sq. ft. or major fraction thereof over 100,001 sq. ft. - 1 additional berth. 
E.  Supplementary space requirements applying to motor vehicle parking and off-street loading. 
1.  Collective provision of off-street parking and loading facilities by two or more buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted to allow for the sharing of such facilities for commercial and multiple use centers. 
a.  For buildings or groups of uses of less than 10,000 square feet, the total parking and loading facilities shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately. 
b.  Where the total area of non-residential use is greater than 10,000 square feet, the total number of parking spaces provided shall equal one space for every 200 square feet of building floor area. Additional parking shall be provided for residential uses built in conjunction with a center of this size and shall equal at least one and one-half spaces for each dwelling unit. Off-street loading facilities may be based on documented, actual use of facilities similar to the combined uses or the total as required if calculated as separate uses. 
1343.03 - AUTOMOBILE PARKING DESIGN PRINCIPLES. 
(a)  Areas computed as parking spaces. Areas that may be computed as open or enclosed off-street parking spaces may include any private garage, carport, or other area available for parking, other than a street, access lane, or driveway. However, a driveway for a one-family residence may be included in the required parking. 
(b)  Compact car parking shall comprise no more than 10% of the total parking spaces. 
(c)  Tables. 
Table A.
Dimensions for 90-Degree Parking of Standard and Mid-Size Automobiles 
Application S 
Stall Width (feet) W 
Module (bay) Width (feet) General Parking 10.0 59 9.5 60 9.0 62 8.5 63 Employee/Residential/Religious Use 9.5 58 9.0 60 8.5 61.5 8.0 63  

Table B.
Dimensions for 60-Degree Parking of Standard and Mid-Size Automobiles 
Application S Stall Width C Stall Width D Stall Depth O Front Overhang A Aisle Width W Module Width Dimensions in feet General Parking turnrover 10.0 11.5 15.6 2.6 20.8 52 9.5 11.0 15.6 2.6 21.8 53 9.0 10.4 15.6 2.6 22.8 54 Employee/Residential/Religious Use 9.5 11.0 15.6 2.6 20.8 52 9.0 10.4 15.6 2.6 21.8 53 8.5 9.8 15.6 2.6 22.8 54 8.0 9.2 15.6 2.6 23.8 55  
Note: Dimensions are given to the nearest 0.1 ft. 
Table C.
Dimensions for 45-Degree Parking of Standard and Mid-Size Automobiles 
Application S Stall Width C Stall Width D Stall Depth O Front 
Overhang A Aisle Width W Module Width Dimensions in feet General Parking 10.0 14.1 12.7 2.1 21.6 47 9.5 13.4 12.7 2.1 22.6 48 9.0 12.7 12.7 2.1 23.6 49 Employee/Residential/Religious Use 9.5 13.4 12.7 2.1 21.6 47 9.0 12.7 12.7 2.1 22.6 48 8.5 9.8 12.7 2.1 23.6 49 8.0 11.3 12.7 2.1 24.6 50  
Note: Dimensions are given to the nearest 0.1 ft. 
Table D.
Parking Dimensions for compact cars 
Application Stall Width (feet) Stall Depth (feet) Module Width (feet) 90-degree, two way General Parking 8.5 16.5 52 8.2 16.5 57 Employee/Residential/Religious Use 8.2 16.5 50 7.8 16.5 56 7.2 16.5 55 60-degree, one way General Parking 8.2 14.3 49 Employee/Residential/Religious Use 7.8 14.3 48 40-degree, one way General Parking 8.2 11.7 43 Employee/Residential/Religious Use 7.8 11.7 43  
(Ord. 4-14-03) 
1343.04 - OFF-STREET LOADING AREA, BERTH SIZES. 
A.  Loading area. A loading area need not be necessarily a full berth, but shall have a minimum plan dimension of at least ten feet overload clearance. The planning director shall determine the sufficiency of the off-street loading area(s) based upon the land and amount of loading and unloading operation required by the proposed use, but in no case shall the use of such space hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
B.  Loading berth. Each required loading berth shall be at least 12 feet wide, 33 feet long, and 14 feet high. 
1343.05 - LOCATION AND ACCESS OF LOADING AREAS, BERTHS. 
A.  Unobstructed access, at least ten feet wide, to and from a street shall be provided. Such access may be combined with access to a parking lot. All permitted or required loading areas or berths shall be on the same lot as the use to which they are accessory. No entrance or exit for any loading area or berth shall be located within 50 feet of any street intersection. No off-street loading berth or area shall be located in any front yard. 
B.  All areas for loading and unloading of vehicles and for the servicing of establishments or shops shall have adequate and unobstructed access from a street, service driveway or alley and shall be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of automobile access ways, parking facilities, fire lanes or sidewalks. 
1343.06 - GENERAL CIRCULATION, PARKING AND LOADING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS. 
A.  Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided. Paved access drives or driveways shall be provided in accordance with section 1343.07 of this article. 
B.  Location of parking spaces. Such parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be on the same lot or tract of land as the building or use to be served unless collective off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses on adjacent or contiguous lots are approved. The total of such collective off-street parking facilities shall not be less than the sum of facilities required for the individual uses computed separately. 
    All areas for off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor vehicles shall be physically separated from the street by a raised curb, planting strip, wall or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle entrance or exit, except for necessary and approved vehicle entrances and exits to the lot. All commercial and industrial parking areas approved after the adoption of this ordinance shall be separated from the street by a landscaped strip of land. 
C.  Location in different zones. No parking area, access drive, driveway or other means of ingress or egress shall be located in any residential zone to provide parking or access to uses other than those permitted in such residential zone, unless otherwise provided for this ordinance. 
D.  Sidewalks and curbing. Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along aisles and driveways and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur, shall be provided with a minimum width of four feet of passable area and be raised six inches or more above the parking area except when crossing streets or driveways. At points of intersection between pedestrian and motorized lines of travel, and at other points where necessary to avoid abrupt changes in grade, a sidewalk shall slope gradually so as to provide an uninterrupted line of travel. Guardrails and wheel stops permanently anchored to the ground shall be provided in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an additional sidewalk width of two and one-half feet is provided to accommodate such overhang. Handicapped provisions shall be included in all sidewalks and curbing construction. 
E.  Landscaping and drainage. Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to minimize noise, glare and other nuisance characteristics as well as to enhance the environment and ecology of the site and surrounding area. General landscaping design shall conform to criteria set forth in article 1347 of this ordinance. All parking areas and access ways thereto shall be properly drained and all such areas shall be a paved surface except parking spaces accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings. A drainage plan shall be approved by the director of public works. Parking viewed from the public right-of-way or from any property used for residential purposes shall be suitably shielded. 
F.  Lighting. All parking areas shall be lighted to provide a minimum of three footcandles at driveway intersections with main roads and a total average illumination of one-half footcandles throughout the parking area. Such lighting shall be shielded in such manner as not to create a hazard or nuisance to the adjoining properties or the traveling public. 
G.  Parking space allocations should be oriented to specific buildings. Parking areas may be designed to focus on major walkways which should be marked. Where pedestrians must cross service roads or access roads to reach parking areas, crosswalks should be clearly designated by pavement markings and/or signs. In non-residential districts, provision for pedestrian access between adjoining commercial lots should be encouraged. 
(Ord. 12-14-98; Ord. 11-28-05) 
1343.07 - LOCATION OF DRIVEWAYS. 
A.  All entrance and exit driveways shall be located to afford maximum safety to traffic, provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress to and from the site, and to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic. 
B.  Where a site occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the point of tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius of that site. (See article 1343.07(H) below) 
C.  No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a rotary ramp of an interchange, or within 20 feet of the beginning of any ramp or other portion of an interchange. 
D.  Where two or more driveways connect a single site to any one road, a minimum clear distance of 200 feet measured along the right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of any two such driveways. Where such development fronts on an arterial street, access to parking and service areas, where practicable, shall be provided by a single access to the arterial street. (See article 1343.07(H) below) 
E.  Driveways used for two-way operation shall intersect the road at an angle to as near 90 degrees as site conditions will permit and in no case will be less than 60 degrees. 
F.  Driveways used by vehicles in one direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle smaller than 45 degrees with a road, unless acceleration and deceleration lanes are provided. 
G.  Driveway dimensions. The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to adequately accommodate the volume and character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land development. The required maximum and minimum dimensions for driveways are indicated below. Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic of over 15% truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum dimensions. (See article 1343.07(H) below) 
H.  Whenever a driveway is constructed, or reconstructed, on a state highway right-of-way, said driveway(s) location and dimensions shall comply with the West Virginia Department of Transportation Division of Highways "Manual on Rules and Regulations for Constructing Driveways on State Highway Rights-of-Way". 
One-way operation driveway* width (in feet) Two-way operation driveway* width (in feet) 3-10 family residence 10-15 15-25 10 family or over 15-25 20-35 Commercial & industrial 15-30 25-35  
*All driveways shall be five feet wider at the curb line and this additional width shall be maintained for a distance of 20 feet into the site. 
(Ord. 12-12-05) 
1343.08 - WAIVER OF PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
A.  Excess spaces. To minimize impervious surfaces, while ensuring adequate parking, where it can be demonstrated, at the time of review of an application for a site plan approval, that the parking and/or loading and unloading requirements of this article will result in more parking spaces than actual needs require, the review board or planning director may permit a portion of the proposed parking and/or loading areas to remain unpaved, but landscaped. 
B.  If a reduction is permitted under this section, the planning director may require as a condition of the approval that the lot include the reservation, permanently or for a specified number of years, of areas for use if needed in the future for additional parking. Such reservation shall be provided in a legal form acceptable to the city attorney. In such case, the applicant shall be required to submit site plans to the planning director showing where and how the additional parking could be accomplished. The additional parking shall be required to be provided within one year by the owner of the lot at that time after the planning director may determine in writing to the owner that the parking has become needed to meet actual use. The determination shall be based upon the planning director's on-site review on at least three different days. 
C.  Exceeding minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements are required by this article may only be exceeded, where it can be demonstrated, at the time of review, that such additional parking is necessary for the actual operation of a proposed use. In such instances, the planning director may grant an increase in minimum space on a lot, provided that all other bulk and area requirements are met for the use in the district in which it is located. 
1343.09 - EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES PARKING MODIFICATIONS. 
A.  Where a building is for an educational institution which prohibits the ownership or operation of automobiles by students or that restricts the parking of student automobiles to designated institutional parking areas, such students need not be included in the calculation of automobile parking requirements. 
B.  Institutional parking spaces of education institutions that are provided for normal daytime activity for other purposes shall be considered to be available for such public uses as are normally conducted in the evening or on weekends in places of public assembly of such institutions. 
1343.10 - HANDICAPPED PARKING. 
A.  Number of spaces. Any lot including four or more off-street parking spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless a revised regulation is officially established under the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act: 
Total number of required 
parking spaces on the lot Required minimum number or percent of handicapped parking spaces 4-25 1 26-50 2 51-75 3 76-100 4 101-150 5 151-200 6 201-300 7 301-400 8 401-500 9 501-1,000 2% of required number of spaces 1,001 or more 20 plus 1% of required number of spaces over 1,000  
B.  Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they will result in the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a handicapped accessible building entrance. Curb cuts shall be provided as needed to provide access from the handicapped spaces. 
C.  Minimum size. Each required handicapped parking space shall be eight by 20 feet. In addition, each space shall be adjacent to a five feet wide access aisle. The access aisle may be shared by two handicapped spaces by being placed between them. However, one out of every eight required handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle of eight feet instead of five feet. 
D.  Slope. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of less than six percent slope in any direction. 
E.  Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by clearly visible signs or pavement markings. Blue paint is recommended. 
ARTICLE 1345 - SIGN REGULATIONS AND SITE LIGHTING[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference- Unauthorized traffic signs, § 313.06; sign definitions, § 1315.02; signs in I-1 General Industrial District, § 1333.09. 

1345.01 - PURPOSE. 
A.  To preserve and protect the public safety, comfort and welfare of users of streets and sidewalks in the City of Huntington by regulating signs of all types. 
B.  To enhance community appearance, reduce visual clutter and blight, promote recreational value of public travel and the economic development of the City of Huntington. 
C.  To limit the size, number and location of signs which may obstruct the vision of motorists, create distractions and increase traffic accidents. 
D.  To acknowledge the appropriate display of signs as necessary to public service and to the conduct of competitive commerce. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.02 - GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS. 
A.  Sign permit requirement and application. 
1.  Except as provided in section 1345.02.B, below, and article 1751 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, as revised, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, or convert any sign in the City of Huntington or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a sign permit for each sign from the director of public works. 
2.  Applications for a sign permit shall be made in writing to the director of public works, and shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with these regulations and all other appropriate ordinances and regulations of the City of Huntington. 
3.  Sign permits shall be issued for the life of the sign, or any shorter period as stated on the approved permit application by the director of public works. However, any permit may be revoked at any time by the director of public works upon finding that the sign violates any provision of this article, article 1751 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Huntington, or that the permittee made false representations in securing the permit. 
4.  No person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign upon any property, structure or building without the prior written consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property, structure or building, or his authorized representative. The written consent must accompany the sign permit application. 
5.  Every sign permit issued shall become null and void if installation is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit. 
6.  No person shall erect, maintain or construct any ground sign or any other sign upon any lot or premise contrary to any building or other restrictive covenants to which such lot or premises is subject. 
B.  Exemptions. The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article, except as they may interfere with traffic safety or in any other way become a public safety hazard. 
1.  Signs or decorations displayed for recognized holidays. 
2.  Memorial plaques or historic markers or other similar signs which are engraved or a permanent component of a building, monument, tombstone or other similar structure. 
3.  Public signs. 
4.  Street number signs indicating the address of a building or structure, and not exceeding one square foot in area. 
5.  Temporary signs, including real estate and political signs, subject to the limitations in Table 1345 and provided that: 
(a)  No temporary sign encroaches into any public right-of-way or obstructs the view of motorists in any required clear sight triangle; and 
(b)  No temporary sign is erected more than 30 days before or remains in place more than seven days after the advertised event. 
6.  "No trespassing" signs, warning signs (such as "Beware of Dog"), notifications signs for emergency personnel, provided that the sign does not exceed two square feet in sign surface area and there are no more than two such signs on the lot. 
C.  Sign height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to the construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower. 
D.  Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
E.  Computation of maximum total permitted sign area for a lot. The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs shall be computed by applying the formula used in section 1345.03 to the lot frontage, building frontage, or wall area, as appropriate, for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage. However, the total sign area that is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building, or wall area frontage on that street. 
F.  Sign placement. Signs shall be subject to the placement requirements in Table 1345, but in no event shall any sign be placed in a position that will obstruct the view of motorists or cause any other danger to motorists or pedestrians within a public right-of-way or on adjoining lots. Nor shall any sign be placed within the clear sight triangle required to be maintained at all street intersections, driveway and access way entrances onto public streets. All signs shall be set back within the buildable area of the site, except as noted in Table 1345. 
G.  Design, construction, and maintenance. All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the appropriate Building Code and Electrical Code as adopted by the City of Huntington. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs, conforming in all respects with the requirements of the ordinance, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this code, at all times. 
H.  Prohibited signs. Unless specifically excepted in this section, the following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts: 
1.  Portable signs or attention-getting devices, flags, pennants, and banners except on a temporary basis in connection with the opening of a business or special event subject to the temporary sign regulations in section 1345.02.B.5. and Table 1345 of this article; 
2.  Any sign on vacant lots, other than temporary political or "For Sale"; 
3.  Signs affixed to trees, utility poles, fences, or equipment; 
4.  Roof signs; 
5.  Signs with moving, rotating, or oscillating parts, excluding tri-vision signs per section 1345.11; 
6.  Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed to be a traffic-control sign; 
7.  Electronic changeable copy signs in R-1, R-2, R-4 and R-5 zones; 
8.  No sign of any description shall be installed, erected, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any door or window leading to any fire escape, nor shall any sign of any kind be attached or affixed in any form or manner to a fire escape. 
9.  Any sign that the director of public works determines to be unsafe or insecure or that is erected in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(1964 Code Secs. 30-23, 30-27; Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.03 - SIGNS PERMITTED IN INDIVIDUAL ZONING DISTRICTS. 
    The signs listed in Table 1345 shall be permitted in individual zoning districts, subject to any requirements listed in the table and in each subsection. 
TABLE 1345: TYPE OF ZONING DISTRICT 
Type of Sign Residential Commercial Industrial Changeable copy sign (See Section 1345.10) Permitted Special permit YES YES Free-standing sign (See section 1345.04) Permitted Special permit YES YES Maximum number 1 per lot or parcel Maximum surface area 32 sq. ft. 72 sq. ft. 72 sq. ft. Maximum height 5 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. Maximum length 8 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. Minimum set back from property line 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. Illuminated sign (See section 1345.05) External permitted Special permit YES YES Internal permitted Special permit YES YES Off-premise (billboard) (See section 1345.11) Suspended/Projecting sign (See section 1345.06) Permitted NO YES YES Maximum surface area 6 sq. ft. 40 sq. ft. Minimum clearance above ground or sidewalk above 9 ft. 9 ft. Maximum height of sign surface 3 ft. 5 ft. Maximum number 1 per each street frontage 1 per each street frontage Minimum spacing between signs 20 ft. 20 ft. Setback Building setback minus 4 ft. Building setback minus 5 ft. Temporary sign (See section 1345.02.B.5) Permitted YES YES YES Maximum number 2 per lot 1 per establishment 2 per lot Maximum surface area 6 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft. Maximum height 4 ft. 6 ft. 6 ft. Illuminated NO NO NO Wall sign (See section 1345.07) Permitted YES YES YES Maximum number 1 per establishment per street frontage Maximum surface area See section 1345.07.D See section 1345.07.C See section 1345.07.C Maximum height See section 1345.07. F See section 1345.07. E See section 1345.07.E Window sign (See section 1345.08) Permitted NO YES YES Maximum surface area See section 1345.08  
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.04 - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR FREE-STANDING SIGNS. 
    In addition to the regulations in Table 1345, all free-standing signs, except for temporary signs, shall comply with the following limitations and requirements: 
A.  A free-standing sign shall have no more than two sign faces; 
B.  The area immediately surrounding the base and support structure of the sign shall be landscaped with evergreen vegetation; 
C.  Freestanding ground signs shall be required in residential districts and shall be used instead of pole signs to the maximum extent practical or feasible in other districts; and 
D.  Connector/Freeway-oriented signs are signs oriented towards Interstate 64: 
1.  Area of sign - shall not exceed 200 square feet in area and shall have no more than two sign faces. 
2.  Height - Signs shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
3.  Lighting - Signs shall be internally or externally lighted. No exposed incandescent lamp shall be utilized. 
4.  Connector for this purpose shall be defined as State Route 10, State Route 152 (5th Street Road), US Route 52 (Rahall Bridge approach), and the sign shall be limited to C-1, C-2 and I-1 zoned properties. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.05 - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR ILLUMINATED SIGNS. 
    In addition to the regulations in Table 1345, all internally or externally illuminated signs shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Limits on degree of internal illumination. Any sign located adjacent to a dwelling unit or lot zoned for residential use shall be located, shielded and screened to prevent direct light or glare onto a dwelling unit or residential lot. 
B.  External illumination. Whenever external illumination is used for a sign, the source of light shall be located, shielded, screened and directed in such a manner that the light source is not visible. 
C.  Back lit "bubble" awnings are prohibited in any National Historic Register District. 
D.  Signs which contain, include, or are illumined by any flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights are prohibited if such signs interfere with traffic safety. Reflective surfaces or devices on sign faces and tri-vision signs with illumination are permitted provided such signs do not interfere with traffic safety and comply with subsections E. and F. of this section. 
E.  Signs must be effectively shielded to prevent beams or rays from being directed toward any portion of the traveled ways, and must not be of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or impair the vision of the drive of any motor vehicle or otherwise interfere with any driver's options of a motor vehicle. 
F.  No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic sign, device, or signal. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.06 - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SUSPENDED OR PROJECTING SIGNS. 
    In addition to the regulations in Table 1345, all suspended and projecting signs shall comply with the following limitations and requirements: 
A.  Suspended or projecting signs shall be permitted only at shopping centers or theaters; 
B.  The sign shall be located in front of the establishment it serves and shall be of similar size, color and design as other suspended signs; and 
C.  There shall be no more than one such sign per establishment fronting on the marquee, overhang, or other building feature from which the sign is suspended. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.07 - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR WALL SIGNS. 
    In addition to the regulations in Table 1345, all wall signs shall comply with the following limitations and requirements: 
A.  The sign shall extend no further than 12 inches from the wall to which it is attached; 
B.  The sign shall be attached to the wall so that the face of the sign is substantially parallel to the wall; 
C.  In C-1 and C-3 Commercial zones, the maximum sign area shall not exceed 10% of the area of the first two stories of building elevation on which it is placed. In C-2 and I-1 zones, maximum sign area shall not exceed 20% of the first two stories of building elevation. In the case of multi-occupant buildings, each tenant or owner may have a sign area not to exceed its proportionate share of the total allowable sign area for the building. 
D.  In residential districts, multi-family apartment buildings and authorized non-residential buildings may have wall signs that shall not exceed two feet in height or 12 square feet in total area. 
E.  In commercial and industrial districts, wall signs shall be placed no higher than the height of the building and, if the sign projects further than three inches from the wall, no lower than ten feet above the ground level. 
F.  In residential districts, wall signs shall be placed no higher than four feet above the adjacent ground level, shall project no more than three inches from the wall, and shall not obscure or cover any window, door or architectural feature. 
G.  No wall sign or wall bulletin shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to permit the accumulation of paper, leaves, or trash behind the same. 
H.  No wall sign or wall bulletin shall be erected and maintained so as to cover the doors or windows of any building, except by special permit authorized by the chiefs of the police and fire departments, or so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any window, door, fire escape of the building upon which it is erected. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-15; Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.08 - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR WINDOW SIGNS. 
    In addition to the regulations in Table 1345, all window signs shall comply with the following limitations and requirements: 
A.  The total area of all window signs on display at any one time, including temporary window promotional signs, shall not exceed 33% of the total area of the window in which they are located. A series of windows which are separated by frames less than six inches in width shall be considered as a single window for the purposes of this computation. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.09 - SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR SHOPPING CENTERS AND OTHER MULTI-OCCUPANT LAND USES. 
A.  No sign permit shall be issued for a shopping center or other multi-occupant land use, or for any individual establishment or occupant therein, unless a uniform sign plan has been submitted and approved for the entire development. 
B.  The Planning Director shall approve the uniform sign plan only upon finding that: 
1.  The sizes of signs and the materials used in the signs shall be consistent throughout the development, or shall establish a hierarchy of different types of signs, with the size and materials of the signs in each category being consistent for all signs in that category; 
2.  The design of and materials used for the structural elements of the signs shall be consistent with the design of and material used for the buildings or buildings which the signs serve; and 
3.  The signs shall conform to all other requirements of this article. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.10 - SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS. 
    Changeable copy signs shall be allowed as special permits in all residential districts, except for institutional uses (see section 1345.10.F). 
A.  In residential districts, changeable copy may be used on authorized free standing or wall signs for permitted nonresidential uses only. Signs utilizing changeable copy shall comply with sign size and illumination regulations for residential districts. 
B.  In commercial and manufacturing districts, changeable copy may be used on authorized free standing or wall signs. Signs containing changeable copy shall comply with sign size and illumination regulations for commercial and manufacturing districts. 
C.  An electronic display sign may be used to show date, time, temperature information, and public service announcements only in the C-1 zone. 
D.  In addition to time, date, temperature, and public service announcements, messages on an electronic display sign shall be limited to on-premise products and services in the C-2, C-3, and I-1 zones, otherwise said electronic display must conform to the regulations regarding off-premise signs (billboards) as outlined in section 1345.11, below. 
E.  In addition to other signs permitted under this article, gasoline service stations may erect changeable copy signs advertising the prices of gasoline or other fuels, provided that the total of area of permitted signage is not exceeded. 
F.  Changeable copy signs are permitted for institutional uses permitted under the zoning ordinance in all districts. Such uses include, but are not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.11 - OFF-PREMISE SIGNS (BILLBOARDS). 
A.  Off-premise signs shall be permitted in the following zones: 
C-1 - Special permit. 
C-2 - Permitted. 
C-3 - Special permit. 
I-1 - Permitted. 
B.  Legal nonconforming off-premise signs. Any off-premise sign lawfully erected and in existence on the effective date of this ordinance which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance may be maintained as a matter of right as a legal nonconforming sign and may be rebuilt 100% or relocated on the same property, provided that the sign's degree of nonconformity is not increased. This includes loss of signs due to Acts of God. 
C.  Size of signs. 
1.  The maximum size area for any one face of an off-premise sign located on interstate roads shall not exceed 672 square feet excluded the base of apron, trim supports, and other structural elements. Temporary embellishments shall not exceed 20% of the maximum sign area allowed. 
2.  The maximum sign area of any one face of an off-premise sign located on non-interstate roads shall not exceed 400 square feet excluding the base, or apron, trim supports, and other structural elements. Temporary embellishments shall not exceed 20% of the maximum sign area allowed. 
3.  Sign may be back-to-back, V-type, and tri-vision with not more than one face to each facing and such structure shall be considered as one off-premise sign. 
D.  Height of an off-premise sign. 
1.  An off-premise sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of ten feet measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the bottom of the sign face. 
2.  An off-premise sign shall have a maximum height not to exceed 50 feet above grade level of interstate roadways to the bottom of the sign face and 35 feet above grade level of non-interstate roadways to the bottom of the sign face, as measured from the centerline of the roadway to which the sign is oriented. In no case, shall the height of a sign exceed the maximum height limitation of the zoning district in which it is located. 
E.  Spacing for off-premise signs. 
1.  No off-premise sign may be established within 750 feet of any other off-premise sign, measured along the same side of the street or highway to which the sign is oriented. 
2.  The spacing between signs does not apply to structures separated by buildings or other obstructions in such a manner that only one sign located within the spacing distances is visible from the street at any one time. 
3.  Spacing from directional and official signs. On-premise signs, or any other signs which does not constitute an off-premise sign shall not be counted nor shall measurements be made from such signs for the purpose of determining compliance with these spacing requirements. 
4.  No off-premise sign shall be constructed within 500 feet, measured linearly, along the same side of the street from a church, school, playground, park, recreation center, or community center. 
5.  No billboard shall be constructed within 200 feet, measured linearly, along the same side of the street from a residential district. 
6.  The minimum distance between off-premise signs shall be measured along the nearest edge of the pavement between points directly opposite the center of the signs along each side of the highway and shall apply to structures located on the same side of the same street or highway. 
F.  Setback requirements. 
1.  Front - 10 feet. 
2.  Side - 5 feet. 
3.  Rear - 5 feet. 
4.  In no case shall any portion of an off-premise sign overhang into or be placed in the public right-of-way unless allowed by the director of public works. 
5.  In no case shall any portion of an off-premise sign extend into the required buffer area as designed in section 1347.05. 
G.  Lighting (see section 1345.05). 
H.  Construction standards. All off-premise signs shall be constructed in accordance with the building code of the city. The structural elements of all off-premise signs shall be of steel unipole construction. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.12 - NONCONFORMING SIGNS. 
    Any nonconforming sign may be continued only as provided in this section. 
A.  Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign may occur, including any necessary repairs and alterations which do not enlarge, extend, or intensify the nonconformity. 
B.  No structural alteration, enlargement, or extension shall be made of a nonconforming sign, except when the alteration is required by law or will eliminate the nonconforming condition. 
C.  No conforming sign shall be erected on the same premises as an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or changed to a conforming sign. However, for multi-occupant land uses, the fact that one particular establishment therein has a nonconforming sign will not prohibit a different establishment therein from erecting a conforming sign on the same premises. 
D.  A nonconforming sign shall be made to conform with the requirements of this article whenever there is a change in the use or occupancy of the building which the sign serves, or whenever the building or structure which the sign serves is externally expanded or remodeled. 
E.  Whenever the use of a nonconforming sign, or the use which the sign serves, has been discontinued for a period of six consecutive months, or whenever it is evident that there is a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon the use of a nonconforming sign, or the use which the sign serves, then the sign thereafter shall be made to conform with the provisions of this article. 
F.  If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement value at the time of the damage or destruction (based on prevailing costs), then the sign thereafter shall be restored to conform to the provisions of this article. However, if the damage or destruction is less than 50% of the replacement value, then the sign may thereafter be restored to its original condition, so long as restoration or repair of the sign is completed within six months after the date of damage or destruction. The repaired or reconstructed sign shall be made to conform to the city of Huntington Building Code and Electrical Code in force at the time of the repair or reconstruction. Nonconforming off-premise signs shall be governed by section 1345.11. 
G.  Any sign that was not previously approved by the City of Huntington and that does not conform to these regulations (illegal signs) shall be immediately removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
1345.13 - LIGHTING. 
    In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit plans for all proposed exterior lighting. These plans shall include the location, type of light, radius of light, manufacturer's specification sheet and intensity in footcandles. The following designs standards shall be followed: 
A.  The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the architectural style of the principal building. 
B.  The maximum height of free-standing lights shall be the same as the principal building, but not exceeding 25 feet. 
C.  All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum open angle of the cone of illumination to 150 degrees. 
D.  Where lights along property lines would be visible to adjacent residents, the lights shall be appropriately shielded. 
E.  Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings and visible to the public shall be avoided. 
F.  Free-standing lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being easily damaged by vehicles. 
G.  Lighting shall be located along streets, parking areas, at intersections, and where various types of circulation systems merge, intersect, or split. 
H.  Pathways, sidewalks and trails shall be lighted with low or mushroom type standards. 
I.  Stairways, and sloping or rising paths, building entrances and exits require illumination. 
J.  Lighting shall be provided where buildings are set back or off-set if access is provided at such points. 
K.  The following intensity in footcandles shall be provided: 
1.  Parking lots - average of 0.5 footcandles throughout. 
2.  Intersections - 3 footcandles. 
3.  Maximum at property lines - 1.0 footcandle. 
4.  In residential areas - average of 0.6 footcandles. 
(Ord. 10-22-07) 
ARTICLE 1347 - LANDSCAPING[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference- Landscape plan in I-1 General Industrial District, § 1333.11. 

1347.01 - PURPOSE. 
A.  Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance, landscaping shall be provided as part of all non-residential land developments, residential subdivisions, and open space cluster developments for which a site plan is required by article 1351 and in accordance with the following standards. It shall be conceived in a total pattern throughout the site, integrating the various elements of the site design, preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site and creating a pleasing site character. 
B.  Landscaping may include plant materials such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, and annuals and other materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, and building and paving material. 
1347.02 - LANDSCAPE PLAN. 
    A landscape plan shall be submitted with each non-residential land development, planned unit development, manufactured home park, residential subdivision, and open space cluster developments site application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs, ground cover, natural features such as rock outcroppings, and other landscaping elements. The plan should show where there are or will be located and planting and/or construction details. When existing natural growth is proposed to remain, the applicant shall include in the plans proposed methods to protect existing trees and growth during and after construction. 
1347.03 - SITE PROTECTION AND GENERAL PLANTING REQUIREMENTS. 
A.  Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to provide at least four inches of even cover to all disturbed areas of the development and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
B.  Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, excess or scrap building materials, or other debris shall be removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with the law. No tree stumps, portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the development. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be removed from the site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they may, subject to approval of the city engineer, be used as mulch in landscaped areas. 
C.  Protection of existing plantings. Maximum effort should be made to save fine specimens (because of size or relative rarity). No material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within four feet of shrubs or ten feet of trees designated to be retained on development site. Protective barriers or tree wells shall be installed around each plant and/or group of plants that are to remain on the site. Barriers shall not be supported by the plants they are protecting, but shall be self-supporting. They shall be a minimum of four feet high and constructed of a durable material that will last until construction is completed. Snow fences and silt fences are examples of acceptable barriers. 
D.  Slope plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes steeper than one foot vertically to three feet horizontally shall be planted with ground covers appropriate for the purpose and soil conditions, water availability, and environment. 
E.  Additional landscaping. In residential developments, besides the screening and street trees required, additional plantings or landscaping elements shall be required throughout the subdivision where necessary for climate control, privacy, or for aesthetic reasons in accordance with a planting plan approved by the planning director and taking into consideration cost constraints. In nonresidential developments, all areas of the site not occupied by buildings and required improvements shall be landscaped by the planting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs, and trees as part of a site plan approved by the planning director or reviewing body. 
F.  Planting specifications. Deciduous trees shall have at least a two-inch caliper measured 12 inches above the ground at planting. Size of evergreens and shrubs shall be allowed to vary depending on setting and type of shrub. Only nursery-grown plant materials shall be acceptable; and all trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be planted according to accepted horticultural standards. Dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the developer during the following planting season. 
1347.04 - STREET TREES. 
A.  Location. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets in accordance with the approved landscape plan. Trees shall either be massed at critical points or spaced evenly along the street, or both. A permit for installation of trees within the city right-of-way or easements will be required. 
    When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along streets, spacing shall depend on tree size, as follows: 
Tree Size (in feet) Planting Interval (in feet) Large trees (40+) 50-70 Medium-sized trees (30-40) 40-50 Small trees (to 30) 30-40  
    When the spacing interval exceeds 40 feet, small ornamental trees can be spaced between the larger trees. If a street canopy effect is desired, trees may be planted closer together, following the recommendations of a certified landscape architect. The trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, or street lights. Tree location, landscaping design, and spacing plan shall be approved by the director of public works as part of the landscape plan. 
B.  Tree type. Tree type may vary depending on overall effect desired, but as a general rule, all trees shall be the same kind on a street except to achieve special effects. Selection of tree type shall be approved by the planning director or reviewing body. 
1347.05 - BUFFERING. 
A.  Function and materials. Buffering shall provide a year round visual screen in order to minimize adverse impacts from a site on an adjacent property or from adjacent areas. It may consist of fencing, evergreens, berms, rocks, boulders, mounds, or combinations to achieve the stated objectives. 
B.  When required. Buffering shall be required when topographical or other barriers do not provide reasonable screening or when the planning commission determines that there is a need to shield the site from adjacent properties and to minimize adverse impacts such as incompatible land uses, noise, glaring light, and traffic. In small-lot developments, when building design and sitting do not provide privacy, the planning commission may require landscaping, fences, or walls to ensure privacy and screen dwelling units. 
    Buffers shall be measured from side and rear property lines, excluding access driveways. 
1.  Where nonresidential, multi-family, or a manufactured home park use (including related parking areas) are adjacent to any R-1, R-2, or R-4 residential district or any lot with a single-family residence, a buffer yard 25 feet, but not to exceed 10% of the lot area width, shall be required. 
2.  Parking areas, garbage collection and utility areas, and loading and unloading areas should be screened around their perimeter by a buffer strip a minimum of five feet wide. 
3.  Where residential subdivisions abut higher-order streets (collectors or arterioles), adjacent lots should front on lower-order streets, and a landscaped buffer area provided along the property line abutting the road. The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 to 35 feet, but not to exceed 10% of the lot area wide or wider where necessary for the health and safety of the residents, and include both trees and shrubs. 
C.  Design. Arrangement of plantings in buffers shall provide maximum protection to adjacent properties and avoid damage to existing plant material. Possible arrangements include planting in parallel, serpentine, or broken rows. If planted berms are used, the minimum top width shall be four feet, and the maximum side slope shall be 2:1. 
D.  Planting specifications. Plant materials shall be sufficiently large and planted in such a fashion that a screen at least eight feet in height shall be produced within three growing seasons. All plantings shall be installed according to accepted horticultural standards. 
E.  Maintenance. Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner appropriate for the specific plant species through the first growing season, and dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the applicant during the next planting season. No buildings, structures, storage of materials, or parking shall be permitted within the buffer area; buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass. 
1347.06 - PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING. 
A.  Amount required. In parking lots, at least 5% of the interior parking area shall be landscaped with plantings. Parking lot street frontage screening and perimeter screening shall be a minimum of five feet wide. If buffering is required, per section 1347.05(B)(1), the more restrictive screening distance shall apply. Planting required within the parking lot is exclusive of other planting requirements, such as for street trees. 
B.  Location. The landscaping should be located in protected areas, such as along walkways, in center islands, at the end of bays, or in diamonds between parking stalls. All landscaping in parking areas and the street frontage shall be placed so that it will not obstruct sight distance. 
C.  Plant type. A mixture of hardy flowering and/or decorative evergreen and deciduous trees may be planted; the area between trees shall be planted with shrubs or ground cover or covered with mulch. 
ARTICLE 1349 - REGULATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN AREA AND PONDING BASINS[22] 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted April 13, 2015 , amended article 1349 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 1349, §§ 1349A-1349J, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

SECTION 1349A - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1349A.01 - AUTHORITY. 
A.  The provisions of this ordinance have been prepared with the intention of meeting the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.) amended by the Congress of the United States through the 15th of February, 1975 (Public Law 91-152). 
B.  Authority to adopt, administer and enforce this ordinance is vested in City of Huntington pursuant to W. Va. Code §§ 8-12-14, 7-1-3n, 7-1-3v and 7-1-3kk and/or W. Va. Code §§ 8A-4-2, 8A-5-7, 8A-7-2. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349A.02 - INTENT. 
    The intent of this ordinance is to: 
A.  Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community. 
B.  Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future and protect natural drainage. 
C.  Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water supply and sanitary sewage disposal in cooperation with the county sanitarian. 
D.  Assure the county assessor obtains information concerning improvement of real property as required by W. Va. Code § 11-3-3A. 
E.  Assure County E-911 addresses are obtained to maintain the currency of established emergency response dispatch systems. 
F.  Reduce financial burdens imposed on City of Huntington, its governmental units, and its residents, by preventing the unwise design and construction of development in areas subject to flooding. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349A.03 - ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. 
    This ordinance supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood prone areas. Any ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349A.04 - APPLICABILITY. 
    It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business, or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development, new construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, or the placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) within City of Huntington, unless a permit application has been completed and a permit or certificate of occupancy has been obtained from the floodplain administrator. In addition, where land partially or fully in the special flood hazard area is to be subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or otherwise developed as defined in this ordinance, a site plan with elevation data shall be submitted to, and approved by, the floodplain administrator prior to any development. 
    Provision of all other codes, ordinances, and regulations shall be applicable insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this ordinance and the community's need to minimize the hazards and damage resulting from flooding. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349A.05 - MATTERS NOT PROVIDED FOR SPECIFICALLY. 
    Where conditions are encountered that are not specifically provided for herein, the Floodplain Administrator shall determine the applicability of the provisions of this ordinance in accordance with its intent, and shall require the applicant to take appropriate measures pursuant to such determination. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349B - INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

1349B.01 - INTERPRETATIONS. 
A.  For the purpose of this ordinance, the following interpretations shall apply: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.  The singular includes the plural. 
3.  The plural includes the singular. 
4.  The word "person" includes a corporation, unincorporated association or partnership as well as an individual. 
5.  The term "shall" or "will" is always mandatory. 
6.  The word "building" or "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof'. 
7.  The word "ordinance" shall refer to the floodplain ordinance. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349B.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give this ordinance it's most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure. A structure on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. This does not include a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Base flood. Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on City of Huntington's Flood Insurance Rate Map. For the purposes of this ordinance, the 100-year flood or 1% annual chance flood. 
    Basement. Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A certification that all development is in occupancy with the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Compensatory storage. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the special flood hazard area used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the special flood hazard area. 
    Contractor - W. Va. Code § 21-11-3(c). A person who in any capacity for compensation, other than as an employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, structure or excavation associated with a project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith, where the cost of the undertaking is one thousand dollars or more. Contractor includes a construction manager who performs management and counseling services on a construction project for a professional fee. 
    Contractor does not include: 
1.  One who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating or consuming them in the construction project; 
2.  A person who personally performs construction work on the site of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or residential purposes; 
3.  A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and who functions under the control of any other licensing or regulatory board, whose primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management and maintenance, who acting in his or her respective professional capacity and any employee of such professional, acting in the course of his or her employment, performs any work which may be considered to be performing contracting work; 
4.  A pest control operator licensed under the provisions of section seven, article sixteen-a, chapter nineteen of this code to engage in the application of pesticides for hire, unless the operator also performs structural repairs exceeding one thousand dollars on property treated for insect pests; or 
5.  A corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship whose primary purpose is to prepare construction plans and specifications used by the contractors defined in this section and who employs full time a registered architect licensed to practice in this state or a Registered Professional Engineer licensed to practice in this state. Contractor also does not include employees of such corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship. 
    Critical facility. Any facility in which, even a slight chance of flooding is too great a threat. Typical critical facilities include hospitals, fire stations, police stations, storage of critical records, and similar facilities. These should be given special consideration when formulating regulatory alternatives and floodplain management plans. A critical facility should not be located in a special flood hazard area if at all possible. If a critical facility must be located in a special flood hazard area it should be provided a higher level of protection so that it can continue to function and provide services during a flood. 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Flood. A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to City of Huntington. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
    Flood insurance study. The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information, and water surface elevations. 
    Floodplain. 
1.  A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 
2.  An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
    Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for unknown factors that may contribute uncertainty to flood heights of any given flood and floodway condition, such as wave action, blockage at stream crossings, and increased runoff from urbanization of the watershed. Freeboard also tends to lower the cost of flood insurance. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground surface immediately adjacent to the development or structure foundation. This is primarily used during insurance rating in approximated floodplains. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
A.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
D.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Licensed manufactured home retailer. A business licensed to sell manufactured homes in the State of West Virginia as set forth in the West Virginia State Code. 
    Licensed manufactured home installer. A contractor licensed to install manufactured homes in West Virginia as set forth in the West Virginia State Code. 
    Licensed professional surveyor. Any person licensed by the West Virginia State Board of Examiners of Land Surveyors to engage in the practice of land surveying as defined in West Virginia State Code. 
    Lowest adjacent grade (LAG). The lowest natural elevation of the ground surface immediately adjacent to the proposed development or structure foundation. The primary use of the LAG is to determine whether the structure is located within a special flood hazard area by comparing it to the base flood elevation. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished enclosure constructed with flood resistant materials as defined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 and usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure has proper flood openings and is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    New construction. Structures for which the start of construction as herein defined commenced on or after January 17, 1990 and including any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after effective date of City of Huntington's first floodplain ordinance adopted by City of Huntington and before the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the ordinance was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance. 
    100-year flood. A flood that has one chance in 100 or a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Person. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
    Post firm non-compliant structures-Violations. The failure of any structure or development to be fully compliant with all requirements of this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided. No future improvements or developments can be made to structures found to be in violation unless the development is to bring the structure into compliance with the current ordinance. 
    Practice of engineering. Any service or creative work, as described in West Virginia State Code Article 13, the adequate performance of which requires engineering education, training and experience in the application of special knowledge of the mathematical, physical and engineering sciences to such services or creative work as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning and design of engineering works and systems; planning the use of land and water; teaching of advanced engineering subjects, engineering surveys and studies; and the review of construction for the purpose of assuring compliance with drawings and specifications any of which embraces such services or work, either public or private, in connection with any utilities, structures, buildings, machines, equipment, processes, work systems, projects and industrial or consumer products or equipment of a mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or thermal nature, insofar as they involve safeguarding life, health or property, and including such other professional services as may be necessary to the planning, progress and completion of any engineering services. Engineering surveys include all survey activities required to support the sound conception, planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of engineered projects. 
    Any person who practices any branch of the profession of engineering or who, by verbal claim, sign, advertisement, letterhead, card or in any other way represents himself or herself to be a registered professional engineer, or by using another title implies that he or she is a registered professional engineer or that he or she is registered under West Virginia State Code, Article 13 or who holds himself or herself out as able to perform, or who performs any engineering service or work or any other service designated by the practitioner which is recognized as engineering, is considered to practice or offer to practice engineering within the meaning and intent of West Virginia State Code, Article 13. 
    Principally above ground. Where at least 51% of the actual cash value of a structure, less land value, is above ground. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
A.  Built on a single chassis; 
B.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
C.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
D.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Registered professional engineer. A person who has been duly registered or licensed as a registered professional engineer by the West Virginia State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers as required under West Virginia State Code, Article 13 et seq. 
    Remedy a violation. To bring a structure or other development into compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, or, if full compliance is not possible, to reduce the adverse impacts of the non-compliance to the greatest extent feasible. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding. Means that during the base flood, water should not damage structures and any subsurface waters related to the base flood should not damage existing or proposed structures. 
    Special flood hazard area. The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in flood insurance studies and on flood insurance rate maps as zones A, AE, AO, A1-30, and A99. This term shall also include areas shown on other flood hazard maps that are specifically listed or otherwise described in this ordinance. 
    Start of construction. The date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Although a permit must be obtained prior to beginning, permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating office. The West Virginia Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management. 
    Stream. As defined in West Virginia State Code 7-1-3U, any watercourse, whether natural or man-made, distinguishable by banks and a bed, regardless of their size, through which water flows continually or intermittently, regardless of its volume. 
    Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means cumulative flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See "substantial improvement." 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. 
    This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", as defined herein regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violation of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
    Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
    For the purpose of this definition improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    Top of bank. The lines depicted on the FIRM maps delineating each side of a stream indicate the top of bank. In the field a professional familiar with fluvial geomorphology should document the top of bank. When a professional is not employed the top of the bank may be considered to be the top of the first significant slope landward of the waters edge when it is followed by at least 50 feet of relatively flat land. 
    Violation. The failure of any structure or development to be fully compliant with all the requirements of this ordinance. Any structure or other development lacking the certifications, finished construction elevation certificate or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349C - ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA 

1349C.01 - IDENTIFICATION. 
A.  The identified special flood hazard area shall be those areas of the City of Huntington which are subject to the 100-year flood, as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and described in the flood insurance study (FIS) prepared for City of Huntington by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) dated February 19, 2014 or the most recent revision thereof including all digital data developed as part of the FIS. 
B.  The identified special flood hazard area shall also be those special flood hazard areas identified by City of Huntington by use of historic or other technical data and shown on an officially recognized "local flood hazards map". These areas shall be designated as appropriate with the level of technical data described below and shall be managed accordingly. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349C.02 - DESCRIPTIONS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. 
A.  The identified special flood hazard area shall consist of the following four specific areas: 
1.  The floodway shall be those areas of AE zone identified as floodways in the FIS and as shown on the FIRM. The term shall also include any floodway areas delineated by developers in the approximated floodplain and designated as such by the community. 
2.  The floodway fringe shall be those areas of AE zone for which specific 100-year flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but which lie beyond the floodway area. 
3.  The AE area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which 100-year flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been delineated. 
4.  The approximated floodplain shall be those areas identified as an A zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no 100-year flood elevations have been provided. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349C.03 - CHANGES IN DESIGNATION OF AREA. 
A.  The delineation of the identified special flood hazard area may be revised by City of Huntington where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual document the necessity for such changes. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
B.  City of Huntington's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable but, not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, City of Huntington shall notify the NFIP Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. 
C.  City of Huntington may identify and regulate new local flood hazard or ponding areas. These areas may be delineated on a "local flood hazard map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high water marks or approximate study methodologies. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349C.04 - BOUNDARY DISPUTES. 
    Should a dispute concerning the location of proposed development relative to a special flood hazard area arise, an initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to City of Huntington. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant/applicant. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349C.05 - ELEVATIONS PREVAIL. 
    Elevation data certified by a licensed professional surveyor or registered professional engineer shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
    If the structure location appears to be inside the SFHA on the FEMA FIRM's and if the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development within an identified flood hazard area is at or above the base flood elevation specified in the flood insurance study (FIS), the structure shall not be required to conform to the flood prevention design and construction standards or flood-related development codes in article VI. Topographic data certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. The applicant shall apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA and the determination given to the floodplain administrator within 90 days of issuance of the permit having the special flood hazard area designation removed from the parcel or structure prior to certificate of occupancy/compliance. 
    The proposed development shall be considered to be within the special flood hazard area if the natural LAG to the proposed development is below either: 1. The closest applicable BFE specified in the flood insurance study, or 2. The reasonably safe from flooding elevation determined by City of Huntington in approximate floodplains. The proposed development shall then be required to conform to all appropriate flood damage reduction provisions of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349D - UTILIZATION OF THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA 

1349D.01 - FLOODWAY. 
    Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the City of Huntington during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. The resultant engineering study shall include a cover letter, signed and sealed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the floodplain administrator. 
A.  Because floodways present increased risk to human life and property due to their relatively faster and deeper flowing waters the floodway shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. 
1.  New development shall not be permitted in the floodway where reasonable alternatives exist elsewhere. In addition to the requirements below the applicant shall demonstrate that there are no reasonable alternatives other than the floodway encroachment before a permit is issued. 
2.  When the floodway is the only reasonable alternative the applicant shall demonstrate that the floodway encroachment is the minimum necessary to accomplish the project. 
3.  All permitted uses, activities, and development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained herein, and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
4.  In special flood hazard areas for which no regulatory floodway has been designated, the regulatory floodway for small, single lot development not incorporating significant amounts of fill can, at the discretion of City of Huntington, be determined to be the channel of the stream and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the special flood hazard area as measured from the top of the bank nearest the site to the upland limit of the 1% annual chance special flood hazard area boundary. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349D.02 - FLOODWAY FRINGE. 
    Within any floodway fringe area any development and/or use of land shall be permitted provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained herein and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349D.03 - AE WITHOUT FLOODWAY. 
    Within any AE without floodway area, no new construction or development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any point. This requirement can be satisfied by utilization of the floodway where determined. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349D.04 - Approximated floodplain (zone A). 
A.  Within any approximated floodplain. 
1.  The floodplain administrator shall use elevation and floodway information from federal, state, or other acceptable sources when available to determine the elevation above which development will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
2.  When data from an acceptable source is not available, the floodplain administrator shall review, or shall cause to be reviewed; all proposed development to determine: 1. The amount being invested, and 2. The specific flood risk at the site. The floodplain administrator shall then require the applicant to determine the elevation above which the development will be reasonably safe from flooding using elevation data, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses or other techniques. When hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be undertaken by a registered professional engineer who shall certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Any development and/or use of land shall be permitted provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood-proofing and related provisions contained herein and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
    See appendix 4.4 for sample "approximated floodplain (zone A) techniques". 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349D.05 - ALTERATION OR RELOCATION OF A STREAM. 
A.  Whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a stream within the special flood hazard area the developer shall notify in writing, by certified mail, to City of Huntington, the floodplain administrator, the state coordinating office, any adjacent communities and any adjacent property owners of all such intended activities prior to the alteration or relocation of the stream. Copies of all required notifications must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In addition prior to issuing the local permit the floodplain administrator shall require copies of all necessary permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state law requires approval. 
    See appendix 4.5 for sample "stream alteration process and contact sheet". 
B.  The developer shall also assure City of Huntington in writing that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the stream will be maintained. The floodplain administrator may require the applicant to demonstrate that the altered or relocated portion of stream will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. If hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be undertaken by a registered professional engineer, who shall certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the floodplain administrator. 
C.  Alteration of a stream includes placement of culverts, bridges or other stream crossings. The floodplain administrator may require the use of certain "best practice" techniques in the construction of bridges, culverts or stream crossings to prevent damage, loss of stream crossings and localized flooding caused by blockage. These techniques may include, but are not limited to, wing walls, trash grates or requiring openings to be of sufficient size to pass debris and/or anticipated future increases in flood heights. 
D.  All new and replacement bridges, culverts and other stream crossings shall adhere to the relevant anchoring requirements contained in this ordinance. 
E.  The developer is required to provide City of Huntington a legal agreement detailing all scheduled inspections and maintenance to be performed on altered or relocated watercourses including culverts, bridges and other stream crossings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer this agreement to the new owner when the land associated with the watercourse alteration is transferred. A copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to the floodplain administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1349H.03 of this ordinance. 
F.  The applicant shall submit any maps, computations or other material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by the floodplain administrator, and shall pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349E - CRITERIA FOR BUILDING AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL 

1349E.01 - GENERAL. 
    Permits are required in order to determine whether all new construction or substantial improvements are: 
1.  Located in an identified floodplain, floodway or other special flood hazard area. 
2.  Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
3.  Constructed with material and utility equipment resistant to flood damage as outlined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 or the most recent revision thereof. 
4.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
5.  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
6.  To comply with West Virginia State Code § 11-3-3a. concerning County Assessor "Building or real property improvement notice". 
7.  Approved by county health department for water and sewer to assure facilities are designed or located in compliance with the flood damage reduction requirements of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349E.02 - BASIC FORMAT. 
    The basic format of the permit shall include the following: 
1.  Name and address of applicant. 
2.  Name and address of owner of land on which proposed development is to occur. 
3.  Names, addresses, and valid West Virginia license numbers of all contractors working at the building site, or affidavits stating that work is being performed by individuals exempt from contractor licensing as set forth in Title 28, Series 2, section 3.9 (b) of the West Virginia Code of state regulations or the most recent revision thereof. 
4.  A description of site location sufficient to locate the project including tax map and parcel number and most recent deed book and page number. 
5.  A standard site plan showing size and location of the proposed development as well as any existing buildings or structures. The site plan shall also show all adjacent roads and watercourses with direction of flow, the lowest adjacent grade to the proposed foundation and/or toe of fill, the base flood elevation and the location of the floodway boundary when applicable. 
6.  An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to pay any and all fees associated with the permitting process as set forth in section 1349G.09 hereof. 
7.  An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to allow authorized representatives of floodplain management programs access to the development to inspect for compliance. 
8.  The contract required by West Virginia Code of State Regulations, Title 28, Series 4, and all addendums to the contract(s) shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator for review within five (5) business days of contract signing. City of Huntington does not require and will not keep copies of the contracts or addendums. Failure to present contract or addendums for review shall void the permit. If a licensed contractor is not involved, or the work is of an aggregate value of less than ten thousand dollars including materials and labor, a brief written description of proposed work and the estimated value will suffice. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349E.03 - ELEVATION AND FLOOD PROOFING INFORMATION. 
    All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum elevation requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered significantly by increasing the elevation of the lowest floor above the freeboard height required by this ordinance. 
    Depending on the type of structure involved, the following information shall also be included in the application for work within the special flood hazard area: 
A.  For structures to be elevated two feet above the base flood elevation: 
1.  A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. 
2.  A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor, certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor. 
3.  Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls, foundations, erosion protection measures, etc. When required by the floodplain administrator, a registered professional engineer or architect shall prepare these plans. 
4.  Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to two feet above the base flood elevation at the building site. 
5.  During the course of construction, as soon as the basic elements of the lowest floor are in place and before further vertical construction, it is highly recommended that the applicant check for error by obtaining elevation data completed by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor certifying the height of the lowest floor. If a mistake in elevation has been made this is the best time to correct the error. 
6.  A finished construction elevation certificate shall be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated qualifications. The elevation certificate shall confirm that the structure in question, together with attendant utilities is elevated in compliance with permit conditions. 
7.  A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant whenever City of Huntington determines that the area below the first floor could be converted to a non-conforming use (generally applies to enclosed areas below base flood elevation that are five feet high or more). This agreement shall state: 
(i)  The area below base flood elevation shall not be converted for use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as detailed in this ordinance. 
(ii)  The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to the floodplain administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1349H.03 of this ordinance. 
B.  For structures to be flood proofed to two feet above the base flood elevation (nonresidential structures only): 
All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum flood proofing requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered significantly by increasing the level of flood proofing above the height required by this ordinance. In order to obtain an "elevation credited" flood insurance rate on dry flood proofed buildings, flood proofing must extend at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
1.  Plans showing details of all flood proofing measures, prepared by a registered professional engineer, showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. 
2.  A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing ground, proposed finished ground, lowest floor, and flood proofing limits; certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor. 
3.  A flood proofing certificate, FEMA 81-65, as revised by FEMA, shall be prepared by the registered professional engineer who prepared the plans in 1. above, stating that the finished structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities is designed so that: 
(i)  The structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(ii)  The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic, buoyant, impact, and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities, pressures, and other factors associated with the base flood. 
C.  For accessory structures constructed of flood resistant materials used solely for parking of vehicles or limited storage, (accessory structures only). 
1.  A site plan prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated qualifications showing elevation of existing ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor. The plan shall also show details of proposed flood resistant materials usage and the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. The location of the floodway boundary shall be represented on the plan when a floodway is present on the site. 
2.  An elevation certificate, based on finished construction, must be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated qualifications. The elevation certificate confirm that the structure in question, together with attendant utilities is designed so that: 
(i)  Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 are used in the construction of the structure from the lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation and that all utilities are located at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(ii)  Hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls are equalized by allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
3.  In addition, the applicant shall sign a non-conversion agreement and notify prospective buyers of the existence of the agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the non-conversion agreement to any new owner at closing via notarized signature. A signed copy of the transferred non-conversion agreement shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to the floodplain administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1349H.03 of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349E.04 - SITE PLAN CRITERIA. 
    Site plans are required for all development, new construction and substantial improvements determined to be located in a special flood hazard area and all proposed subdivisions and manufactured home parks. These proposals shall be reviewed by the floodplain administrator to assure that they are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
    The owner or developer shall submit a preliminary site plan to the floodplain administrator that includes the following information: 
1.  A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or development with respect to special flood hazard areas, proposed lot sites, and fills. 
2.  Name of registered professional engineer, licensed professional surveyor or other qualified person responsible for providing the information required in this section. 
3.  Where the subdivision or manufactured home park lie partially or completely in the special flood hazard areas, the plan map shall include detailed information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities and building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of two or five feet depending upon the slope of the land and identify accurately the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas. A registered professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor shall certify the site plan. 
4.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments which are proposed to take place either fully or partially within the approximated floodplain and which are greater than ten lots or two acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data and shall delineate a floodway when directed to do so by the floodplain administrator. 
1.  When a flood insurance study (FIS) is available from FEMA, the data contained in that study shall be used to substantiate the base flood. 
2.  If a FEMA Flood Insurance Study is not available the required data may be available from an authoritative source, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resource Conservation Service or state and local water resource department. 
3.  If the required data is not available from other sources the applicant shall develop the technical data using detailed methodologies comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study. This data shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer, who shall certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. 
5.  Where the subdivision or other development site lies partially in the special flood hazard area and all proposed development including fill will take place on natural grade a significant vertical distance above the approximated floodplain area (zone "A") boundary depicted on the map, development of detailed base flood elevation data may not be necessary. In these cases the site plan for the proposed development must show contours at intervals of two or five feet, depending on the slope, and clearly delineate the area to be developed and the location of the special flood hazard boundary area as scaled from the FEMA map. A registered professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor shall certify the site plan. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349E.05 - RESTRICTIONS TO SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. 
    Subdivision of land in the special flood hazard area shall result in lots that include a buildable portion outside of the special flood hazard area and be served by streets within the proposed subdivision having surfaces not lower than one foot below the elevation of the line defining the special flood hazard area limits. All new structures shall be sited on the portion of the subdivided lot that is located outside of the special flood hazard area. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349F - SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 

1349F.01 - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. 
    In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings, structures, and related utilities and facilities, the following restrictions apply to all development, subdivision proposals, manufactured home parks, new construction and to construction of substantial improvements, and the repair of substantial damage, to existing structures occurring in the Special flood hazard area. 
A.  Basements and lowest floors. 
1.  Residential structures - All new construction, relocation, substantial improvements including repair of substantial damage, of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Non-residential Structures - All new construction, relocation, substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork and utilities, elevated to two feet above the Base Flood Elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation. 
3.  Openings - For all new construction, relocation, substantial improvements, and repair of substantial damage, those fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
4.  A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant on all flood-proofed structures and any elevated structures when the City of Huntington determines that the area below the first floor could be converted to a non-conforming use (generally applies to enclosed areas below base flood elevation that are five feet high or more). This agreement shall state: 
The area below base flood elevation shall not be converted for use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as detailed in this ordinance. 
The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to the floodplain administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1349H.03 of this ordinance. 
B.  Manufactured home placement. Certain unique characteristics of manufactured homes installed in special flood hazard areas pose an elevated risk to safety and substantial damage to property. Therefore: 
1.  All manufactured homes to be sited within the special flood hazard areas of City of Huntington shall be installed by a contractor possessing a valid West Virginia Manufactured Home Installer's license. The licensed manufactured home installer shall use an installation design engineered to withstand flood hazards specific to the particular home site. Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within the special flood hazard areas shall be installed in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  The lowest floor, ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump shall be elevated two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Elevation shall be on reinforced piers on a permanent foundation, or shall use foundation elements of at least equivalent strength engineered for use in a flood hazard area. Installation designs incorporating dry stacked block piers shall not be used in special flood hazard areas. 
c.  All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in compliance with the requirements of 42 West Virginia Code of State Regulations, Series 19, 1349s 10.1, 10.2, and 10b as authorized by W. Va. Code § 21-9-4 or the most recent revisions thereof. The anchoring shall be adequate to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to the over-the-top and frame ties, attached to permanent foundation elements. Ground anchors may not be adequate to satisfy flood specific anchoring requirements. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
d.  Permanently attached rigid skirts and/or perimeter wall skirts of brick or block shall have openings to prevent collapse and damage to supporting piers. The openings shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
e.  Any additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored and vented. 
2.  The licensed West Virginia Manufactured Home Installer placing the unit shall perform a site inspection and certify in writing that the manufactured home has been installed to the standards set forth in this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory structures. 
1.  Except as provided in subsection 2. below, accessory structures shall be located out of the special flood hazard area or elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Where accessory structures not connected to the principal structure are to be located on sites below the base flood elevation, the following flood damage reduction provisions apply: 
a.  Use of the structure shall be restricted to parking or limited storage. 
b.  Structures shall be no more than 200 square feet in size and valued at less than $5,000. 
c.  Floors shall be at or above grade on at least one side. 
d.  Structures shall be located, oriented and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
e.  Structures shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
f.  Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 shall be used in the portions of the structure below BFE. 
g.  Machinery, electric devices or appliances, and all utilities shall be located at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
h.  The venting requirements contained in section 1349F.01 A. are applicable and shall be strictly adhered to. 
3.  A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant stating that the use of the accessory structure or detached or attached garage shall not be changed from the use permitted, acknowledging that the structure may be subject to greater flood risk and that higher flood insurance premiums may be possible, and that a change in use may require full compliance with this ordinance. The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the existence of this agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to the floodplain administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 1349H.03 of this ordinance. 
D.  Recreational vehicle placement. 
1.  Recreational vehicles to be placed within any special flood hazard area shall either: 
a.  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions, or 
c.  Be installed in accordance with the Manufactured Home Placement requirements and all other flood reduction requirements contained in this ordinance. 
E.  Fill. City of Huntington officially recognizes the beneficial functions the floodplain serves in storage and transportation of water during floods. Therefore: 
1.  Placement of fill in the special flood hazard area is discouraged and should be minimized. 
2.  No fill shall be permitted in the floodway. 
3.  Placement of fill in other areas of the special flood hazard area shall be restricted to functional purposes such as elevating a structure. Fill shall only be permitted in the same permit with the related structure or other functional purpose. Placement of fill to dispose of spoil from excavation or to elevate yards, parking lots, or fields will not generally be considered a functional purpose. The floodplain administrator may require the developer to provide compensatory storage before permitting fill. 
4.  No fill shall be permitted unless it meets the requirements of section 1349D.01 of this ordinance. All fill placed in the special flood hazard area shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
a.  Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties. City of Huntington may require the applicant to demonstrate through engineering reports that proposed fill would not adversely affect adjacent properties. When required, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by registered professional engineers who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed and sealed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by City of Huntington during permit review City of Huntington shall consider the following issues that have the potential to cause adverse impact to adjacent properties: 
i.  Unacceptable increases in flood heights. 
ii.  Blocking drainage from adjacent property. 
iii.  Deflection of floodwaters onto adjacent existing structures. 
iv.  Increases to stream velocity initiating or exacerbating erosion problems. 
v.  Other unique site conditions may be considered when determining whether fill will cause adverse impact to adjacent property including, but not limited to, subsidence areas, Karst topography, stream blockages, and steep topography adjacent to the channel. 
b.  Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
c.  Filled site shall be contoured to drain properly (avoid ponding). 
d.  Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all points before the start of sloping required in following subsection. For nonresidential structures, fill shall be placed to provide access acceptable for intended use. At grade access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond the building line shall be provided to a minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a nonresidential structure. 
e.  Fill shall consist of soil or rock material only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted; no trash or woody debris shall be buried on site. 
f.  Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling. Fill compaction standards shall be appropriate to proposed post fill use, particular attention is necessary when fill is being used to elevate a structure. 
g.  Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the floodplain administrator. 
h.  Fill site and fill shall be protected from erosion. 
i.  Fill slopes exposed to flood waters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood of five feet per second or less will be protected from erosion by covering them with grass, vines, weeds, or similar vegetative undergrowth. 
ii.  Fill slopes exposed to flood waters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood of greater than five feet per second will be protected from erosion by armoring them with stone or rock slope protection. 
i.  All applicants placing fill in a special flood hazard area shall obtain a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA when directed to do so by the floodplain administrator before a permit can be issued. After fill is finished the applicant shall convert the CLOMR to a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
j.  The applicant shall submit any maps, computations or other material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by the floodplain administrator, and shall pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. 
F.  Placement of structures and other development. 
1.  All structures and other development shall be constructed or placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum obstruction effect upon the flow and height of floodwater. 
i.  Whenever possible, structures and other development shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and 
ii.  So far as practicable, structures and other development shall be placed approximately on the same flood-flow lines as those of adjoining structures or development. 
G.  Anchoring 
1.  All structures and other development including stream crossings shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse. 
2.  All air ducts, large pipes, swimming pools and storage tanks located at or below the Base Flood Elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation. 
H.  Flood protection setback. A flood protection setback equal to twice the width of the watercourse channel measuring from the top of one bank to the top of the opposite bank or 50 feet, whichever is less, shall be maintained from the top of the banks of all watercourses. To reduce erosion, natural vegetation shall be maintained in this area. Where natural vegetation does not exist along the watercourse and conditions for replanting are suitable, high priority shall be given to planting vegetation in the setback area to stabilize banks, enhance flood protection and benefit aquatic resources. 
1.  Necessary public works and temporary construction may be exempted from this subsection. 
2.  The floodplain administrator may consider an appeal to the flood protection setback requirement if the applicant demonstrates that it is impossible to allow any development without encroachment into the flood protection setback area. The appeal conditions shall be the minimum necessary and shall be made only after due consideration is given to varying other siting standards, such as side, front and back lot line setbacks. 
I.  Storage. 
1.  No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored below base flood elevation. 
2.  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
3.  Due to the potential of masking the natural elevation and making it more difficult to enforce this ordinance, material that resembles "fill" material shall not be considered "storage" material for purposes of this subsection. 
J.  Utility and facility requirements. All new or replacement water systems whether public or private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
All new or replacement sanitary disposal systems, whether public or private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
All other new or replacement public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
K.  Drainage. 
1.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazard. 
2.  Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes within zones AH and AO to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
L.  Backflow preventers. Back flow prevention valves should be used for all enclosed structures with sewage or drainage facilities located in the special flood hazard area. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349G - ADMINISTRATION 

1349G.01 - DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. 
    The floodplain coordinator is hereby appointed as floodplain administrator and is vested with the responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments made in our agreement with the Federal Government to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions. The floodplain administrator shall also be responsible for submitting all required reports to FEMA concerning City of Huntington's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.02 - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND SITE PLAN APPROVALS REQUIRED. 
    It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business, or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development or the new construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, the placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) within City of Huntington, unless a permit application and standard site plan has been completed, and a permit has been obtained from the floodplain administrator. In addition, where land that is either partially or fully in the special flood hazard area is to be subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or otherwise developed, a detailed site plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the floodplain administrator prior to any development. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.03 - APPROVAL OF PERMITS AND PLANS. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall review, or shall cause to be reviewed; all permit applications and plans in order to determine whether proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
B.  All permits and plans shall be approved only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of the state and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
C.  The floodplain administrator shall not issue a permit to any person who does not possess a valid contractor's license when a contractor's license is required by W. Va. Code § 21-11-10. 
D.  The floodplain administrator, before issuance of the permit, shall require the applicant to furnish satisfactory proof that such person is duly licensed as a contractor under the provisions of West Virginia State Code. If the applicant is not licensed a written affidavit that such person is not subject to licensure as a contractor or subcontractor as defined in W. Va. Code § 21-11-3 shall be provided to the floodplain administrator and placed in the permit file. 
E.  The floodplain administrator shall require copies of all necessary permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state law requires approval. 
F.  The floodplain administrator shall provide a copy of all permits to the county assessor as required by W. Va. Code § 11-3-3A. 
G.  The floodplain administrator shall provide a copy of all permits for new structures to the County E-911 addressing coordinator. 
H.  The County E-911 addressing coordinator shall provide a copy of all requests for addresses for new structures to the county floodplain administrator. 
I.  City of Huntington shall provide sufficient space to allow the floodplain administrator to keep on file in perpetuity, in a location safe from natural hazards, all information collected during the course of the administration of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.04 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES. 
    Application for a permit and/or site plan approvals shall be made, in writing, on the forms supplied by City of Huntington, and shall include all information stipulated under section 1349E of this ordinance. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.05 - CHANGES. 
    After the issuance of a permit or site plan approval by the floodplain administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any of the plans, specification or other documents submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.06 - PERMIT PLACARDS. 
    The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit placard, which shall be prominently displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.07 - START OF CONSTRUCTION. 
    Work on the proposed development shall begin within 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. All work on the proposed development shall be completed within 18 months of permit issuance, at which time the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is granted in writing by the floodplain administrator. The request for a time extension shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the extension. When considering an extension, the floodplain administrator shall consider the following criteria: 
A.  Has the developer diligently pursued the completion of the proposed development during the 18 months? 
B.  Will the granting of the extension be detrimental to public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property? 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.08 - INSPECTIONS, STOP-WORK ORDERS, VIOLATION NOTICE AND REVOCATIONS. 
A.  Inspections. 
1.  Upon learning of a potential violation of this ordinance, the floodplain administrator or staff shall investigate to determine whether a violation has occurred. 
2.  During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
3.  The floodplain administrator or other authorized official may inspect any development covered by this or previous ordinance to determine whether any portion of the development has been altered to be in non-compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1.  The floodplain administrator shall immediately issue, or cause to be issued, a "stop-work order" for any development found ongoing without having obtained a floodplain determination or a permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 1349H.03 of this local law. 
C.  Violation notice and revocations. 
1.  When it appears after investigation that a permitted development is non-compliant with the provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the permit, the floodplain administrator shall notify the violator by means of written violation notice. The violation notice shall specify the nature of the violation and request that the violation be corrected within 15 days from the date appearing on the notice. Failure to correct the violation within this time period shall be cause for revocation of the permit and the governing body, or authorized employee or agent to: 
a.  Seek an injunction in the Circuit Court of Cabell or Wayne County to restrain the violator from continuing the violation, including but not limited to requests for the removal of structures or land uses from the property involved; and 
b.  Seek a misdemeanor conviction in magistrate court or circuit court. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.09 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. 
A.  In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to occupy, or to permit the use or occupancy, of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, installed, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the floodplain administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this local law. Occupying or using a building or premises in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 1349H.03 of this local law. 
B.  In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to inspect and approve a permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until the inspector is in possession of a copy of the certificate of occupancy issued by the local floodplain administrator stating that the particular development being inspected conforms to the requirements of this local law. Inspection and approval of utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 1349H.03 of this local law. 
C.  In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to install a permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the local floodplain administrator stating that the development conforms to the requirements of this local law. Installation of utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 1349H.03 of this local law. 
D.  A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the local administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood hazard. 
E.  Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted as prescribed in this ordinance or local administrative procedures, and any finished construction elevation certificate, hydraulic data, flood proofing certificate, or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a condition of permit approval. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349G.10 - FEES. 
    Application for building permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the City of Huntington, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the fee schedule as established by the City of Huntington Division of Inspection and Compliance. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349H - APPEALS, VARIANCES, AND PENALTIES 

1349H.01 - APPEALS. 
1.  Whenever any person is aggrieved by a decision of the floodplain administrator with respect to the provision of this ordinance, it is the right of that person to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals of City of Huntington which shall be known as the appeals board. Such appeal shall be filed with the Appeals Board of City of Huntington, in writing, within 30 days after notification of the decision. Upon receipt of such appeal, the appeals board shall set a time and place not less than ten nor more than 60 days for the purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to all parties at which time they may appear and be heard. The determination by the appeals board shall be final in all cases. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349H.02 - APPEAL REVIEW CRITERIA. 
A.  All appeals contesting only the permit fee, the cumulative substantial damage requirement, the flood protection setback requirement, or the freeboard requirements, may be handled at the discretion of the appeals board. 
B.  All decisions on appeals to all other provisions of this ordinance shall adhere to the following criteria. 
C.  Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the appeals board upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the appeal would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of an appeal will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing locals laws or ordinance. 
1.  An affirmative decision shall be issued only upon determination that it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. Financial hardship, as a sole criterion, shall not be considered sufficient justification to grant an appeal. 
2.  An affirmative decision shall be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  The appeals board shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a City of Huntington official that (i) the issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, (ii) such construction below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property. Such notifications shall be maintained with a record of all decisions as required in paragraph 4. of this section; and 
4.  The appeals board shall (i) maintain a record of all decisions including justification for their issuance, and (ii) report such decisions issued in its biannual report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
5.  An affirmative decision shall not be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the base flood elevation. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349H.03 - VARIANCES. 
A.  If compliance with any of the requirements of this ordinance would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the City of Huntington may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements. 
B.  Considerations for the issuance of variances to this ordinance shall adhere to the following criteria: 
1.  A decision granting or denying the variance request shall only be issued by the board of zoning appeals upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the permit would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that granting the permit will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing laws, regulations or ordinances; 
2.  An affirmative decision granting a variance shall be issued only upon determination that it is the minimum necessary, considering the special flood hazard area, to afford relief. Financial hardship, used as sole criteria, shall not be considered sufficient justification to grant a variance; 
3.  An affirmative decision granting a floodplain variance shall be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; 
4.  The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant in writing and signed by a majority of the board of zoning appeals that (i) the issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, and (ii) such construction below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all decisions as required in this ordinance; 
5.  The board of zoning appeals shall (i) maintain a record of all decisions including justification for the decisions, and (ii) report such decisions issued in its biannual report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
6.  An affirmative decision shall not be granted for issuance of a floodplain variance for any construction, development use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the base flood elevation. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349H.04 - PENALTIES. 
    Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this ordinance or direction of the floodplain administrator, or any other authorized employee of City of Huntington, shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the prosecuting attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, pay a fine to City of Huntington of not less than fifty dollars or more than $500 plus cost of prosecution. In default of such payment such person shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ten days. Each day during which any violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this ordinance. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or non-occupancy with, this ordinance shall not excuse the violation or non-compliance with the ordinance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or non-compliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in non-compliance with this ordinance may be declared by the City Council of the City of Huntington to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349I - GOVERNMENT ACTIONS 

1349I.01 - JURISDICTIONAL BOUNDARY CHANGES. 
A.  The county floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets or exceeds the requirements for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
B.  Municipalities with existing floodplain ordinances shall pass a resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified flood hazards. 
C.  All plats or maps of annexation shall show the special flood hazard area boundaries, base flood elevation and location of floodway where determined. 
D.  In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44 Subpart (B) 1349 59.22 (a) (9) (v) all NFIP participating communities will notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the State Coordinating Office in writing whenever the boundaries of City of Huntington have been modified by annexation City of Huntington has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that all Flood Insurance Rate Maps accurately represent City of Huntington's boundaries, a copy of a map of City of Huntington suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which City of Huntington has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority shall be included with the notification. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349I.02 - PERMITS FOR GOVERNMENT ENTITIES. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all public utilities and municipal, county, state and federal entities are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. Any entity claiming to be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance shall provide a written statement setting forth the rationale for exemption. In addition the entity claiming exemption shall provide copies of all relevant legal documentation demonstrating the exemption. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
SECTION 1349J - SEVERABILITY AND MUNICIPAL LIABILITY 

1349J.01 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect and for this purpose the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
1349J.02 - LIABILITY. 
    The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision or development plan in an identified flood-prone area, shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by City of Huntington, or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon City of Huntington. 
( Ord. of 4-13-15(3) ) 
CHAPTER NINE - ZONING ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE 1351 - SITE PLAN REVIEW[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Cross reference- Site plan defined, § 1315.02; site plan review in flood plain area, § 1349.12. 

1351.01 - GENERAL. 
    Before a building permit is issued for any new use, a change of use or new occupancy of a non-conforming use, other than single-family or a two-family detached structure, or before approval is given for parking areas, or for off-street loading and unloading facilities, or for essential services, a site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission staff for review and approval. 
1351.02 - INFORMATION REQUIRED. 
A.  Site plans shall include the following information, where appropriate, at a convenient scale: 
1.  Title and location of the property. 
2.  Name and address of landowner and applicant. If a corporation is landowner or applicant, the principal office and name of president and secretary shall be included. 
3.  Name, address and professional license number and seal of the professional preparing documents and drawings. 
4.  Place for signature of the director of planning, code official, or director of public work. 
5.  Date of plan and any modifications thereto. 
6.  North arrow, scale, graphic scale, date and notes and dated revisions. 
7.  The zoning district in which the parcel is located together with the district boundaries including within the boundaries of the parcel or within 200 feet therefrom. All setback lines, landscape strips, landscape buffers, building heights, and other bulk requirements shall be shown and dimensioned. Any deviation from requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be specifically shown. 
8.  Reference to any existing or proposed deed restrictions or exceptions concerning all or any portion of the parcel. A copy of such covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be submitted with the application. 
9.  The location of all existing water courses, ponding basins, slopes in excess of 15 percent, wooded areas, easements, rights-of-way, streets, roads, highways, freeways, railroads, canals, rivers, buildings, structures or any other feature directly on the property or beyond the property if such feature has an effect upon use of said property. 
10.  The location, use and ground area of each existing or proposed building, structure or any other land use. 
11.  The location and widths of proposed streets servicing the site. 
12.  The location of existing and proposed grades. 
13.  The location and capacity of existing and proposed off-street parking areas and loading and unloading facilities. 
14.  Existing and proposed storm and sanitary drainage facilities. 
15.  The location and treatment of existing and proposed entrances and exits to public rights-of-way, including the possible utilization of traffic signals, channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional width, and other device necessary to control traffic safety and convenience. 
16.  The location of and identification of existing and proposed open spaces, parks or other recreation areas affected by the site plan. 
17.  Proposals for soil erosion and sedimentation control, if appropriate. 
18.  The location and design of landscaping, buffer areas and screening devices including a planting plan and schedule of plant materials. 
19.  The location of sidewalks, walkways and other areas proposed to be devoted to pedestrian use. 
20.  General nature and location of public and private utilities, including maintenance and solid waste disposal facilities. 
21.  Specific location and design of signs including the size, nature of construction, height, and orientation, including all identification signs, traffic and directional signs, and arrow, freestanding and facade signs and time controls for sign lighting and lighting fixtures. 
22.  The quantitative aspects of the proposal such as improvement coverage, number of units, square feet of construction, value of construction, density, coverage, number of employees, number of residents and area of land, etc. Specifically identified on the site plan, in tabular form, shall be pertinent zoning data indicating the bulk/area requirements of the zone in which the proposed development is located and how the proposed development responds to the zoning requirements. 
23.  The location and size of all proposed easements, rights-of-way, public areas to be dedicated to the public or to be restricted or defined by deed or any other arrangement. 
24.  A drainage study shall be prepared which will evaluate the affect of the proposed development of existing drainage system downstream of the development. 
B.  Preliminary plans for the proposed buildings or structures, indicating typical floor plans, proposed use, elevations, height and general design or architectural styling. 
C.  Any other information required by the planning commission staff which is reasonably necessary to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
1351.03 - PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF REVIEW. 
    In reviewing the site plan the planning commission staff shall consider its conformity to the Comprehensive Plan and the other codes and ordinances applicable to it. Traffic flow, circulation and parking shall be reviewed to ensure the safety of the public and of the other users of the facility and to ensure that there is no unreasonable interference with traffic on surrounding streets. The impact on drainage shall be considered to ensure against flooding. Conservation features, aesthetics, landscaping and impact on surrounding development as well as on the entire city shall be part of the planning commission staff review. 
1351.04 - SITE PLAN BINDING. 
    The site plan as approved by the city shall be binding upon the applicant. Any changes from the approved plan shall require resubmission and reapproval by the city. The site plan shall remain effective for a period of two years from the date of approval. In the event a particular facility is to be constructed in stages, a site plan for each particular stage shall be required for the issuance of each building permit. 
1351.05 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. 
    The planning commission staff may require that improvements and landscaping be secured by a performance guarantee in the same manner prescribed for such improvements in the subdivision ordinance. 
1351.06 - CODE OFFICIAL/PLANNING STAFF COORDINATION. 
A.  Planning commission staff recommendations. The code official shall not issue a building permit under this article until receipt of the written recommendations or the planning commission staff or until 15 days or agreed upon extensions thereof has elapsed. 
B.  Demolition permit. No demolition permit will be issued by the building inspector until written approval of same is made by the planning commission staff if it affects site plan approval. 
C.  Waiver. The building inspector may waive the requirement for site plan review if the nature or extent of construction or alteration is considered part of normal repair, maintenance, or replacement. 
D.  Temporary certificate of occupancy. The building inspector may grant a temporary certificate of occupancy for a specified period of time not exceeding six months. 
    In its review, the planning commission staff may secure recommendations from the citizens advisory committee, director of public works or any other local, county, state or federal agency which may have an interest in the particular development for which site plan approval is being sought, which recommendations shall be received by the planning commission within ten days after the request therefor. 
    In the event, a determination cannot be made with respect to required data or information at the time of submittal of a site plan, the planning commission staff may make compliance with the particular requirement a condition of approval for a certificate of occupancy and not require it prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
    The written recommendations of the planning commission staff regarding the site plan shall be forwarded to the building inspector and the applicant not more than 15 days from the time the site plan is submitted for planning commission staff review unless extended by mutual agreement between the planning commission staff and the applicant. If the planning commission staff takes no action within 15 days, the site plan shall be deemed to have been approved as submitted. The 15 days shall be deemed to have begun when all required data and exhibits are submitted. 
    The planning commission staff may impose reasonable conditions binding on the applicant in approving any site plan. 
1351.07 - PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW. 
    Where a site plan is of an unusual nature that requires a reevaluation of policies implied in this article, the planning commission staff may request a review and judgment by the planning commission. In the event that the applicant disagrees with a decision made by the staff, the applicant may appeal such decision to the planning commission. 
ARTICLE 1353 - HUNTINGTON HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Law reference- Historic landmarks commission, W. Va. Code, Art. 8-26A; H-1 Historic Preservation District Overlay, Art. 1339. 

1353.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, there is hereby established the Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Huntington. 
1353.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article: 
A.  The term "commission" shall refer to the Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Huntington. 
B.  The term "site" shall refer to any land, with or without any structure thereon, where some event or events of historic significance occurred or which is otherwise of historical value. 
C.  The term "structure" shall refer to any manmade appurtenance, public or private, including but not limited to buildings, whether residential, commercial, governmental or otherwise; landmarks; monuments; memorials; fences; boundary walls; signs; light fixtures; steps and stairways; sidewalks and other pavings; and any other fixtures of any kind. 
1353.03 - COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP. 
A.  The commission shall be composed of five members appointed by the mayor. Of the initial appointees, two shall serve until the first day of July in the second calendar year subsequent to the year in which this ordinance is adopted, and three shall serve until the first day of July in the fourth calendar year subsequent to the year in which this ordinance is adopted. Each appointee thereafter shall serve a term of four years. The commission shall notify the mayor of any vacancy in its membership and such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. In the event any appointed member absents himself from 40% of the commission's meetings in any 12-month period, such member shall be disqualified and the commission shall declare a vacancy which shall be filled as provided hereinabove. At its first meeting and at the first meeting after July 1 of each year thereafter, the commission shall select one of its members to serve as chairman and one to serve as secretary. 
B.  The members should have a demonstrated interest, background, or experience in historic preservation or historically related disciplines; e.g. history, architecture, renovation or rehabilitation projects, real estate, etc. 
C.  All members shall be residents of the city. 
D.  The members of the commission shall not receive any salary for their service, but shall be reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties having the prior approval of the mayor. 
E.  The vote of each member of the commission shall be counted equally in all matters that come before it, provided, however, that no member shall vote upon any matter involving any property in which he or a member his immediate family has an ownership interest. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12(4); Ord. of 9-28-15(2) ) 
1353.04 - MEETINGS. 
    The commission shall meet at least quarterly and may meet more often at the call of the chairman or the majority of the commission as the business of the commission may require with due notice to each member given by the secretary. All meetings shall be public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. The secretary shall file for public record with the city clerk minutes of all its meetings within 60 days of the date such meeting held. 
1353.05 - POWERS AND AUTHORITY. 
    In addition, to any other powers and authority conferred by these codified ordinances or general law, the commission shall have plenary power and authority within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Huntington and within the limits of available funds to perform the following functions: 
A.  Make a survey of the structures and sites within the City of Huntington which constitute the principal historical and architectural locations of local, regional, statewide or national significance. No structure or site shall be deemed to be an historic one unless it has been prominently identified with, or best represents, some major aspect of, or ideals related to, the history of the City of Huntington, Cabell and Wayne Counties, the State of West Virginia, or the United States of America. Structures so designated may embody the principal or unique features of an architectural type or demonstrate the style of a period of history or method of construction, or serve as an illustration of the work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose genius influenced the period in which he worked or has significance in current times. 
B.  Prepare a register of structures and sites which meet the requirements of subsection A. of this section setting forth appropriate information concerning such structures and sites, and to certify them as historical landmarks. 
C.  Inspect such registered or certified properties and sites from time to time and to designate or mark them with appropriately designed signs or markers, provided prior consent of the owner or owners has been obtained. 
D.  Establish standards for the care and management of certified landmarks and withdraw such certification for failure to maintain the standards so prescribed. 
E.  Acquire by purchase, gift, or lease and administer registered landmarks and easements or interests therein, both real and personal. 
F.  Lease or sell property so acquired under terms and conditions designed to ensure the proper preservation of the landmark involved. 
G.  Aid and encourage council and the city administration in the adoption of ordinances and rules and regulations for the preservation of properties of historical or architectural value. 
H.  Prepare and place historical markers on or along the highway or street near the historical landmark, area, or district, which is intended to be identified by such markers. 
I.  Seek the advice and assistance of individuals, groups and department or agencies of government which are conducting historical preservation programs and coordinate with the same insofar as possible. 
J.  Seek and accept gifts, bequests, endowments and funds from any and all sources for the accomplishment of the purposes and duties of the commission. 
K.  Adopt rules and regulations concerning the operation of the commission and such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance, provided, however, that such rules or regulations shall not be inconsistent with any city ordinances. 
1353.06 - CREATION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICTS. 
A.  The commission may from time to time recommend that an area of the city containing at least one-half of a city block or the equivalent thereof (being approximately 86,000 square feet in the City of Huntington) and containing at least one structure or site meeting the requirements of subsection A. of section 1353.05 be designated as an historic preservation district. It shall not be necessary that all properties or structures within such area be historically significant. 
B.  The recommendation of the commission shall be made first to the planning commission in the form of an application for an appropriate amendment to the zoning ordinance designating such area "H-1 Historic Preservation District," which application shall be in writing, shall clearly define the boundaries of the proposed district, and shall provide detailed information as to the historical significance of the structures and sites therein. The planning commission shall then hold such public hearings upon such proposed amendment as may be required by law and shall submit a report to the mayor together with the original application of the commission. The mayor shall review said report and application and, if found to be in order, shall submit the same together with an ordinance giving effect to the recommendation of the commission to council for action thereon. Council may, if it deems necessary, remand the application to the commission for further information or study. 
C.  The properties, structures, and uses within the boundaries of any historic preservation district designated according to this section shall be subject to the review requirements of this article as well as the requirements imposed by the zoning ordinance. 
D.  Upon the approval of council of an ordinance designating an area of the city as an historic preservation district, the commission shall inform the assessor of the county in which such area lies, and said assessor shall, pursuant to W. Va. Code, Ch. 8, Art. 26A, § 5, consider such designation in assessing the properties contained therein. 
1353.07 - REVIEW OF PROPOSED ALTERATIONS. 
A.  Prior to the alteration, movement, demolition, repair, or other change in the exterior of any structure located within an area which has been designated an historic preservation district or the construction of any new structure on property located within such a district, the owner thereof shall submit an application to the commission for a certificate of appropriateness on forms to be adopted by the commission and shall include at a minimum the following information: 
1.  Detailed plans, depicting the exact work to be performed, including detailed renderings of the exterior of any proposed new structure or any exterior alterations to the existing structures. A delineation of the relationship of the renderings of the proposal in relation to adjacent structures on surrounding lands may be required. 
2.  A statement of the relationship of the proposed work to the standards for approval of certificates of appropriateness as set forth below. 
3.  Such other information as may be required from time to time by the appropriate municipal reviewing agency or official. 
    No structure exposed to public view within an historic preservation district shall be constructed, altered, moved, demolished, repaired, or otherwise changed without a certificate of appropriateness having been issued by the commission. 
B.  The historic preservation commission shall review and designate the application as a minor or major application based upon the following criteria: 
1.  Major application shall be any application for a "Certificate of Appropriateness" which involves demolition or removal of a structure or any part thereof; the addition to any structure located within the historic preservation district, or on any historic property (including structure and archeological resource); or the new construction of buildings within the historic district. 
2.  Minor application shall mean an application for "Certificate of Appropriateness" which is considered maintenance and upkeep, such as painting, replacing, repair to a structure located within the historic preservation district, or on any historic property (including structure and archeological resource) and does not involve any activity set forth in paragraph 1. above. 
3.  Waiver. A letter of waiver from minor application procedure for a "Certificate of Appropriateness" is available for the applicant who complies with accepted standards, colors or techniques to be used with respect to the maintenance and upkeep, painting, replacing, or repairing of an applicable structure. Said standards, colors and techniques shall be on file with the secretary of the commission. A letter defining the requested waiver which indicates the property in question and the particular maintenance, upkeep painting, replacing or repairing sought to be done, shall be available without charge from the office of the chairman or secretary of the commission. Such letter shall have an indefinite duration, thus eliminating the need for successive exemption letters for the same type of maintenance, upkeep, painting, replacing or repairing. 
C.  All construction, alterations, movements, demolition, repairs, or other changes carried out on structures located within an historic preservation district shall be compatible, harmonious, and consistent with the style, scale, and character of the original structure. New structures need not be in any particular historical style, provided that the scale and design of the new structure and the materials used are harmonious with the overall character of the district. Standards for design are provided in article 1339 of this zoning ordinance. 
D.  The commission shall review such application, plans, and designs, giving consideration to the following: 
1.  With respect to applications for demolition, the commission shall first consider whether preservation of the resource in place is feasible or, failing that option, whether preservation of the resource at another location is feasible. 
2.  With respect to applications for relocation, the cmmission shall first consider whether the preservation of the resource in place is possible. 
3.  With respect to applications for certificates of appropriateness relating to changes in exterior appearance, new constructions, or signage or exterior lighting the commission shall consider the visual compatibility of the proposed changes to the subject structure and the other structures and surroundings to which it would be visually related; the extent to which the proposed changes would affect adversely the public's view of a historic structure from a public street; and the impact of the proposed changes upon the ambience of the historic district. 
4.  In assessing visual compatibility, the commission should consider such factors as height, proportion of the building's front facade, proportion of window and door openings, relationship of entrance and porch projections to the street, roof shapes, scale of buildings, directional expressions of the front elevation, and the relationship of materials, texture and color of facade and roof of the subject building to that of others to which it is visually related. 
5.  The in passing appropriateness of exterior architectural features, in any case, shall keep in mind the purposes set forth in this article and shall consider, among other things, the general design arrangements and material of the building or structure in question and the relationship of such factors to similar features of historic structures in the immediate surroundings and the position of such structures in relationship to the street or public way and each other. 
6.  The commission shall not make any requirements except for the purpose of preventing developments obviously incongruous to the historic aspects of the surroundings. 
7.  The commission shall be tolerant in its judgment of plans for new construction or for alterations, repair or demolition which would seriously impair the historic value and character of surrounding structures or the surrounding area. 
8.  The commission shall provide encouragement that any alterations or repairs to structures in a historic district be made in the spirit of their architectural style and that any additions will be made in such manner as not to detract from a building's original appearance. 
9.  It is the intent of this section that the commission be strict in its judgment of plans for alterations, repairs or demolition of existing structures deemed valuable according to studies approved by the city. Small additions and construction to existing properties in Huntington's Historic District, such as decks, porches, garages and the like, which are not visible from the street and have minimal or no impact on the historic character of the area, may be reviewed and approved by the planning commission staff upon notice to the commission and to the full planning commission of such action. 
    The commission shall pass only on exterior features of a structure and shall not consider the interior arrangement. If after reviewing the application and plans the commission is satisfied that the proposed construction, alteration, repair, or other change will not materially impair the historical or architectural value or significance of the structure or site in question or of the surrounding area, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness to the applicant and shall notify the building inspector and the zoning officer of its action. 
E.  If the commission disapproves of the application, it shall notify the applicant in writing of its reasons, and the commission may work with the applicant for the purpose of amending his proposed plans and designs to comply with the standards set forth in this article. 
F.  The building inspector shall not issue a building permit and the zoning officer shall not issue any zoning permit for any construction, alterations, repairs, or other changes to any structure or site located within an historic preservation district without a certificate of appropriateness from the commission. Such building permit and zoning permit shall restrict any construction, alterations, demolition, repairs, or other changes to that which is covered by the certificate of appropriateness. The building inspector shall from time to time inspect the work approved by the certificate of appropriateness and shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance therewith. 
G.  Failure of the commission to act within 45 days from the date an application is submitted shall constitute approval, and the building inspector and zoning officer shall proceed as if a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. 
1353.08 - VARIANCES. 
    Where by reason of unusual circumstances applicable solely to the particular applicant, strict enforcement of this article would result in serious undue hardship, the commission shall have the power to vary or modify the application of this article with respect to such applicant, provided always that such variances are harmonious with the general purposes of this article and will not seriously affect neighboring properties or the historic preservation district as a whole. 
1353.09 - EXCEPTIONS. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repairs which do not involve a change of design, materials, or the outward appearance of a building or structure in an historic preservation district, nor to prevent the construction, alteration, or demolition of any feature required by the public safety. The requirements of this article do not apply to work begun or for which a permit was issued prior to the establishment of the historic preservation district in which the concerned building or structure is located. 
1353.10 - APPEALS. 
    Any property owner aggrieved by an action or decision of the commission concerning his application for a certificate of appropriateness may appeal the same to the board of zoning appeals. 
1353.11 - RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CERTIFIED HISTORICAL LANDMARKS OUTSIDE HISTORICAL PRESERVATION DISTRICTS. 
    Whenever the commission certifies property not contained in an historic preservation district as being a registered landmark, it may seek and obtain from the concerned property owner or owners an agreement as to such restrictions upon the use of the property as the commission may find reasonable and necessary to perpetuate and preserve the features which led it to certify such property as an historical landmark. The restrictions contained in such agreements shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the successors, heirs, and assigns of the property owner. All such agreements between the commission and the property owner shall be in writing, and when duly signed and acknowledged, shall be recorded in the office of the City Clerk of City of Huntington and in the deed books in the Office of the Clerk of the County Commission of Cabell County or the Office of the Clerk of the County Commission of Wayne County, depending upon the location of the property in question, and shall be served upon the assessor of the county in which the concerned property is located. Pursuant to W. Va. Code, Ch. 8, Art. 26A, § 5, the assessor shall take such restrictions into consideration when assessing such properties. 
1353.12 - INTERAGENCY AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION. 
    The commission shall cooperate and coordinate its activities with the West Virginia Historical Society and the West Virginia Department of Culture and History with the view of developing a unified program for the identification, study, preservation, and protection of all historic buildings, structures and sites in the City of Huntington. The commission shall coordinate its activities with the Planning Commission of the City of Huntington in all matters affecting the City of Huntington Comprehensive Plan. 
ARTICLE 1355 - NONCONFORMING USE SPECIFICATIONS[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Cross reference- Nonconforming uses and structures defined, § 1315.02; nonconforming signs, § 1345.12. 
State Law reference- Validation of existing ordinances, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-49; existing uses safeguarded, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-50 

1355.01 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES. 
    The lawful use of a building or premises, existing at the time of passage of this ordinance, may be continued although such use does not conform to all the provisions of this ordinance, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  A nonconforming use may be extended throughout a building provided the size of the structure is not increased. 
(b)  A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or greater restrictions provided: 
(1)  The size of the structure is not increased. 
(2)  Where the nonconforming use is also a special permit, the ownership of both the property and the business constituting the special permit remain unchanged. 
(3)  Where the ownership of the business constituting the special permit, or both, are changed from the owner(s) granted the special permit, the special permit shall become null and void, and a new special permit must be sought in accordance with the provisions of article 1359 of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use or to a use permitted in a district of greater restrictions, it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a less restricted district. For the purpose of this article, the R-l district shall be considered to have the greatest restrictions, and such restrictions are considered to decrease in the following order of districts R-2, R-4, R-5, C-l, C-2, C-3, and 1-1. 
(d)  No building shall be erected upon any premises devoted to a nonconforming use, except in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(e)  The board may authorize, by written permit, in an R-l, R-2, R-4, or R-5 district for a period of not more than one year from the date of such permit, a temporary building for business or industrial use incidental to the residential construction and development of such district. 
(f)  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit or improvement location permit has been heretofore issued, and the construction of which has been diligently prosecuted within 90 days of the date of such permit, and which entire building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within three years from the date of passage of this ordinance. 
(g)  In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one year, abandonment will be presumed unless the owner of the property can show that the property has not been abandoned, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located, provided that abandonment of any agricultural use or manufacturing process shall not be construed as abandonment of agricultural or industrial use. 
(h)  The continuance of the use of any land, building, or structure for the purpose for which land, building, or structure is used at the time this ordinance takes effect is hereby permitted, but any addition to any existing building for the purpose of carrying on any use prohibited under the zoning regulations applicable to the district is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that such prohibition shall not apply to alterations, additions to, replacement of structures, or to the acquisition or use of land presently owned by any firm or industry but not used for agricultural or industrial purposes or to the use or acquisition of additional land which may be required for the protection, continuing development or expansion of any agricultural, industrial or manufacturing operation or any present or future satellite agricultural, industrial or manufacturing use. 
If a nonconforming use has been abandoned, any future use of such land, building or structure shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance regulating the use in the district in which such land, building, or structures may be located; provided, however, that abandonment of any particular agricultural or manufacturing process shall not be construed as abandonment of agricultural or manufacturing use. 
(i)  These provisions apply in the same manner to a use which may become a nonconforming use as a result of an amendment to this section. 
(Ord. of 12-14-09) 
ARTICLE 1357 - FILING FEES[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Cross reference- Building fees, § 1711.05. 

1357.01 - FEES ESTABLISHED. 
    Application and petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance shall be accompanied by the filing fees hereafter specified. 
(a)  For each application for a certificate of occupancy, a fee of $75 shall be paid. 
(b)  For each petition for an appeal from the decision of the administrative official to the board, special permit/special exception, or variance a fee of $160 shall be paid, the receipt of which shall accompany the petition. 
(c)  For each application for review of preliminary and/or final plan, and/or variance(s) pursuant to the development ordinance of the City of Huntington by the planning commission, a fee of $150 shall be paid, the receipt of which shall accompany the petition. 
(d)  For each petition for an amendment to this ordinance, the fees shall be as follows: 
Rezoning to: Single- and 2-family $175.00 Multi-family Residential $250.00 Commercial $350.00 Industrial $350.00  
(e)  Except for the fee for a certificate of occupancy, no part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returnable to the applicant or petitioner. 
(Ord. of 3-28-11(1); Ord. of 11-24-14(2)) 
ARTICLE 1359 - SPECIAL PERMIT, REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 

1359.01 - PROCEDURES. 
(a)  Special permits as defined by article 1315 and their accessory buildings may be permitted by the board of zoning appeals in the districts where indicated, in accordance with the procedure and requirements set forth in this article and any other requirements described by this ordinance. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a special permit the planning director shall give public notice in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8A-8-11. The planning director shall prepare a written notice which shall be mailed to all property owners within a 400-foot radius of the subject property 15 days prior to the hearing. Further, written notice shall be provided to all residents, if they be different than the owner, within the 400-foot radius by first class mailing through the United States Postal Service. If the petitioner's property is located on a street where the entrance and exit is the same (cul-de-sac, dead end or circle) all such properties within that location shall be notified regardless of the 400-foot guideline. Notice shall also be posted on the subject property by the applicant. The findings of the board and its order to the planning director shall be in writing. 
(c)  In making its decision, the board of zoning appeals shall consider the following: 
(1)  Effect upon the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. 
(3)  Potential injury to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted. 
(4)  Effect upon the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses already permitted in the district. 
(5)  Adequate provisions for utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary facilities. 
(6)  Adequate ingress and egress so designed to minimize traffic congestion in the public street. 
    The board shall direct the planning director to issue the improvement location permit for such special permit, otherwise the board shall direct the planning director to reject the application. The findings of the board of zoning appeals and its order to the planning director shall be in writing. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning appeals regarding its action pertaining to the special permit request may file an appeal with the circuit court in accordance with article 1361. 
(e)  The board of zoning appeals may impose additional conditions to assure that special permits will conform to the intent of this ordinance. 
(f)  An existing use which is listed herein as a special permit, and which is located in a district in which such special permit may be permitted, is a conforming use provided that: 
    Any expansion of such special permit involving the enlargement of the buildings, structure, and land area devoted to such use shall be subject to the requirements and procedure described in this article. 
(g)  Any person to whom is issued an improvement location permit for a special permit who fails to commence construction within 12 months after such permit is issued or who fails to carry to completion 30% of the total development plan thereof within three years after such permit is issued or within one year after such construction is begun, whichever is later, or who fails to conform to the provisions of the development plan and supporting data finally approved by the board of zoning appeals and upon the basis of which such improvement location permit was issued, may be required by the board of zoning appeals upon written petition of any person deeming himself aggrieved, to show cause why such approval should not be withdrawn and such improvement location permit revoked. 
(h)  The holder of an improvement location permit for a special permit may apply to the board of zoning appeals at any time for alteration, change, amendment to extension of the application or development plan upon which such permit was based. 
(1)  Upon receipt of such application, the board of zoning appeals shall proceed as in the case of original applications for an improvement location permit for a special permit. 
(2)  In the event the board of zoning appeals shall approve and order such application or development plan changed, altered, amended or extended, it shall so notify the planning director who shall issue an amended improvement location permit accordingly. 
(i)  Expiration. If a special permit/special exception use lawfully operating ceases operation for a period of 12 months or more regardless of any intent to resume operation, it may not recommence operation in that location without first applying for special permit/special exception via the public hearing process and approval of the board of zoning appeals in the districts where indicated, in accordance with the procedure and requirements set forth in this article and any other requirements described by this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-8-10; Ord. of 11-24-14(1)) 
ARTICLE 1361 - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Charter reference- Establishment; composition, § 8.12. 
State Law reference- Open governmental proceedings, W. Va. Code, Art. 6-9A; establishment; composition, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-51 et seq.; appeals, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-56 et seq.; injunctions, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-67. 

1361.01 - ESTABLISHED; POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    A board of zoning appeals is hereby established with membership and appointment provided in accordance with the authority conferred by Article 5, Land Use Planning, Chapter Eight A, Article Eight of the Code of West Virginia. 
(a)  The first meeting of each year, the board shall elect a chairman and a vice- chairman from its members. The vice-chairman shall have authority to act as chairman during the absence or disability of the chairman. 
(b)  A majority of members of a board shall constitute a quorum. No action of the board is official, however, unless authorized by a majority of the board present. 
(c)  Council may appoint up to three alternate members to serve upon the board of zoning appeals in accordance with W. Va. Code, § 8A-8-3. 
(d)  The board may appoint and fix the compensation of a secretary and such employees as are necessary for the discharge of its duties all in conformity to and compliance with salaries and compensation therefor fixed by the city. 
(e)  The board shall adopt such rules concerning the filing of appeals and applications for variances, special permits and special exceptions, giving of notice and conduct of hearings as shall be necessary to carry out their duties under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(f)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep records of its examination and other official actions and shall record the vote on all actions taken. All minutes and records shall be filed in the office of the planning director and shall be a public record. 
(g)  The board shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty to: 
(1)  Hear and determine appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(2)  Permit and authorize exceptions to the district regulations only in classes of cases or in particular situations as specified in this ordinance. 
(3)  Authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(h)  Any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property will be substantially affected by an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this ordinance may appeal such to the board of zoning appeals. 
(i)  In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirements, decision to determinations appealed from as in its opinion ought to be done on the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(j)  An appeal taken from the requirement, decision or the determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this ordinance shall be filed with the board. The appeal shall specify the grounds thereof and shall be filed within 30 days of the decision of the administrative official and in such form as may be prescribed by the board by general rule. 
The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon request of the board, transmit to it all documents, plans and papers constituting the record of the action from which an appeal was taken. 
(k)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal. Public notice shall be given of the hearing and due notice shall be given additionally to the interested parties. The board may require the person taking the appeal to assume the cost of public notice and due notice to interested parties. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(l)  When an appeal from the decision of any official has been taken and filed with the board, all proceedings and work on the premises concerning which the decision was made shall be stayed unless the official from whom the appeal was taken shall certify to the board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings or work shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Circuit Court of Wayne County or Cabell County, depending upon which court has jurisdiction, on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and the owner of the premises affected and on due cause shown. 
(m)  Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by certiorari. 
(n)  No variance in the application of the provisions of this ordinance shall be made by the board relating to building, land or premises now existing, or to be constructed, unless after a hearing, the board shall find that such variance will not: 
(1)  Alter the land use characteristics of the district. 
(2)  Impair the adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property. 
(3)  Increase the hazard from fire, flood and other dangers of said property. 
(4)  Diminish the marketable value of adjacent lands and buildings. 
(5)  Increase the congestion in the streets. 
(6)  Otherwise impair the public health, safety, convenience, comfort or general welfare. 
(Ord. of 12-14-09) 
ARTICLE 1363 - AMENDMENTS[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Cross reference- Annexed areas, § 1317.05. 
State Law reference- Procedure, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-45 et seq.; existing uses safeguarded, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-50. 

1363.01 - MODIFICATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; PROCEDURE. 
    Any proposed ordinance for the amendment, supplement, change or repeal of this ordinance not originating from petition of the commission shall be referred to the commission for consideration and report before any final action is taken by the city council. Prior to the submission to the city council of a commission petition or a report on a proposed ordinance referred to it for an amendment, supplement, change or repeal of this ordinance, the commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing in the manner prescribed for adoption of a Comprehensive Plan in Section Eleven (11) of Article Three (3) Chapter Eight A (8A), of the Code of West Virginia, passed March 13, 2004, and in accordance with the Charter of the city. 
(Ord. 2-8-10; Ord. of 4-13-15(6) ) 
1363.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
(a)  Proposed amendments to this ordinance may be presented by the planning commission to the council requesting an amendment, supplement, repeal or change of the regulations of the zoning ordinance. Prior to submission to council of a planning commission petition or report on a proposed ordinance, the planning commission shall make its report on the proposed ordinance to council. Thereafter, council shall proceed to take such action on the proposed ordinance as it deems proper. 
(b)  The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or change the rules and regulations and districts fixed by the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Before amending the zoning ordinance or zoning map, city council with the advice of the planning commission, must find that the amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. If the amendment is inconsistent, then city council with the advice of the planning commission must find that there have been major changes of an economic, physical or social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated when the Comprehensive Plan was adopted and those changes have substantially altered the basic characteristics of the area. 
(d)  Zoning map amendments (i.e., rezonings) often become issues of significant contention between the applicants and residents living adjacent to and in the vicinity of the property to be rezoned. Too often this results in difficult and argumentative public hearings before the municipal planning commission and city council. In most cases, opposition to a rezoning request is based on legitimate concerns over the well-being and preservation of a neighborhood, but sometimes opposition results from a simple lack of communication and understanding between the applicant and the neighborhood residents. The city, therefore, strongly advises any person that is considering applying for a zoning map amendment (i.e., rezoning) to discuss the proposal with residents living within 400-feet of the property to be rezoned and with the leadership of any organized neighborhood association that represents the area before making application to the planning department. 
(Ord. 2-8-10) 
1363.03 - AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURES. 
    Whenever public necessity or the public health, safety, and general welfare require, city council may, by ordinance and the receipt of recommendation thereon from the planning commission and subject to the procedures below, amend, supplement, change, or repeal the regulations, restrictions, and boundaries or classifications of property. 
(Ord. 2-8-10) 
1363.04 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES. 
(a)  Amendment to the zoning map. 
(1)  A request for rezoning of property shall be filed on prescribed forms with the planning department. 
(2)  The planning department will conduct a formal review of the completed form, and, so much as is possible, the names and addresses of property owners and residents within a 400-foot radius of the petitioned property. 
(3)  The planning department will publish a legal advertisement describing the request for rezoning in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the planning commission. Notification will be sent to property owners and residents, to the extent that they can be identified, within 400-feet of the affected property no later than 15-days prior to the meeting. 
(4)  The planning director shall require the petitioner to cause official notification to be posted in a prominent location on the property(ies) not later than 14-days prior to the meeting. 
(5)  The planning commission will hold a duly scheduled public hearing on the rezoning request, prepare a report, and make a recommendation to the city council. 
(6)  City council will hear the case according to its rules and procedures. 
(7)  If the request is approved by council, the applicant shall receive approval and will be formally notified by mail by the planning department. The planning department shall amend the zoning map to reflect the approved rezoning. 
(8)  If the request for rezoning is denied by council, the applicant will be formally notified in writing by the planning department of the denial and the right to appeal the decision to the Circuit Court of Cabell County, or Wayne County, whichever therein the property resides. 
(9)  Any person who feels aggrieved by an approval or denial of a rezoning request may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court of Cabell County, or Wayne County, whichever therein the property resides. 
(b)  Abandonment, annexation and/or variance to subdivision regulations. 
(1)  A request for abandonment, annexation and/or variance to subdivision regulations of property shall be filed on prescribed forms with the planning department. 
(2)  The procedure for advertisement and notification of affected properties shall be the same as those established in section 1363.03 et seq. of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 2-8-10) 
1363.05 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted April 13, 2015 , repealed § 1363.05, which pertained to comprehensive plan amendment. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
ARTICLE 1367 - REMEDIES AND PENALTIES[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-66; injunction, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-67; penalty, W. Va. Code, § 8-24-68. 

1367.01 - PURPOSE. 
    To provide for remedies for the city and owners or tenants of property with respect to proposed or occurring violations of this ordinance, and to prescribe penalties for violation of this ordinance. 
1367.02 - REMEDIES. 
A.  The commission, the board or any other designated enforcement official may institute a suit for injunction in the Circuit Court of Wayne County or Cabell County, depending upon which court has jurisdiction, in the name of the city to restrain a person from violating the provisions of this ordinance. The commission or the board may also institute a suite for a mandatory injunction in the Circuit Court of Wayne County or Cabell County, depending upon which court has jurisdiction, in the name of the city, directing a person to remove a structure erected in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. If the commission or the board is successful in its suit, the respondent shall bear the cost of the action. 
1367.03 - PENALTIES. 
A.  Upon receiving any citation, a person who is found guilty by the municipal court judge to have violated any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, shall be fined not less than $10 and not more than $300. 
    Appeals of such actions shall be taken to the circuit court as provided in West Virginia Code § 8-34-1. 
CHAPTER ELEVEN - DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE CITY 
ARTICLE 1375 - PURPOSE, TITLE, AUTHORITY 

1375.01 - GENERAL PURPOSE. 
(a)  These development regulations are adopted in order to provide for the harmonious development of the City of Huntington; to provide wholesome living environments, including sound building sites, for the residents of the city; to effect the coordination of roads in developments with other existing or planned roads, to aid in coordinating development plans with municipal and state plans; to provide adequate open space for light, air, and recreation; to conserve natural, scenic, historical, and recreational areas; to aid in enhancing the public health, safety, and welfare by requiring that facilities, such as roads, water mains, sewers, and drainage facilities, be installed within developments prior to the sale of lots or parcels in order that excessive public expenditures for such facilities will be avoided. 
(b)  All developments within the City of Huntington shall adhere to the requirements of this development ordinance. These requirements shall apply to all commercial, industrial, governmental, religious, non-profit or public, and multi-family residential developments of one acre or more, and single-family residential developments of four or more lots. Single-family residential developments of one to three lots must also meet these regulations if they fall under the Hillside Regulations as defined in article 1389 of the development ordinance. 
(c)  Permits for construction or other related activities will not be issued until approval of the development by the planning commission has been obtained. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1375.02 - TITLES. 
    Regulations governing the development of land within the incorporated territory of the City of Huntington, establishing procedures for the development and review of development-plans, establishing standards for the design and installation of improvements to developments, providing for the administration and enforcement of these regulations, and providing for penalties for their violation. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1375.03 - AUTHORITY. 
    By authority of an ordinance adopted by the City of Huntington on the 26 th day of December, 2000, (a certified copy of which has been duly filed with the county clerk), pursuant to the provisions of Section 28 through Section 35, inclusive, and other sections of Article 24, Chapter 8, of the Code of West Virginia, a plat of the developments covered by this ordinance shall not be recorded by the county clerk unless it has first been approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1377 - DEFINITIONS 

1377.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this section is to eliminate ambiguity by providing a full definition of certain words and phrases which are used in these regulations. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1377.02 - DEFINITION OF WORDS. 
    For the purpose of these regulations and in order to carry out the provisions and intention as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; and the terms "shall" and "will" are always mandatory and not directory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout these regulations. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
5.  Administrative agencies - Administrative agencies include the department of public works, the Cabell and State Health Departments, the Huntington Planning Commission, and the Huntington Sanitary Board. 
10.  Area, buildable - That portion of a lot bounded by the required rear and side yards, and the building setback line. 
15.  Bench mark - A permanent marker which designates elevation and location. 
20.  Block - A surface land area which is separated and distinguished from other surface land areas by visible physical boundaries such as streets, railroads, rivers, extremely steep land, or other physical barriers. 
25.  Block number - The official number or letter assigned to a block for identification purposes. 
30.  Building - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature. When separated by party walls, without any opening through walls, each portion of a building shall be considered a separate structure. 
35.  County clerk - The recorder of deeds for Cabell or Wayne County. 
40.  Dedication - Setting aside of land and/or improvements for a particular use. 
45.  Developer - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land. 
50.  Development - The physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses. Development activities include: subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, utilities, and other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural activities). Routine repair and maintenance activities are exempted. 
55.  Development, major - All developments, including but not limited to subdivisions of four or more lots, or any size development requiring any new streets or extension of the local governmental facilities, or the creation of any public improvements. 
60.  Development, minor - Any development, including but not limited to subdivisions containing not more than three lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, nor the extension of municipal facilities, nor the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance, or these regulations. Except for the clearing of land, the staff may allow any development where cost will not reasonably exceed $100,000 to be considered as a minor development instead of as a major development. 
65.  Development plan - A drawing, including a legal or site description, of the real estate involved which shows the location and size of all existing and proposed lots, buildings, structures, and yards; location and dimension of the building lines and easements; widths and lengths of all entrances and exits to and from said real estate; location of all adjacent or adjoining streets; all of which presents a unified or organized arrangement of streets, lots, buildings and public and service facilities and other improvements such as landscape development, and public parking areas, all of which shall have a functional relationship to the real estate comprising the planned development and to the use of properties immediately adjacent thereto. 
70.  Director of public works - The Director of the Department of Public Works for the City of Huntington. In the event that the position of city engineer is vacant, the director of public works shall fulfill the duties assigned to the city engineer under the provisions of this ordinance. 
75.  Easement - The right to use another person's property, but only for a limited and specifically named purpose. The owner generally may continue to make use of such land since he has given up only certain, and not all, ownership rights. 
80.  Easement area - A strip of land over, under, or through which an easement has been granted. 
85.  Elevation, average ground - The mean elevation of the finished grade. 
90.  Engineer - A registered engineer currently licensed to practice engineering in the State of West Virginia 
95.  Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
100.  Frontage - The side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line. 
105.  Health department - Cabell-Huntington Health Department, Wayne County Health Department or West Virginia State Health Department. 
110.  Improvements - Physical changes made to raw land and structures on or under the land surface in order to make the land more usable for man's activities. Typical improvements in these regulations would include, but not be limited to grading, street pavement, curbs, gutters, drainage ditches, retention or detention ponds, storm and sanitary sewers, street name signs, street trees, street lighting and traffic signals. 
115.  Land remnant - Any portion of a tract of land which cannot be developed after the tract has been subdivided. 
120.  Lot - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
125.  Lot, corner - A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
130.  Lot, flag - A lot not fronting on or abutting a public road and where access to the public road is a narrow, private right-of-way. 
135.  Lot, through - A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
140.  Lot, reverse frontage - A through lot which is not accessible from one of the parallel or non-intersecting streets upon which it fronts. 
145.  Lot area - The total land area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
150.  Lot depth - The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth should be measured by drawing lines from the front to rear lot lines, at right angles to the front lot line, every ten feet and averaging the length of these lines. 
155.  Lot frontage - The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line. 
160.  Lot line - A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
165.  Lot line, front - The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. A corner or through lot shall have two front lot lines. 
170.  Lot line, rear - The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
175.  Lot line, side - Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
180.  Lot number - The official number assigned to a lot for identification purposes. 
185.  Lot width - The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. 
190.  Monuments - Markers placed on or in the land. 
195.  Percolation test - An examination of subsoil used in determining the acceptability of the site and the design of the subsurface disposal system. 
200.  Planning commission - The Planning Commission of the City of Huntington, West Virginia. 
205.  Plan, final - The material which comprises the second and last "official" submission of a development scheme to the planning commission, and which consists of an applied construction drawing of the "as-built" physical improvements. In the case of subdivisions this is the plan to be recorded in the county clerk's office. 
210.  Plan, preliminary - The material which comprises the first "official" submission of a development scheme to the planning commission, and which consists of an application, a draft copy of any protective covenants, the development design drawings, and construction drawings of the proposed improvements. 
215.  Protective covenants - A written statement governing development of the land. 
220.  Public hearing - A meeting for the review of a matter where opinions may be presented by the public. These hearings may take place during the regular Planning Commission meeting and are held according to state laws. 
225.  Public utility - Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized to furnish under state or municipal regulations to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation, water, or sewer. 
230.  Recreational facilities - Country clubs, riding stables, golf courses, and other similar recreational areas and facilities including swimming pools, and tennis courts. 
235.  Right-of-Way - A dedication of land to be used generally for streets, alleys, or other public uses wherein the owner gives up his rights to the property as long as it is being used for the dedicated purpose. Also, a land measurement term meaning the distance between lot property lines which generally contain not only the street pavement, but also the sidewalks, grass area, and utilities. 
240.  Road - For the purpose of these regulations, "road" shall be defined the same as "street". 
245.  Roadway - The portion of the street right-of-way which contains the street pavement, curb, and gutter, and is used primarily as a channel for vehicular movements and secondarily as a drainage channel for storm water. In these regulations where curbs are required, the pavement is measured from face to face of the curbs; without curbs, it is the measurement of the wearing surface. 
250.  Sanitary board - The Huntington Sanitary Board. 
255.  Secretary - The person designated by the planning commission as its secretary. 
260.  Septic tank - See Individual Sewerage Treatment Facility. 
265.  Setback - The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the related front, side, or rear property line. 
270.  Setback, building - A line in the interior of a lot which is generally parallel to, and a specified distance from, the street right-of-way line or lines. No building shall then be placed in the space between the building setback line and the right-of-way line. 
275.  Sewerage, community system - A central sewerage system which is owned, operated and maintained by a private corporation or a non-profit property owner's association. 
280.  Sewerage, individual treatment facility - A sewerage disposal system developed to function on an individual lot basis. A septic tank is a type of individual sewerage treatment facility. 
285.  Sewerage, public system - A central sewerage system, owned, operated, and maintained by a municipality, county, utility district, or private company. 
290.  Sewer, sanitary system - A municipal or community sewerage disposal system of a type approved by the West Virginia State Health Department. 
295.  Sketch, pre-application - An informal drawing and other materials indicating the general lot and street layout and other features of a proposed development. 
300.  Staff - Employees of the Huntington Planning Commission. 
305.  Street - A general term used to describe a right-of-way which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement between certain points in the community, which may provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may also provide space for the location of underground and above ground utilities. 
310.  Street, intersecting - Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
315.  Street classification - Types of streets as set forth in the major thoroughfare plan for the City of Huntington. 
320.  Street grade - The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade. 
325.  Street line - The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 
330.  Street plan, major - The official plan adopted by the Huntington Planning Commission designating types and locations of streets in Huntington. 
335.  Street sign - The sign designating the official name of the street. 
340.  Sub-divider - For the purpose of these regulations, "sub-divider" shall be defined the same as "developer". 
345.  Subdivision - See "development". 
350.  Surveyor - Licensed land surveyor. Licensed to practice surveying in the State of West Virginia. 
355.  Terrain Classification - Terrain within the entire area of the preliminary plan is classified as level, rolling, hilly, or hillside for design purposes. The classifications are as follows: 
1.  "Level" is that land which has a cross slope range of four percent or less. 
2.  "Rolling" is that land which has a cross slope range of more than four percent but not more than eight percent. 
3.  "Hilly" is that land which has a cross slope range of more than eight percent but not more than 15 percent. 
4.  "Hillside" is that land which has a cross slope range of more than 15 percent. 
360.  Test holes - Openings constructed in the ground for conducting soil tests. 
365.  Unit - A subsection of a total development developed as a complete segment. 
370.  Use - The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use. 
375.  Use, public - Public parks, schools, and administrative, cultural, and service buildings not including public land or buildings devoted to storage and maintenance of equipment and material. 
380.  Utilities agencies - All agencies providing public utilities, such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water supply, electric, telephone, natural gas, and television cable companies. 
385.  Water, public system - A central water system, owned, operated, and maintained by a municipality, county, utility district, or private company. 
390.  Way - A street or alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles. 
395.  Yard - An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in the zoning ordinance. 
400.  Yard, front - A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. Such front yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts, and similar appurtenances. Covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. 
405.  Yard, rear - A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. Such rear yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward other than by accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30 percent of the required space, and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts, and similar structures. 
410.  Yard, side - A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. Such space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward other than by architectural appurtenances projecting not more than 24 inches from the building, or open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes or fireproof outside stairways, projecting not more than four feet, and certain accessory uses in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
415.  Zoning Ordinance - The duly adopted Zoning Ordinance of Huntington, West Virginia. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1381 - ADMINISTRATION 

1381.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to specify the function to be performed by the various agencies in administering these regulations. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1381.02 - PLANNING COMMISSION. 
    The planning commission and its staff shall perform the following duties in regard to the administration of these regulations: 
(a)  Maintenance of records. The staff of the planning commission shall maintain permanent and current records of these regulations, including amendments thereto. 
(b)  Pre-application sketch. The staff of the planning commission shall receive and review all pre-application sketches. After review of the sketch with the developer and other appropriate agencies, the planning commission staff shall either approve, amend, or disapprove the sketch. 
(c)  Preliminary plan. The planning commission as represented by its staff shall receive all preliminary plans for administrative review. 
(d)  Design review. The planning commission staff shall review all preliminary plans for development design and conformance to regulations governing the development of land. 
(e)  Distribution of plans. The planning commission staff shall distribute copies of all preliminary plans to appropriate administrative and utility agencies for review of conformance to the individual agency's requirements. 
(f)  Field trips. The planning commission staff shall arrange for and conduct all conferences and field trips necessary for proper investigation of preliminary plans. 
(g)  Recommendations. Based upon findings of the staff's review and the recommendations of other appropriate agencies, the planning commission staff shall make recommendations for approval or disapproval of the preliminary plan to the planning commission. 
(h)  Notification. The planning commission shall notify the developer by mail the time and place of the public hearing on the preliminary plan. Legal notification shall take place at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(i)  Approval or disapproval. The planning commission shall receive the recommendations of its staff and approve or disapprove the preliminary plan within 60 days of its submission 
(j)  Records. The planning commission staff shall keep a record of all preliminary plans and planning commission actions pertaining thereto. 
(k)  Final plan. The planning commission as represented by its staff shall receive all final plans for administrative review. 
(l)  Review. The planning commission staff shall review all final plans for conformance to preliminary plan and data required by these regulations. 
(m)  Distribution of plans. The planning commission staff shall distribute copies of all final plans to appropriate administrative and utility agencies for review and approval. 
(n)  Sufficiency of bonds. The planning commission staff shall obtain the recommendation of the various city agencies as to the sufficiency of all necessary bonds for the financing of required improvements. 
(o)  Recommendations. Based upon findings of the staff review and recommendations of other appropriate agencies, the planning commission staff shall make recommendations for approval or disapproval of the final plan to the planning commission. 
(p)  Certification. The planning commission shall consider the final plan and approve or disapprove the plan if found to conform to the requirements of this ordinance within 60 days of its submission. For subdivisions, the planning commission shall certify that such plan is approved for recording with the county clerk. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1381.03 - CABELL HUNTINGTON HEALTH DEPARTMENT. 
    The Cabell Huntington Health Department shall perform the following duties in regard to the administration of these regulations when individual sewage disposal or water supply facilities are included in the development: 
(a)  Pre-application sketch. After review of the pre-application sketch, the Cabell Huntington Health Department shall provide the planning commission staff with a written statement relative to the possible success of individual sewage disposal facilities on tracts where sanitary sewers are not provided, and they may make recommendations concerning other health factors. 
(b)  Percolation tests. The results of all percolation tests required for individual sewage disposal facilities shall be reported to the planning commission staff. 
(c)  Other health factors. Any other factors relating to the health of the community shall be provided to the planning commission staff. 
(d)  Preliminary plan. After review of the preliminary plan the Cabell Huntington Health Department shall approve the preliminary plan or provide the planning commission staff with a written statement of deficiencies. 
(e)  Final plan. After review of the final plan the Cabell Huntington Health Department shall issue certificates of approval. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1381.04 - HUNTINGTON SANITARY BOARD. 
    After review of the preliminary plan the Huntington Sanitary Board shall provide the planning commission staff with a written statement relative to the following: 
(a)  Storm drainage. The adequacy of all storm drainage systems. 
(b)  Sanitary sewer. The adequacy of sanitary sewer facilities. 
(c)  Final plan. After review of the final plan, the sanitary board shall issue certificates of approval. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1381.05 - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. 
    The director of public works shall perform the following duties in regard to the administration of these regulations: 
(a)  Pre-application sketch. The director of public works shall review the pre-application sketch for adequacy of proposed roads and drainage systems and make necessary written recommendations to the planning commission staff. 
(b)  Preliminary plan. After review of the preliminary plan, the director of public works shall provide the planning commission with a written statement relative to the adequacy of all proposed roads and drainage systems. 
(c)  Final plan. After review of the final plan, the director of public works shall issue a certificate of acceptance of roads or provide the planning commission with a written statement of deficiencies. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1383 - PROCEDURE FOR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL 

1383.01 - GENERAL PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish the step-by-step procedure which shall be followed by the developer in submitting plans to the planning commission. 
(a)  Pre-application meeting. The developer shall meet with the city planning commission staff prior to submitting the pre-application sketch. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of these regulations and the criteria and standards contained therein; and to familiarize the developer with the Comprehensive Plan, the major thoroughfare plan, the parks and public open space plan, the zoning ordinance, and the drainage, sewerage, and water systems for the City of Huntington. 
(b)  Preparation of pre-application sketch. The developer shall prepare a pre-application sketch in conformance with section 1385.02 of these regulations. When the developer desires assistance regarding the pre-application sketch, the planning commission staff and other administrative agencies may provide advice. 
(c)  Submission of pre-application sketch. After the pre-application sketch has been prepared by the developer, it shall be submitted to the planning commission staff for their review. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1383.02 - PRELIMINARY PLAN. 
(a)  Purpose. The preliminary plan is the first "official" plan required by these regulations. The preliminary plan is required in order to properly identify the property being developed, to ensure the adherence to required design standards, to determine improvement proposals, and to guide construction of the required improvements. 
(b)  Preparation of preliminary plan. After the pre-application sketch has been reviewed by the planning commission staff, the preliminary plan shall be prepared in conformance with section 1385.03 of these regulations by a licensed land surveyor or registered engineer licensed by the State of West Virginia. 
(c)  Public hearing. Within 60 days after the submission of a preliminary plan, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Having been properly notified of said hearing in conformance with section 1381.02 of these regulations, the developer and/or his representative shall be present. Upon presentation of the preliminary plan at the public hearing, during which variances from the established standards of this ordinance shall be presented in writing, the planning commission will review all recommendations and approve or disapprove the preliminary plan or request additional information. 
(d)  Approval. If the preliminary plan is approved, the developer is authorized to proceed with physical improvements after securing any required construction permits. Lots and parcels may be sold after this approval, building permits will not be issued except with the approval of the planning commission. 
(e)  Disapproval. If the preliminary plan is disapproved for further action, the developer may rework the plan to conform to the planning commission's requirements, and then re-submit the plans. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1383.03 - FINAL PLAN. 
(a)  Purpose. All development plans shall receive their second "official" consideration by the planning commission as final plans. The final plan is the permanent record of the development as constructed. It shows all property lines and other dimensions important for the accurate and legal transfer of property and records the location of street lines, easements, utilities, and improvements as they exist upon the ground. 
(b)  Preparation of final plan. After the preliminary plan has been approved by the planning commission and the required improvements have been installed or appropriate bonds have been filed, the final plan shall be prepared in conformance with section 1385.04 of these regulations by a competent licensed land surveyor or registered engineer licensed in the State of West Virginia. 
(c)  Time lapse. Unless a time extension has been requested by a developer and granted by the planning commission, all final plans shall be submitted within 18 months of the approval date of the preliminary plan; otherwise, the plans can not receive "final plan" consideration, but shall be considered as, and re-submitted as, new preliminary plans. 
(d)  Submission of final plan. Following the preparation of the final plan, the developer shall submit to the planning commission, one reproducible copy along with three copies of said plan at least 20 days prior to planning commission action thereon. 
(e)  Planning commission action. The planning commission will review the final plan for compliance and approve or disapprove. 
(f)  Amendments to approved plan. 
(1)  Approval of an amendment shall be required for: 
A.  Any material change, deletion, or addition made to: 
1.  An approved preliminary plan, or 
2.  An approved final plan, or for 
B.  A final plan that does not conform to the preliminary plan approved by the planning commission. An applicant seeking approval of an amendment shall file an application therefore with the planning director. The application shall describe the amendment sought and provide such other information as the planning commission may require. It shall be accompanied by ten copies of the proposed amendment and a filing fee. 
(2)  If the planning director determines that the amendment sought is a minor amendment as defined herein, he or she shall refer it to the planning commission for final action. No public hearing shall be required for a minor amendment. An applicant may appeal a decision of the planning commission on a minor amendment to the city council. 
(3)  For amendments other than minor amendments, the full approval process set forth herein for preliminary plans and final plans shall be followed. 
A minor amendment to a development shall be any change from the previously approved plan that involves: 
A.  No change in land use type or housing type, and 
B.  No change in the location of any structure, off-street parking or loading area, common open space area, or any area or right-of-way to be conveyed to or reserved for a public body, by more than ten feet in any direction, nor a change in the spacing between any two structures by more than 10%, and 
C.  No change of more than 10% in any non-locational quantitative specification of the previously approved plan, including: 
1.  Any dimension of any lot, yard, structure, or pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare; 
2.  Any residential density; 
3.  Amount of common open space acreage; 
4.  Utility line capacity; 
5.  Amount of floor area of non-residential development; 
6.  Amount of land to be conveyed to or reserved for any public body; 
7.  Size or capacity of any off-street parking or loading area; 
8.  Amount or dimensions of proposed tree or ground cover, landscaping, or screening; and 
D.  No other change that causes the development to fall short of meeting the requirements of any applicable zoning district to any greater degree than already provided on the previously approved plan. 
(4)  The planning commission may disallow minor amendment status if a proposed amendment fails to meet the foregoing criteria when it is considered together with one or more minor amendments previously approved for the same development. 
(5)  The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove an amendment. An amended final plan shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions herein governing recording of a final plan. 
(g)  Resubmission. In the event of the disapproval of a final plan by the planning commission, the developer may correct the plan's and/or development's deficiencies and re-submit the final plan in conformance with the required procedures. 
(h)  Recording of developments. Upon approval of the final plan by the planning commission, one black line copy of the final plan shall be filed for recording with the county clerk. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1383.04 - MINOR DEVELOPMENTS. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish special requirements for minor development plans in order that they may be prepared and processed in much less time than is required for major development plans. 
(b)  Qualifications for minor developments. For the purpose of these regulations, when a parcel of land is divided so that the resulting plan contains three or fewer lots, all of which have frontage on an existing street or road, or when two or more lots are combined into a single parcel with frontage on an existing road, it may be considered as a minor development. 
(c)  Minor development procedures. Procedures for submitting minor developments are as follows: 
(1)  Submission of application. A formal application including such information as required for an initial plan as provided for in section 1383.02 of these regulations shall be submitted to the planning commission staff. 
(2)  Review of application. The staff of the planning commission shall review all minor development applications and shall advise the developer of approval to proceed, suggested amendments, or rejection within 14 days from the receipt of the application. 
(3)  Submission of final plan. After review of the application and provision for all required improvements, the developer shall submit a final plan for the signature of the president of the planning commission and director of planning. 
(d)  One lot developments. When a single lot is created on an existing street and when no improvements are required, the planning commission may authorize the planning commission staff to require necessary information and give approval for recording the plan of said lot. 
(e)  Planning information. The planning information for minor developments shall be the same as required for a final plan in section 1385 of these regulations. Under special circumstances where unusual topographic problems exist or where improvements will be required, the planning commission may also require: 
(1)  Topographic information as specified in section 1385.03. 
(2)  A drainage plan as specified in section 1385.03. 
(3)  A map showing existing and proposed utilities as required in section 1385.03. 
(4)  Improvements, if any, to be made in a minor development, to be shown on the minor development plan. 
(f)  Required improvements. The planning commission may require those improvements for a minor development which will be necessary to bring that section of road along which the land is subdivided and those utilities or drainage ways within the development up to the design standards set forth in article 1387 of these regulations. All improvements required for minor developments shall be provided in accordance with the standards and regulations required under article 1389 of these regulations. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1385 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLANS 

1385.01 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to specify the information required to be included on plans of proposed developments. Three plans are required to be submitted: the pre-application sketch, the preliminary plan, and the final plan. The overriding consideration in requiring the submission and approval of three plans is to assure that developments develop soundly. One objective in requiring three plans is to assist the developer in the sound and economical development of his property through the examination of the suitability of the property for development before surveying expenses and improvements costs are incurred. A second objective in requiring three plans is that administrative and utility agencies may aid in the design of proposed developments so that improvements, including roads and utilities, may be installed at minimal costs. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1385.02 - PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH. 
(a)  Submission of pre-application sketch. Prior to the preparation of a development plan, the developer shall submit one copy of the pre-application sketch to the planning commission staff. 
(b)  Vicinity map. A small scale map or sketch of the general vicinity shall be submitted showing the relationship between the proposed development and existing community facilities which serve or influence it, such as main traffic arteries, public transportation lines, parks, playgrounds, schools, principal places of employment or shopping, railroad stations, airports, hospitals, churches, and other community facilities. 
(c)  Sketch plan. A sketch plan of the area to be developed shall be submitted. The sketch plan should be to an appropriate scale. The sketch plan shall show the general location of the following: 
(1)  Boundaries of the tract. 
(2)  Physical characteristics of the site, such as swamp, woods, drainage pattern, geotechnical data, etc. 
(3)  Existing buildings. 
(4)  Available utilities. 
(5)  Proposed layout of streets, lots, open spaces, nonresidential area, and other important facilities. 
(d)  Statements. The following information shall accompany the sketch plan: 
(1)  Property owners of the proposed development names and addresses. 
(2)  Developers' names and addresses. 
(3)  Statement indicating the availability of public utilities. 
(4)  Written statement from the Cabell Huntington Health Department relative to the possible success of individual sewage disposal facilities on the tracts where sanitary sewers are not provided. 
(5)  After the review of the pre-application sketch, the developer will be given direction as the amount of detail that will be required for the Preliminary Plan submission in regards to (1) traffic impacts; (2) geotechnical investigations; (3) drainage; and,(4) grading. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1385.03 - PRELIMINARY PLANS. 
(a)  General. The preliminary plan shall be prepared by licensed land surveyor or registered engineer licensed in the State of West Virginia. Two copies of said preliminary plans shall be submitted to the planning commission staff. 
(b)  Land development drawing. The preliminary plan drawn to the following specifications shall be submitted: 
(1)  Development name. The proposed name of the development, which shall not duplicate nor closely approximate (phonetically or in spelling) the name of any other development or subdivision in Huntington, preceded by the words, "Preliminary Plan of ____________ " shall be indicated. 
(2)  Person identification. The name and mailing address of the property owner, the developer, the engineer, and other persons directly involved in the transaction shall be indicated. 
(3)  Date and scale. The date of design of the preliminary plan, north point, and the graphic scale which shall be at a minimum of one inch equals 100 feet. 
(c)  Vicinity map. A sketch showing the general location of the development in relation to the surrounding area shall be placed on the sheet. The location sketch shall be drawn to a scale large enough to show the proposed development's relationship to existing and proposed community facilities, such as major traffic arteries, public transportation, schools, hospitals, recreation areas, shopping areas, industrial areas, and natural features such as rivers, streams, and topographic features. 
(d)  Drainage plan. Specific plans for handling storm water including, but not limited to, the following information: existing and finished contours; the locations, sizes, and profiles of storm drains and culverts; data used in making the determinations of the sizes of storm drains and culverts; and other pertinent information required in dealing with storm drainage problems, and in particular to prevent flooding or ponding on building sites. 
(e)  Plan information. Preliminary plans shall contain all necessary information pertaining to tract boundaries, contours, streets, utilities, lots, and other information as may be required by the planning commission. 
(1)  Boundary lines on and adjacent to the tract. The location, distance, and bearings for boundary lines and location, width, and purpose of all easements shall be indicated. The boundary lines of the tract should be shown by a special line style and weight (possibly a heavy solid line) which will provide quick and easy distinction between the developer's property and any adjacent property. 
(2)  Contours. The preliminary plan shall show accurate original and finished contours developed in the field. 
A.  Contours shall be at intervals of two feet. 
B.  Where the grade of slope exceeds 15 percent, the planning commission may accept contour intervals of five feet. 
C.  Where possible, all contour information shall be referenced by USGS (United States Geological Survey) datum and/or a permanent bench mark. 
(f)  Existing and proposed streets. The following is required for existing and proposed streets: 
(1)  Streets on and adjacent to the tract shall be indicated by the street name, right-of-way width, and location; type, width, and elevation or any surfacing or curb; any legally established centerlines and elevations; gutters, culverts, etc. 
(2)  The plan and profile of each proposed street indicating the existing ground surfaces and proposed street grade surface at a horizontal scale equal to the horizontal scale of the land development plan and a vertical scale of one-tenth of the horizontal scale, with tentative finish grades indicated, shall be shown. 
A typical section of each proposed type of street at a scale of ten feet or less to the inch showing the width of pavement, the location, and width of sidewalks, the location of utilities, and rights-of-way shall be shown. 
In order that the administrative agencies may more accurately study the preliminary plan, center lines of all proposed streets in the development shall be staked out in the field prior to submission of the preliminary plan, or the developer and/or the developer's engineer shall visit the development site with members of the administrative agencies. 
(3)  Traffic Impact Study. After the review of the pre-application sketch, the developer may be directed to prepare and submit for approval a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) for the proposed development. The TIS is to be prepared by a qualified professional engineer and will contain an analysis of existing traffic in the vicinity of the development, projections of the traffic to be generated by the development, the affects of the generated traffic on the existing system, and proposed mitigation measures required, if any. Mitigation measures may be required as part of the development. 
(g)  Utilities. The preliminary plan shall show the following information concerning existing and proposed utilities including sanitary sewers, water lines, storm sewers, gas, telephone, and electrical work. 
(1)  The locations, sizes, and capacities, where appropriate, of all water mains, manholes, pumping stations, standpipes, reservoirs, and similar facilities, and the locations and dimensions of specific easement areas related thereto shall be indicated. 
(2)  The plan and profile including invert elevation of all sanitary sewers, manholes, lift stations, and treatment plants, and similar facilities, and the locations and dimensions of specific easement areas related thereto, and vertical scale of profiles shall be one-tenth of the horizontal scale, as required by this ordinance. 
(3)  The drainage plan as required in this section and all easements related thereto shall be shown on the preliminary plan. 
(h)  Lotting and setback. The location of lot lines, along, with the appropriate lot and block numbers. The proposed building setback lines with dimensions showing the distance setback from the street right-of-way shall be indicated when the proposed setback is other than the minimum required in the Huntington Zoning Ordinance. 
(i)  Non-residential designation. The name, acreage, and use of any sites proposed for public use such as parks, playgrounds, etc., and the name, acreage, and use of any other uses (other than single-family dwellings) such as multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, etc., shall be indicated. 
(j)  Other conditions. Other conditions on the tract to be shown on the preliminary plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  Zoning designations, proposed highways, parks, schools, or other major improvements shall be indicated. 
(2)  Watercourses, marshes, rock outcroppings, woodlots, railroads, bridges, or other structures shall be indicated. 
(k)  Subsurface conditions. The location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions, on the site are to be submitted. A slope stability analysis may be required when steep slopes are created either by cuts or fills. The location of test holes (at least one per acre) for preliminary percolation tests where sanitary sewers are not to be provided, and a letter from the Cabell Huntington or Wayne County Health Departments interpreting and approving the results of such percolation tests shall be submitted. 
(l)  Drainage. A drainage report shall be submitted which shows as a minimum the pre-development storm runoff, the post development storm runoff, the impact of the storm runoff on downstream drainage features, and any measures required to mitigate these impacts. Retention ponds or other measures to alleviate these impacts may be required as part of the development. 
(m)  Site plans. A site plan for the proposed development must be submitted meeting the requirements of article 1351 of the zoning ordinance. 
(n)  Storm water management/soil erosion control plan. A storm water management/soil erosion control plan meeting the requirements of the West Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Developing Areas shall be submitted for approval. A copy of the approved plan submitted to the West Virginia Division of Environmental Protection will meet this requirement. 
(o)  Other permits. Copies of all other permits that are required by state and federal regulations and laws shall be submitted. 
(p)  Development agreement. The development agreement shall include an agreement outlining the responsibilities of the city and developer relative to the construction and phasing of improvements and planned use of the property. Said agreement shall be approved by the appropriate governmental body. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1385.04 - FINAL PLAN. 
(a)  General information. The final plan of a development shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan and shall be prepared in the following manner: 
(1)  Materials. The final plan of a development shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet or less to the inch. 
(2)  Size. The final plan shall be drawn according to established methods used by the county clerk's office. 
(3)  North point. The final plan shall be so oriented that the north point will be directed as nearly as possible to the top of the page with the binding edge on the left. 
(4)  Page numbering. When more than one sheet is used for any final plan, each sheet shall be numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation indicating the total number of sheets in the plan. In addition, an index sheet of the same dimension shall be required showing the entire development, the sheet numbers, and outlines for each separate sheet of the final plan. 
(5)  Number of copies. At the time of final application, the original and two copies of the final plan shall be submitted to the planning commission. 
(6)  Copy to be recorded. Two copies of the final plan with all appropriate certificates shall be recorded with the county clerk. 
(b)  Mapping and engineering information. The final plan of the development shall include sufficient data to accurately reproduce the development on the ground and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Street lines on adjacent land. Show the exact location with dashed lines and the width along the property lines for all existing or recorded streets intersecting or paralleling the boundaries of the tract. 
(2)  Monument references on adjacent land. Show the bearing and distances to nearest established street boundaries, established survey lines, or other official monument. 
(3)  Adjacent land. For adjacent land which is planted, show the boundaries with dashed lines and the recorded name of the development. For adjacent land which is unplanted, show the boundaries with dashed lines. 
(4)  Boundary lines of tracts. In a line style and weight which will distinguish the developer's property from all adjacent property (possibly a heavy, solid line) show the tract boundary lines with lengths of courses to hundredths of a foot and bearings to the nearest minutes. These boundaries shall be determined by an accurate survey in the field. 
(5)  Monuments on tracts. Show the accurate location and material of all permanent reference monuments. 
(6)  Street, easement, and lot lines on tracts. For street and alley rights-of-way, show the names, bearings, angles of intersection, and width including the widths along the line of any obliquely intersecting street; for all arcs, show the length of radii, points of curvature, and tangent bearings; for all easements or other rights-of-way, show the locations, width, and actual name and purpose (gas line easement, etc.); for all lot lines, show dimensions in feet and hundredths, and bearings and angles to minutes. 
(7)  Easements along property lines. The minimum easement along boundary lot lines as required in section 77-10 of these regulations shall be noted on the final plan. 
(8)  Reservations and dedications of tracts. Show the accurate outline of all property which is either offered for dedication to public use or which is reserved by covenant in the deeds for the common use of the property owners in the development with the purpose also plainly printed thereon. 
(9)  Lot numbers, setback lines, and restrictions of the tract. Show the lots numbered in numerical order and lettered in alphabetical order; show the front yard setback building lines with dimensions; and if any private restrictions exist, show boundaries of each type of use restriction and any other restrictions. 
(c)  Title block. The title block for the final plat drawing shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Development Name. The name of the development and, where the plat at hand is only part of a larger development bearing the same name, the unit number or other necessary identification shall be indicated. Such development name shall not duplicate or closely approximate any other development name in the city. The name of the development shall be preceded by the words "Final Plat of ____________ ." 
(2)  Person identification. The name of the following: the property owner, the developer, the engineer and/or surveyor. 
(3)  Legend information. The graphic scale, written scale, north point, date of preparation, and any other pertinent legend information should be indicated. 
(d)  Certifications. The following appropriate certificates with required signatures shall accompany all final plats. 
(1)  Ownership. The certification of ownership and general dedication shall be as follows: 
Certificate of Ownership and General Dedication 
(I, We)the undersigned (owner, owners) of the property shown hereon, hereby adopt this as (my, our) plan of development and dedicate the roads, rights-of-way, easements, parks, and other open spaces as shown and otherwise indicated to the public use forever, and hereby certify that (I am the owner, we are the owners) in fee simple of the property and that any portion of said property dedicated to public use is not encumbered by any mortgages. 
(I, We) further certify that all restrictive covenants which apply to the lots, if any, are either shown on the plan or are referred to thereon, with copies of the said covenants filed with the Planning Commission of Huntington, West Virginia, and the County Clerk. 
Date _____     _____ 
(2)  Survey. The certification of survey shall be one of the following: 
Certificate of Survey 
I hereby certify that I am a licensed surveyor and have surveyed the herein described property, that the plan conforms to said survey, and that same is true and correct. 
Surveyor           
No. _____ 
Certificate of Survey 
I hereby certify that I am a registered Engineer licensed to do surveying under the laws of the State of West Virginia that I have surveyed the herein described property, that the plan conforms to the said survey, and that the same is true and correct. 
Engineer      
West Virginia Registration No. _____ 
(3)  Sanitary sewerage. The certification for sanitary sewerage shall be one of the following certificates: 
Certificate of Approval of Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems 
This is to certify that this development is generally satisfactory for subsurface sewage disposal systems on the property. 
Date _____     _____ 
Cabell Huntington Health Department 
Certificate of Approval for Sanitary Sewers 
This is to certify that the development shown hereon is approved subject to the installation of sanitary sewers and treatment facilities and that such installation shall be in accordance with state and local regulations. 
Date _____     _____ 
West Virginia State Health Department 
Certificate of Approval of Lot for Recording 
This is to certify that the lot shown hereon is approved for recording and that no sewage treatment facilities are required. 
Date _____     _____ 
West Virginia State Health Department 
(4)  Acceptance of streets. The city shall certify the acceptance of streets and roads as follows: 
Certificate of Acceptance of Roads 
This is to certify that the Director of Public Works/City Engineer has inspected the grade and drainage in this Development, and the roads are hereby accepted by the Engineer subject to any surety bond or certified checks in the Engineer's office for completion of roadway pavement. 
Date _____     _____ 
Director of Public Works/City Engineer 
(5)  Approval for recording. Upon approval and certification of all elements of the final plan, the planning commission shall certify the plan for recording as follows: 
Certificate of Approval for Recording 
This is to certify that the development plan shown hereon has been found to comply with the Development Regulations of Huntington and with existing official plans with the exception of such variances and stipulations, if any, as noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission of Huntington, West Virginia, and that said plan is hereby approved for recording in the Office of the County Clerk. 
Date _____     _____ 
Planning Commission 
(6)  Protective covenants. When the developer intends to regulate land use in the development and otherwise protect the development by the use of covenants, one copy of the final protective covenants shall be submitted as part of the final plan materials. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1387 - DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS 

1387.01 - GENERAL STATEMENT. 
(a)  The regulations in this article shall control the manner in which streets, lots, and other elements of a development are arranged on the land. These design controls shall help ensure convenient and safe streets, creation of usable lots, provision of space for public utilities and, where possible, reservation of land for recreational uses. The planning of attractive and functional neighborhoods shall be promoted, minimizing the undesirable features of unplanned, haphazard growth. 
(b)  The planning commission has the responsibility for reviewing the design of each future developments early in its design. 
(c)  The commission shall ensure that all of the requirements of this article are met. 
(d)  Design standards and criteria relating to the design of streets, drainage systems, and related elements are contained in a separate document which is available from the City of Huntington Public Works Department or the Planning Department. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.02 - CONFORMITY TO THE CITY'S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. 
    The arrangement, character, width, and location of all arterial and collector thoroughfares or extensions thereof shall conform with the city's Comprehensive Plan. Thoroughfares not contained in the aforementioned plan shall conform to the recommendation of the city planning commission based upon the design standards set forth in this article. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.03 - SUITABILITY OF LAND. 
    If the planning commission finds that land proposed to be developed is unsuitable for development due to flooding, bad drainage, topography, inadequate water supply, schools, transportation facilities, and other such conditions which may endanger health, life, or property; and, if from investigations conducted by the public agencies concerned, it is determined that in the best interest of the public the land should not be developed for the purpose proposed, the commission shall not approve the land for development unless adequate methods are advanced by the developer for solving the problems that will be created by the development of the land. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.04 - STREETS. 
(a)  Street design. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, construction, and location of all streets shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan of the City of Huntington, or subsequent amendments thereto, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. The street pattern shall discourage through traffic in the interior of a development. The developer shall provide within the boundaries of the development plan, the necessary right-of-way for the widening continuance or alignment of such streets in conformity with the major thoroughfare plan. 
(b)  Street design standards for cul-de-sacs and loop streets. All such streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards as maintained by the City of Huntington. 
EXAMPLE OF A SUBDIVISION
DESIRABLE FEATURES OF A SUBDIVISION
(SEE CHAPTER 11 FOR SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS) 
1.  Easement for planting screen to provide protection from non-residential use. 
2.  Sidewalk easement gives access to school. 
3.  Cul-de-sac utilizes parcel of land to advantage. 
4.  Turn around right-of-way of sufficient diameter. 
5.  Street trees planted where no trees exist. 
6.  Additional building setback improves subdivision entrance. 
7.  Street intersections of right angles reduce hazards. 
8.  Lot side line centered on street end to avoid car lights shining into entrance. 
9.  Residences opposite street end set back farther to reduce glare from car lights. 
10.  Three-way intersection reduces hazards. 
11.  Property lines on 30' radii at corners. 
12.  Lot side lines perpendicular to street right-of-way lines. 
13.  Secondary roadway eliminates hazard of entering major thoroughfares from individual driveways. 
14.  Neighborhood park located near center of tract. Adjacent lots wider to allow for 15 foot protective side line setback. 
15.  Pavement shifted within right-of-way to preserve existing trees. 
16.  Ten foot walk easement provides access to park. Adjacent lots wider to allow for 15 foot protective side line setback. 
17.  Variation of building line along straight street creates interest. 
18.  Screen planting gives protection from noise and lights on thoroughfare. 
19.  Lots backing to uncontrolled land given greater depth for additional protection. 
20.  Low planting at street intersections permits clear vision. 
21.  Wider corner lot permits equal building setback on each street. 
22.  Planting of block end to avoid siding properties to residences across street. 
(c)  Collector street design standards. All such streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards as maintained by the City of Huntington. 
(d)  Intersection design standards. 
(1)  Multiple intersections. Multiple intersections involving junctions of more than two streets shall be avoided. 
(2)  Four-way intersections. Four-way intersections of local streets should be avoided and three-way or T-intersections should be encouraged wherever possible. 
(e)  Special street types. The following requirements shall apply to special street types: 
(1)  Permanent dead-end streets shall not be permitted. Temporary dead-end streets shall be permitted only as part of a continuing street plan, and only if a temporary turn-around is satisfactory to the Planning Commission. 
(2)  Dedication of new half-streets shall not be permitted. Where a dedicated or planted half-street exists adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half shall be planted. 
(3)  Where a development adjoins an arterial street, a marginal access street shall be designed, if the development design is such that residential lots would require direct vehicular access onto the arterial highway. Points of access to the arterial street shall be spaced at a minimum of 1,320 feet. A planting strip having a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided between the pavement of the arterial street and the pavement of the marginal access street. The minimum width of the marginal access right-of-way shall be 50 feet. 
(f)  Streets for commercial development. Streets serving business developments and accessory parking areas shall be planned to connect with arterial streets so as not to generate traffic on local streets. The intersections of driveways from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall be located so as to cause the least possible interference with traffic movement on the streets, and shall be located not less than 100 feet from the intersection of an arterial or collector street with any other street, and shall be spaced not less than 200 feet from each other. The commission may require marginal access streets to provide maximum safety and convenience. 
(g)  Streets for industrial developments. Collector streets for industrial development shall be planned to serve industrial areas exclusively and shall connect with arterial streets so that no industrial traffic will be directed into any residential streets. The intersections of service streets from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall not be less than 100 feet from the intersection of the arterial or collector street with any other street. Streets shall be planned to be extended to the boundaries of any adjoining land planned for industry, except for severe physical conditions or if the commission finds such extension is not in accord with the approved plan of the area. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.05 - SIDEWALKS OR WALKWAYS. 
(a)  Sidewalks or walkways may be required at the discretion of the planning commission. 
(b)  Public sidewalks, walkways may be required for all commercial and industrial development subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.06 - LOTS. 
    The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of lots: 
(a)  The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and the character of surrounding development. 
(b)  All lots shall conform to or exceed the requirements of these development regulations and the zoning district requirements for the district in which they are located and the use for which they are intended. 
(c)  Each lot shall front on a paved street. For slope areas where the average topographic slope is 15% or greater, refer to Hillside Regulations. 
(d)  All side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and radial to curved street lines, except where the commission determines that a variation to this rule would provide a better layout. 
(e)  Lots with double frontage (through lot) shall be avoided except where the commission determines that it is essential to provide separation of residential developments from arterial streets. 
(f)  No lot shall have a depth of less than 120 feet except that whenever a lot fronts upon an exterior curved portion of a street, the centerline radius of which is 100 feet or less than the required minimum, lot depth may be reduced to not less than 110 feet. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.07 - EASEMENTS. 
    Easements shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and shall be provided where necessary for sanitary sewers, gas mains, water lines, and electric lines. Easements shall also be provided along every water course, storm sewer, drainage channel, or stream within a development, as provided for in section 1387.08 of these regulations. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.08 - FLOOD AREAS AND STORM DRAIN DITCHES. 
(a)  In order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the planning commission shall discourage any proposed development located in an area within the 100-year floodplain as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). In the event that the floodplain development is in the best interest of the community at large, article 1349 (regulation of floodplain area and ponding basin) of the zoning ordinance shall apply. If the development is located in an area having poor drainage or other adverse physical characteristics, the commission may approve the development provided the developer agrees to perform such improvements as will render the area safe for the intended use. In lieu of improvements, the developer shall furnish a surety or certified check covering the cost of the required improvements. 
(b)  Flood control or storm drainage facilities shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Access to flood control or storm drainage ditches and channels shall be by means of easements. Such easements shall be not less than ten feet in width, exclusive of the width of the ditch, or channel, and an easement of this type shall be provided on one side of a flood control or storm drainage ditch, channel, or similar type facility; 
(2)  Flood control or storm drainage easements containing underground facilities shall have a minimum width of ten feet; 
(3)  Whenever a flood control or storm drainage ditch or channel has a depth of five feet or more, or a bank slope of two feet horizontal to one foot vertical or deeper, a five-foot high masonry wall or a five-foot high chain link fence may be required by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1387.09 - DRAINAGE DESIGN. 
    Drainage designs will be based on the procedures and methods for hydrology studies outlined in the West Virginia Division of Highways Drainage Manual. Minimum design storm standards, unless directed in writing are: 
Storm sewer - Ten-year storm. 
Roadway culverts - (major roadway) 25-year storm 
(minor roadway) ten-year storm. 
Detention ponds - Two-year storm. 
Drainage ditches - Two-year storm (minimum). 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1389 - REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS 

1389.01 - GUARANTEE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS. 
    All improvements required herein shall be constructed prior to the recording of the final plan. The developer may be required to furnish the planning commission with a surety or certified check for the amount of the estimated construction cost for the ultimate installation and initial maintenance of the improvements if the developer proceeds with construction of the housing by logical phasing of the development. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1389.02 - CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE AND MATERIALS. 
    The developer shall design and construct improvements not less than the standards outlined in these regulations. The work shall be done with city inspection and shall be completed within the time agreed upon by the city engineer and developer. The minimum requirements for materials shall be in accordance with the standards of the current volume of "Standard Specifications" of the State of West Virginia Department of Highways. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1389.03 - MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND PINS. 
    In residential developments, two stone or concrete monuments, not less than 24 inches long by six inches square or in diameter at the top, with proper centers, shall be set in each block so that all street lines can be reestablished; in addition, iron pipes or equally good markers shall be set at all other outside points of angles, curves, and tangents and at any staked lot corners. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1389.04 - STREETS. 
(a)  Street improvements. All streets shall be graded to their full width, including side slopes, and improved in conformance with the standards given or referred to in these regulations. 
(1)  Street width. Minimum street pavement widths shall conform to the standards given in article 1387. 
(2)  Street sub-grade. The sub-grade shall be free of sod, vegetative or organic matter, soft clay, and other objectionable materials for a depth of at least two feet below the finished surface. The sub-grade shall be properly rolled, shaped, and compacted, and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(3)  Street base course. The developer has the option of using any of the following base courses, based upon recommendations of the city engineer as to topsoil and traffic conditions; aggregate, bituminous aggregate, asphalt concrete, or equally suitable base course. Thickness shall be determined by the city engineer, based upon the physical properties of the base course used and the physical properties of the roadbed. The developer shall submit a pavement design based on sub-grade conditions encountered. The pavement design shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(4)  Street surface course. The surface course shall be constructed using either asphalt concrete, bituminous mix, or Portland cement concrete. Specific material and thickness recommendations shall be determined by the city engineer, based on the approved pavement design. 
(5)  Portland cement concrete pavement. If the developer elects to construct streets totally out of Portland cement concrete or if such pavement is required by the city engineer, thickness of six inches for local and collector streets and seven inches for arterial, commercial, and industrial streets shall be required. The planning commission may require pavement of greater thickness, upon the recommendation of the city engineer, based upon his evaluation of the sub-grade, traffic, and wheel load conditions. 
(6)  Full-depth asphalt pavement. If streets are to be constructed out of "full-depth" asphalt, an asphalt pavement in which asphalt-aggregate mixtures are used for all courses above the sub-grade, careful inspection of the sub-grade may be necessary, to determine pavement thickness. 
For local streets pavements may vary from four to six inches depending upon sub-grade conditions. For collector streets pavements shall vary from five to nine inches, and for arterial and industrial streets from six to 11 inches. 
(7)  Street curbs and gutters. The requirements for curbs and gutters will vary according to the character of the area and the density of development. In areas of notable flash flooding or heavy rain run-off, curbs shall be required to channel the flow of water. Curbs shall be required on all streets designed for areas where the existing or anticipated residential density of the area surrounding the proposed development equals or exceeds three dwelling units per net acre. In commercial developments, or where other similar intensive urban uses exist or are anticipated, curbs shall be required. Where curbs exist on abutting properties, their extension shall be required throughout the proposed development. Curbs, combined curbs, and gutters shall be constructed in conformance with the current "Standard Specifications" of the State of West Virginia Department of Highways and requirements of the city engineer. 
(8)  Sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete or other acceptable material as may be required in section 1387.05 to a minimum-depth of four inches. 
(9)  Street names signs and street naming. Street name signs, of a type in use throughout the city, shall be erected by the city at all intersections. The developer may erect street signs of a type compatible with the development upon approval of the planning commission. 
A.  For purposes of street naming, the following suffixes shall apply: 
1.  Avenue shall be used only for streets that run in a generally east-west direction; 
2.  Boulevard or drive shall be used only for a large meandering type street; 
3.  Circle or court shall be used only for cul-de-sac type streets that run in a generally east-west direction; 
4.  Lane or place shall be used only for cul-de-sac type streets that run in a generally north-south direction; 
5.  Road or way shall be used only for streets that run in a diagonal manner, either a generally northwest-southeast direction or a northeast-southwest direction; 
6.  Street shall be used only for thoroughfares that run in a generally north-south direction; 
7.  The words north, south, east, or west should be avoided as part of a street name whenever possible. 
B.  Whenever a new street is constructed as an extension of an existing street, its name shall be the same as that of the existing one. 
C.  To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets shall be approved by the city planning commission prior to such names being assigned or used. 
(10)  Street and walkway lighting. 
A.  The developer shall install street lights in accordance with standards and specifications of the power company in each residential development which contains a majority of lots with an individual lot width of 100 feet or less at the front property line. Such lights shall be located at each entrance (streets and walkways) to the development and in each street intersection within the development. In addition, whenever the distance between two adjacent street (walkway) lights would exceed 300 feet, then additional street lights shall be installed in such a manner that proper light intensity shall be provided and maintained. 
B.  New development street (walkway) lighting shall be installed with all associated wiring underground. 
(11)  Street trees. Trees should be provided by the developer in all developments where curbs, gutters, and sidewalks are required in accordance with standards and specifications of the planning commission. Trees and shrubs shall be species which are resistant to damage and disease and which do not cause interference with underground utilities, street lighting, or visibility at street intersections. Existing trees should be retained in new developments wherever possible, but which do not cause interference with underground utilities, street lighting, or visibility at street intersections. 
(12)  Driveways. Driveways shall be constructed as specified in the existing zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Water supply improvements. The following requirements shall govern water supply improvements: Where a public water supply is reasonably accessible or required because of pollution problems, in the determination of the planning commission, the development shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, and shall meet the requirements of the appropriate agencies. 
(1)  Fire protection. Fire hydrants with two and one-half inch outlets and one large pumping connection shall be provided by the developer in all developments with public water supplies. 
The hydrants should be located between property lines and curbs with all outlets facing or parallel to the street. Hydrants shall be placed at the corners of all blocks and at mid-block for blocks exceeding 800 feet in length. Hydrants shall also be required at the entrance and end of all cul-de-sacs exceeding 400 feet in length. 
The type of hydrant and control valves and the location of the hydrant shall be approved by the fire chief. The minimum size of any water line serving any hydrant shall not be less than six inches in diameter and should be circulating water lines. The size and location of water lines should be approved by the city engineer and the fire chief. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer improvements. The following requirements shall govern sanitary sewer improvements: 
A.  Where an adequate public sanitary sewer system is reasonably accessible, in the determination of the planning commission and sanitary board, public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots, including lateral connections to the public system. Public sewer system extensions shall meet the requirements of the Huntington Sanitary Board. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be prohibited. 
B.  Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the developer may provide: 
1.  A central treatment plant, provided that such central treatment plant is installed to meet requirements of Health Department of the State of West Virginia. 
2.  Lots may be served by individual disposal systems if approved by the local health department. 
C.  Individual sewage system. 
1.  Where the installation of individual disposal systems is considered, the suitability of the soil for individual systems, the absorptive ability of the soil, surface drainage, ground water level, and topography shall be the criteria for determining whether or not the installation of individual systems is permissible. Criteria shall be in accordance with the requirements of the county health department. 
2.  Each lot so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the necessary length of tile field at a safe distance from and at a lower elevation than the proposed building(s). Such lot size and shape shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
3.  At least one percolation test shall be made for each lot area being planned, and each test shall be located in close proximity to the proposed individual sewage disposal unit, be numbered and its location shown on the preliminary plan. All percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the planning commission and the health department. 
4.  Where the installation of individual disposal unit is considered and where the average natural ground slope exceeds ten percent, the installation of a step-up disposal system may be required subject to specification by the health department. 
(3)  Drainage improvements. The developer shall construct all necessary facilities including underground pipe, inlets, catch basins, or open drainage ditches, as determined by the city engineer to provide for the adequate disposal of subsurface and surface water and maintenance of natural drainage courses. The velocity of flow in an open ditch shall not exceed four feet per second in soil ditches or six feet per second in turf gutters. Paved gutters will be required if velocities of flow are greater than those specified or if it is otherwise likely that destructive erosion will result. Drainage ditches shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility. 
(4)  Storm sewers and storm water drainage. Where an adequate public storm sewer is available at the development boundary, the developer shall construct a storm sewer system and connect with such storm sewer line. If such a storm sewer system is not accessible, natural drainage channels with easements of adequate width shall be provided, as determined by the city engineer and approved by the planning commission. Paved gutters or storm sewers shall be required if velocities of flow are greater than specified in section 1389.04, paragraph B.3. of these regulations or cause destructive erosion. Storm drainage, including drain tile around basements, shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility, but shall connect to an adequate drainage outlet. 
(5)  Culverts and bridges. Where natural drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to have satisfactory bridges and/or culverts constructed. Where culverts are required, minimum requirements shall be observed as follows: 
A.  All culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the proposed street. The cover over the culvert and its capacity shall be determined by the city engineer. 
The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe shall be 18 inches. Headwalls or end sections will be required. 
B.  Driveway culverts shall have a minimum length of 20 feet, and a minimum diameter of 12 inches. The driveway culverts shall be laid so as to maintain the flow lines of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be required. 
(c)  Electric, gas, cable, and telephone improvements. The following requirements shall govern electric, gas, cable, and telephone improvements: 
(1)  Electric service and telephone service shall be provided within each development. Gas service may be optional where reasonably accessible. Whenever such facilities are reasonably accessible and available, they may be required to be installed within the area prior to the approval of the final plan. Telephone, electric, and street lighting wires, conduits and cables shall be constructed underground except in cases where the city engineer determines that topographic, bedrock, or underground water conditions would result in excessive costs to the developer. 
(2)  Overhead utility lines, where permitted, shall be located at the rear of all lots. The width of the easement per lot shall be not less than five feet and the total easement width shall be not less than ten feet. 
(3)  Whenever a sanitary sewer line and electric and/or telephone line are each placed underground in the same utility easement, the following provisions shall be applicable. 
A.  The total easement width shall be not less than 20 feet; 
B.  The sanitary sewer line shall be installed easement, and the electric and/or telephone lines shall be installed within three feet of the opposite side of the easement; and 
C.  Any deviation from the above standards must be approved by the planning commission or their representatives. 
(4)  Site improvements. The utilities, pavements, and other land improvements required for the proposed development shall be designed sufficiently with extensions provided to serve nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or drainage area as determined by the city engineer. 
(5)  Cost of site improvements. The developer shall be required to pay for only that part of the construction costs for the arterial streets, trunk sewers, or water lines which are serving the proposed development as determined by the city engineer. The city shall pay the difference between the cost of required improvements for the proposed development and improvements required to service the surrounding areas specified in section 1389.04, paragraph C.4. 
(d)  Extension of boundaries. The developer may be required to extend the necessary improvements to the boundary of the proposed development to serve adjoining undeveloped land, as determined by the planning commission. 
(1)  Off-site extensions. 
A.  If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed development, and if the planning commission finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a municipal expense until some future time, the developer may be required, prior to approval of the final plan, to obtain necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. 
B.  Such improvements shall be available for connections by developers of adjoining land. 
(e)  Completion of improvements. No final development plan shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for recording by the county clerk until all required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the planning commission and other appropriate agencies. 
(1)  Bond in lieu of improvements. 
A.  In lieu of such prior construction, the planning commission may require the filing with the director of finance a security bond to ensure the construction of the required improvements within two years from the date of approval of the final plan. Such bond would be in the amount of not less than 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the planning commission and other appropriate agencies. 
B.  All bonds shall be covered by a bonding company licensed to do business in the State of West Virginia. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1391 - HILLSIDE REGULATIONS 

1391.01 - GENERAL. 
    These regulations apply to all hillside areas. A hillside area as referred to herein is defined as one with an average slope of more than 15%. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.02 - DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE SLOPE. 
    The average slope for any hillside development shall be determined by the planning commission during the time of preliminary development design. Determination will be on an area-by-area basis with each lot sized according to the average topographic change falling within each area. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.03 - MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY HOMES. 
    The minimum lot requirements shall be used to determine the minimum lot area for a single family home. The average percent of slope is determined by the Planning Commission. The lot area in thousands of square feet shall then be determined by charting the average natural ground slope and the minimum lot area. Rounding shall be made to the nearest five-foot frontage interval. Deviations from these requirements may be allowed subject to determination by the planning commission where exceptional circumstances warrant. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.04 - GRADING PLAN AND CONTROLS. 
    The grading plan shall show contour lines at five-foot intervals where average slopes exceed 15 percent and at two-foot intervals where slopes are less than 15 percent. Elevations are to be used on the sea level datum (USGS), if available. The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions shall be shown for each lot and each building site. Where pads are utilized or proposed for building sites, engineering data shall show the existing topography and the approximate finished grades, location and size of each building site, and finished grade of streets prior to consideration of the final plan. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.05 - CUTS AND FILLS. 
    No land shall be graded, cut, or filled so as to create a slope exceeding a vertical rise of one foot for each two and one-half feet of horizontal distance between abutting lots, unless a retaining wall of sufficient height and thickness is provided to retain the graded bank. Major cuts, excavation, grading, and filling, where the same materially changes the site and its relationship with surrounding areas or materially affects such areas, shall not be permitted if such excavation, grading, and filling will result in a slope exceeding a vertical rise of one foot for each two and one-half feet of horizontal distance between abutting lots or between adjoining tracts of land, except where adequate provision is made to prevent slides and erosion by cribbing and retaining walls. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.06 - COMPACTION OF FILL. 
    All fills shall be compacted to a density of 90% or greater. Inspection of fill shall be conducted by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.07 - RETAINING WALLS. 
    Retaining walls may be required whenever topographic conditions warrant or where necessary to retain fill or cut slopes within the right-of-way. Such improvements shall require the approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.08 - MINIMUM HILLSIDE REQUIREMENTS. 
    The following regulations shall govern the front yard, side yard, street right-of-way and pavement requirements in hillside developments: 
Group Percent of slope Front yard (ft) Each side yard in percent of lot width Right-of-way Pavement 1 15±25% 25' 10% 32' 22' 2 26-30% 23' 10% 30' 20' 3 31%-Over 20' 10% 28' 18'  
(a)  Street alignment. The following regulations shall govern street alignment: 
(1)  Vertical profile grades shall be connected by vertical curves up to 20%, but only for short, straight stretches. 
(2)  Waiver of visibility requirements may be given subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(3)  Waiver of vertical curve requirements may be given subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  Sewage disposal. Where public sewers are not available or reasonably accessible, a central treatment plant shall be installed by the developer in accordance with Huntington Sanitary Board requirements. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1391.09 - UNDEVELOPED LAND. 
    Land subject to flooding, land with excessive slope and land deemed by the planning commission to be undesirable for development shall not be planned for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may involve danger to health, life, or property or to aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land shall be set aside for compatible uses. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
ARTICLE 1393 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1393.01 - AREA OF JURISDICTION. 
    The Huntington Planning Commission, through these development regulations, shall have jurisdiction and control over the development of all incorporated land in Huntington, West Virginia, which area shall also be considered as the planning area. For land that is expected to be annexed, the planning staff may act in an advisory capacity to the developer. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1393.02 - VARIANCES. 
    These land development regulations are adopted only as minimum requirements, and all developers should consider constructing their developments to higher standards. Thus, the developer is encouraged to go beyond the standards of these regulations; and the planning commission may require standards above the minimum contained herein whenever it feels that public health safety, and welfare purposes justify such increases. 
    The planning commission also may reduce or otherwise vary the requirements of these regulations whenever it encounters the situations described below. In granting such variances, the planning commission may attach and require whatever conditions it feels are necessary to secure the basic objectives of the varied regulations. Any variances granted by the planning commission shall be noted in its official minutes along with the reasons which justified the granting of the variance. 
(a)  Hardships. The planning commission may reduce or otherwise vary the requirements of these regulations when a definite hardship would occur as a result of strict enforcement of these regulations. 
(b)  Conditions required. Where the planning commission finds extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties may result from the strict compliance with these regulations, they may, after written application by the developer, grant variations to the regulations, subject to specified conditions, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variations shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of these regulations or the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Evidence of hardship required. The planning commission shall not grant variations to these regulations unless they shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to them in each specific case that: 
(1)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were adhered to. 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property, and have not been created by any person having an interest in the property. 
(3)  The purpose of the variation is not based, exclusively upon a desire for financial gain. 
(4)  The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1393.03 - LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN INNOVATIONS. 
    The planning commission shall make a thorough analysis of developments for which this section might be applicable and shall satisfy itself that the public interest will continue to be served in the granting of variances from the strict application of the provisions of these regulations. 
    Prior to the approval of preliminary and final plans, the planning commission may require evidence of covenants, deed restrictions and contracts to assure that developments as proposed will materialize. 
(a)  Developments. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of large-scale developments when the Planning Commission finds that a plan and program for a new village, complete community, shopping center, industrial park, or neighborhood unit provides adequate public open spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity and achievement of the plan. 
(b)  Design innovation. From time to time developments may be conceived and designed to provide unusually good amenities and at the same time not conform strictly to the provisions of these regulations. The planning commission may waive the requirements of these regulations in the approving of developments involving thoroughly studied design innovations. The developments allowable under this provision are those which might call for the preservation of land for recreational, scenic, historical, and/or park purposes, and for the maintenance of the drainage capacity of watercourses in such a manner as to yield wholesome living environments for future occupants. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1393.04 - AMENDMENTS. 
    The planning commission may from time to time recommend revisions or modifications or amendments to these regulations by appropriate action taken at a regularly scheduled meeting after the required notice and holding of a public hearing. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1393.05 - FEES. 
(a)  Review fees. At the time of the filing of a final-plan for review, the developer shall pay to the planning commission for checking and verifying the preliminary and final plans a fee of $100. 
(b)  Resubmission fees. In the event that the planning commission disapproves, or the developer changes certain portions or sections of the final plan, the resubmission fee may be waived in whole or in part by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1393.06 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. 
(a)  Enforcement. The following procedures are provided for the enforcement of development regulations. 
(1)  Improvement location permit. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless a street or highway giving access to such proposed structure is an existing public or private street or highway, or unless such street appears on a recorded plan approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  Improvement in streets. No public municipal street utility or improvement shall be constructed by the department of public works in any street or highway until it has become a public street or highway or has been offered for public dedication and appears on a recorded plan approved by the planning commission, unless a public easement satisfactory to the city engineer is obtained for such utility or improvement. 
Subject to the discretion of the department of public works a sub-surface utility or improvement operated from revenue by the city, or by a public service district may be constructed in a private street, provided a public easement satisfactory to the city engineer is obtained for such utility or improvement. 
(3)  Injunction. The planning commission, or any designated enforcement official, may institute a suit for injunction in the county circuit court to restrain an individual or a governmental unit from violating the provisions of this ordinance. The planning commission, or any designated enforcement official, may institute a suit for a mandatory injunction directing an individual or a governmental unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Penalty. A person who violates any provision of Chapter Eleven shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $10 and not more than $500. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1393.07 - SALE OF LAND WITHIN DEVELOPMENTS. 
    No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a development shall transfer or sell any land by reference to, exhibition of, or by the use of a plan of the development before such plan has been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in these regulations. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
1393.08 - SEPARABILITY. 
    Should any section, subsection, paragraph, or provision of these regulations be held invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no way affect the validity of any other provision of these regulations, it being the intention of the planning commission to adopt each and every provision of these regulations separately. 
(Ord. 12-26-00) 
PART FIFTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
ARTICLE 1505 - BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal inspection, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-15; authority of local fire officers, W. Va. Code, Art. 29-3A. 

1505.01 - ESTABLISHED; SUPERVISION. 
    A bureau of fire prevention is hereby established in the fire department of the city. Such bureau shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-6) 
1505.02 - FIRE MARSHAL. 
    The fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department, and the rank normally shall not exceed that of captain. 
(Ord. 8-25-86) 
1505.03 - DEPUTY FIRE MARSHALS; INSPECTORS. 
    The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as deputy fire marshals as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the mayor the employment of technical inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall perform such duties as may be required of them by the bureau of fire prevention or the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted in article 1509. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-8) 
1505.04 - ENFORCEMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE. 
    The fire prevention bureau shall enforce the Fire Prevention Code adopted in article 1509. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-9) 
1505.05 - ANNUAL REPORT TO MAYOR. 
    A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the mayor. It shall contain all proceedings under the Fire Prevention Code and this Part Fifteen, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. In such report, the chief of the fire department may also recommend any amendments to the Fire Prevention Code which he deems desirable. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-10) 
ARTICLE 1509 - WEST VIRGINIA STATE FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4; promulgation of State Fire Code, W. Va. Code, § 29-3-5. 

1509.01 - ADOPTION OF CODE. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if set out at length herein, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosions, that certain code known as the West Virginia State Fire Code, as adopted on March 12, 2016. 
(b)  The fire marshal and other sworn officers of the fire department, as appointed by the fire chief, are hereby empowered to enforce the Fire Code and to issue summonses to violators of its provisions. 
(Ord. of 6-10-02; Ord. of 8-11-14(1); Ord. of 9-12-16(3) ) 
1509.02 - MODIFICATIONS. 
    The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such Code; provided, that the spirit of such code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the fire department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-17) 
1509.03 - APPEALS FROM ACTIONS OF CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT. 
    Whenever the chief of the fire department disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Fire Prevention Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-18) 
1509.04 - NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS. 
    The mayor, the chief of the fire department and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-19) 
1509.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this Part Fifteen - Fire Prevention Code, for which no other penalty is provided or fails to comply therewith; or violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder; or builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of any penalty pursuant to this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-20) 
ARTICLE 1517 - GAS APPLIANCES AND EQUIPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Tampering with utilities, § 533.06; gas connections to substandard dwellings, § 1723.05. 

1517.01 - GAS APPLIANCES, ETC., TO COMPLY WITH STANDARDS. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale or install any gas appliance or accessory or gas piping system, if the same when installed for use would be in violation of the provisions of this Part Fifteen, and the standards of safety herein and hereby established and required. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-47) 
1517.02 - SHUTOFF VALVES. 
(a)  Generally. An outside valve shall be installed on every gas service pipe regardless of size that supplies large stores or factories, or places of public assembly such as churches, theaters, motion picture theaters, schools and hospitals, and on every service pipe two and one-half inches or larger in diameter. 
(b)  Location. Shutoff cocks and valves shall be placed in suitable stop or valve boxes, manholes or vaults, the covers of which shall bear the name of the company to which it belongs; and the valves, if necessary, shall be tagged to properly identify their purpose. 
(1964 Code Secs. 12-48, 12-49) 
1517.03 - BURNERS. 
(a)  Location. All gas burners shall be placed at least three feet below any woodwork or ceiling attached to wooden beams, unless the same is properly protected by a shield, in which case the distance shall be not less than 18 inches. 
(b)  Pilot lights. Gas burners installed in low pressure steam boilers or hot water boilers or furnaces, used for heating buildings, shall be provided with a thermostatic pilot light so constructed and adjusted that no gas can flow through the main burner unless the pilot light is burning, or with some other similar type of safety device serving the same end. The operation of the safety device which shuts off the main gas supply shall not depend on the closing of an electric circuit. 
(1964 Code Secs. 12-50, 12-51) 
1517.04 - BRACKETS. 
    No gas bracket on any lath and plaster partition or woodwork shall be less than six inches in length, measured from the burner to the plaster surface or woodwork. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-52) 
1517.05 - CONNECTIONS. 
    Gas connections to stoves, heaters and other appliances shall be made by metal pipe or by approved metal tubing securely fastened in place; except, that for devices which require a movable connection, approved, flexible tubing as specified below may be used provided there is no shutoff on the device. 
    No person shall use, sell, expose or offer for sale, or install or fix, any tubular connection of fabric intended for any illuminating gas fixtures, stove, heater or lamp, or other gas appliances, unless such tube connection, hose or similar device is approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in accordance with the following specifications: 
(a)  Gas tubing shall be made up in suitable lengths with end pieces securely attached by the manufacturer. 
(b)  All gas tubing shall be made up of a strong gastight metal core with rubber packing and covered with a layer of good quality or other suitable gastight material and a braided cloth covering. Such layers or covering or rubber shall be put on over the metal core in such a way that it will of itself form a gastight wall. 
(c)  Each length of tubing shall be labeled by the manufacturer with a tag attached to the tubing or a marking on the end piece, or both. The inscription shall state the manufacturer's name, the length of the tubing or any other information pertinent to the public use of this piece of tubing. 
(d)  Rubber end pieces shall be of good quality, shall be at least two inches long, corrugated inside, shall have an outside wall thickness of at least five 30-seconds of an inch at the gas appliance end and shall be so attached as to stand a pull equal to lifting a weight of 50 pounds. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-53) 
1517.06 - STOVES AND GAS PLATES. 
    All gas stoves or gas plates shall be placed on iron stands at least six inches above combustible supports unless the burners are at least five inches above the base with metal guard plates below the burners. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-54) 
1517.07 - STANDARDS FOR GAS APPLIANCES, ETC., GENERALLY. 
(a)  All gas appliances, accessories and piping systems installed, sold or offered for sale shall conform to reasonable standards of safety, and to the provisions and requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The presence on a gas appliance or accessory of a safety seal or label of a nationally recognized testing agency or a certificate or letter of approval from such agency or the inclusion of an appliance or accessory in an approved listing by such agency shall be prima-facie evidence that such appliance or accessory conforms to reasonable standards of safety. Such nationally recognized testing agency shall be one qualified and equipped to perform and one that does perform periodic inspections of current models of gas appliances and accessories. 
(c)  Installation of appliances, accessories and piping that complies with the standards recommended by the National Fire Protection Association in their manual designated National Fuel Gas Code, 1984 edition, shall be considered prima-facie as conforming to reasonable standards of safety, the provisions of which manual and the amendments or revisions thereof hereafter made are incorporated herein by reference as though set out in full. The city clerk and the fire prevention bureau of the city shall keep copies of the manual and the amendments or revisions thereof in their respective offices for study and inspection by any interested parties. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-55) 
1517.08 - TURNING ON OR RECONNECTING GAS SERVICE. 
    No person, except an authorized agent or employee of the gas supplier, shall turn on or reconnect any gas service in or on any premises where and when gas service is not at the time being rendered. This shall not be construed to prohibit an installer from turning on the supply of gas temporarily for the purpose of testing the installation made by him or from turning on gas that he has temporarily turned off for the purpose of connecting an appliance or making repairs. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-56) 
1517.09 - ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF GAS PREREQUISITE TO INSTALLATION OF SPACE HEATER. 
    No person shall install any gas appliance for the purpose of space heating without first determining from the gas supplier that adequate facilities are present on the premises to supply gas to such appliances in quantities that will assure reasonably safe and uninterrupted operation. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-57) 
1517.10 - POWERS OF INSPECTORS. 
(a)  The duly authorized agents, employees, inspectors and representatives of the fire prevention bureau of the city shall at all reasonable times have the right to inspect any such installations of gas piping, appliances and accessories within the city in order to ascertain and determine whether the same comply with the standards set forth in section 1517.07(c) and are hereby authorized and empowered to take such measures as may be necessary to correct any violations of or deficiencies or variances from such standards which may be ascertained and determined by any such inspection or which may otherwise come to their attention and notice. 
(b)  The duly authorized agents, employees, inspectors and representatives of the fire prevention bureau are hereby authorized and empowered to disconnect, or to direct the duly authorized agents, employees and representatives of the gas supplier to disconnect, who upon receipt of such direction to do so, shall disconnect the gas service of any person violating any provision of this article and the standards of safety herein and hereby established and required, and to take like action when the giving, rendering, supplying or continuing to give, render and supply such gas service or the installation or use of any gas piping, appliances or accessories would or may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public generally. Where such disconnection has been made, a notice shall be attached to such appliance, accessory or gas piping which shall state that it has been disconnected and the reasons therefor, and such notice shall not be removed and the appliance, accessory or gas piping shall not be reconnected until it has been made to conform to the requirements of this article and its reconnection has been authorized by the duly authorized agents, employees, inspectors and representatives of the fire prevention bureau. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-58) 
1517.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 1509.99 for general Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 1521 - SELF-SERVICE DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- License tax, § 739.05. 

1521.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Combination dry cleaning unit" means a device in which the dry cleaning, washing and extracting cycles are completed within the same enclosure. 
(b)  "Dry cleaning" means the process of cleaning wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs or other articles by the use of nonaqueous liquid solvents. 
(c)  "Dry cleaning and coin-operated dry cleaning" means either dry cleaning or dry dyeing operations. 
(d)  "Dry cleaning machine, device, apparatus or unit" means the machinery and equipment, including those which are self-service or coin-operated, in which dry cleaning operations are performed. 
(e)  "Dry cleaning plant or establishment" means any place, building, structure, room or portion thereof in which dry cleaning is conducted. 
(f)  "Dry cleaning room" means a building or room in which the dry cleaning operations are conducted, including all additional sections containing solvent or solvent handling equipment. 
(g)  "Dry dyeing" means the process of dyeing clothes, fabrics or other textiles in a solution of dye colors and nonaqueous liquid solvents. 
(h)  "Incidental operations" means operations incidental to the dry cleaning business, such as laundering, scouring, scrubbing, dyeing, pressing and ironing. 
(i)  "Self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning" means the process of cleaning wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs or other articles by the use of nonaqueous liquid solvents in a dry cleaning unit designed to be used, or used, by the general public. 
(j)  "Self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning plant or establishment" means any place, building, structure, room or portion thereof containing a dry cleaning device or devices which are available for use by the general public for the purpose of dry cleaning. 
(k)  "Solvent classifications" means a method for classifying solvents according to fire hazards. The following schedule, developed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., for the rating of hazards of flammable liquids, shall be employed: 
Ether 100 
Gasoline 90-100 
Alcohol (ethyl) 60-70 
Kerosene 30-40 
Paraffin oil 10-20 
(l)  "Spotting" or "prespotting" means the local application of solvents to spots, dirt, grease, paints and stains for the removal of the same. 
(m)  "System classification" means dry cleaning plants or systems arranged in four classes according to the hazard scale set out in this section, as follows: 
(1)  Class I. Systems utilizing solvents rated above 40. 
(2)  Class II. Systems utilizing solvents rated 40 or below, but which do not comply with Class III or Class IV requirements. 
(3)  Class III. Systems employing equipment listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., utilizing listed solvents having specified characteristics and rated at 25 or below. 
(4)  Class IV. Systems utilizing solvents classified as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and only moderately flammable at higher temperatures (rated not over 5). 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-59) 
1521.02 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS PRIOR TO BUILDING OR REMODELING PLANTS. 
    Before any self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning plant is established or constructed, or before an existing plant is remodeled, a complete floor and building plan shall be submitted for approval to the chief of the bureau of fire prevention, the building inspector, and any other board or agency having jurisdiction. The submitted plans shall be drawn to an indicated scale, shall show the location of all equipment, the relative location of the dry cleaning building, boiler room, finishing room or building, storage tanks for solvents, pumps, washers, drying tumblers, extractors, filter traps, condensers, mechanical ventilators, piping, and a sectional elevation of the building including the lowest floors, pits, tanks, fittings and other devices. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-60) 
1521.03 - APPROVAL OF PLANS. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating any self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning establishment without the prior approval of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention, the building inspector and any other officials having jurisdiction. All such establishments shall meet the requirements of state laws and administrative regulations issued pursuant thereto, and all provisions of the Codified Ordinances and other city ordinances and regulations. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-61) 
1521.04 - BOILERS AND BOILER ROOMS. 
    Boilers shall not be located within dry cleaning rooms. When located in a room adjoining the dry cleaning room, the boiler room shall be cut off by solid fire partitions without openings, having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours. The boiler room construction and the location of the boiler shall meet all requirements of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention and the provisions of the Building Code. In addition, the boiler shall be inspected and a certificate of inspection posted in the boiler room. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-62) 
1521.05 - APPROVAL OF EQUIPMENT; REQUIREMENTS WHERE TEMPORARY APPROVAL GIVEN. 
    Self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning equipment shall not be used unless such equipment has been tested and listed by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or by another nationally recognized testing laboratory acceptable to the State Fire Marshal. Pending the results of such testing, the chief of the bureau of fire prevention may temporarily allow the use of such type and design of dry cleaning equipment that has been submitted for testing and listing; provided, however, that the operation of such equipment shall be immediately terminated upon order of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention or State Fire Marshal if the testing laboratory finds that the use of such equipment is not compatible with public safety. In addition, dry cleaning establishments receiving such temporary approval shall comply with the following provisions: 
(a)  An attendant shall be on duty at all times when such establishment is open to the public. Such attendant shall be a competent, mature person familiar with the equipment involved and with emergency measures necessary for the protection of the public in the event of the failure of any part of the mechanism. 
(b)  Self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning equipment shall not be used in any manner contrary to the operating instructions of the manufacturer, or other than in full conformity with construction and test specifications of the testing laboratory. The installation of all gas, oil burning and electrical heating equipment in any self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning plant shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of recognized national standards and accepted engineering practices. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-63) 
1521.06 - DRY CLEANING UNITS RESTRICTED TO FIRST STORY OF BUILDINGS. 
    Self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning units shall be installed only within buildings at first story level, and in no case above or below the first story. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-64) 
1521.07 - PUBLIC AREA TO BE VISIBLE FROM OUTSIDE; LOCATION OF COIN-CHANGING DEVICES; MEANS OF EGRESS. 
    No self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall be open to the general public unless the area therein accessible to the public is visible from the outside thereof. In addition, any coin-changing devices shall be located in a position as conspicuous to the exterior vantage points thereof as may be practicable. All such establishments shall have at least two means of egress remote from each other, which lead directly to the outside, adequate in size for the area served, and as approved by the chief of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-65) 
1521.08 - CERTAIN MANUALS TO BE FURNISHED BY MANUFACTURER. 
    Manufacturers of self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning machines shall provide the office of the State Fire Marshal and the bureau of fire prevention with detailed installation, operation and maintenance manuals. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-66) 
1521.09 - DRY CLEANING DEVICES TO BE ACCESSIBLE FROM FRONT ONLY; DOORS TO MAINTENANCE AREAS TO BE LOCKED. 
    Every dry cleaning device situated in a self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall be accessible to the general public from its front only. The working or maintenance portions of the equipment shall be completely separated from the front of the machine by a partition. Access doors leading to the maintenance areas shall be kept locked. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-67) 
1521.10 - DOORS OF DRY CLEANING UNITS. 
    The dry cleaning units shall be so designed that they are inoperable when their front or loading doors are open. Such dry cleaning devices shall be so designed that the loading doors cannot be opened during the normal operating cycle, nor during an abnormal interruption thereof due to electrical, mechanical or power failure. Each dry cleaning unit shall contain a device to control the drying cycle and to prevent the opening of the loading doors until after all cleaning solvent has been removed from the cleaned items within the units. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-68) 
1521.11 - USE OF SOLVENTS. 
    Only the solvent specified by the equipment manufacturer shall be used in a dry cleaning unit, and each unit shall bear a label specifying the name of the solvent. No solvent other than a Class IV solvent, nor any solvent having a toxicity level greater than that of perchlorethylene, nor any solvent classified other than nonflammable, shall be used. The solvent, when used in a dry cleaning device, shall be contained within a closed, vapor-tight system, consisting of corrosive resistant piping or duct work. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-69) 
1521.12 - DIKES REQUIRED AROUND EQUIPMENT. 
    Cleaning equipment shall be installed only in a diked area made of concrete, metal or other material impervious to the solvent used, and which is provided with a storage tank operating by gravity flow and of sufficient capacity to contain the maximum amount of solvent used in the system. The diked floor, at the base of the equipment, and its storage tank shall have a liquid volume capacity equal to the maximum quantity of solvent that could escape from the system. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-70) 
1521.13 - MINIMUM AIR FLOW. 
    In order to minimize any solvent vapor build-up in the customer area of a self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning establishment, during business hours a minimum flow of air shall be maintained from the customer area through the partition at the following rate: 
Number of Machines Minimum Flow Rate C.F.M. Per Machine 1-3 500 4-8 400 9-16 375 17 or more 360  
A general ventilation fan, capable of exhausting a minimum of 1,000 cubic feet per minute per machine, shall be installed in the exterior wall of the maintenance room. In case of a serious solvent leakage, such fan shall be operated at capacity level. Tempered make-up shall be provided in sufficient quantities to eliminate any negative pressure conditions that would otherwise develop as a result of air exhausted from the plant. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-71) 
1521.14 - EXHAUST SYSTEM. 
    The dry cleaning equipment shall be provided with an exhaust system which shall maintain a minimum of 100 feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open. The ductwork connections from this system shall be sealed (soldered or taped), and the discharge stack extended to a minimum height of eight feet above the highest point of the roof. In addition, an efficient vapor reclaiming device may be used. 
    Exhaust ventilation outlets from the dry cleaning establishments shall be located at a sufficient distance from combustion air or dryer air intakes to preclude the possibility of contaminating intake air with solvent vapor. Steps shall be taken to insure that solvent contaminated air is kept out of air intakes of all combustion equipment, so as to minimize the thermal decomposition of the solvent. The terminal of any exhaust shall be not less than six feet from any window, ventilation or other opening if such opening lies on the same plane as the exhaust terminal. When the opening lies on a different plane (in any way tends to face in the direction of the exhaust terminal), such terminal shall be at least ten feet away from the same. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-72) 
1521.15 - SOLVENT CONTROL. 
    Solvent control shall be such that under normal operating conditions no solvent odor can be detected in the customer area. A concentration of such dry cleaning solvent in excess of 40 parts per million parts of air shall not be permitted in the customer area of a dry cleaning establishment, nor shall there emanate therefrom vapors or odors that would constitute a nuisance to any portion of the premises upon which such establishment is located, nor to any adjoining or nearby premises. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-73) 
1521.16 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR LIQUID-LEVEL GAUGES AND SIGHT GLASSES. 
    All liquid level gauges and sight glasses used in connection with any machine, pipes, tanks or other equipment in a dry cleaning plant, the breakage of which would permit the escape of toxic liquids or vapors, shall be of a type not readily damaged by heat, and shall be reliably protected against physical damage, and, unless of an approved heavy duty type, shall be equipped with an automatic device which will immediately shut off the flow of solvent if the glass is broken. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-74) 
1521.17 - PERIODIC INSPECTION OF EQUIPMENT; MAINTENANCE. 
    The operators of all self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning establishments shall cause the dry cleaning devices and related component facilities situated therein to be inspected at least once during each aggregate period of 24 hours that such establishment is open to the public, and shall cause such mechanisms to be maintained in proper working order. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-75) 
1521.18 - LINT TRAPS AND ARRESTORS. 
    Lint traps shall be provided on the dry cleaning units, and all direct equipment exhausts or vents shall be provided with mesh lint arrestors which shall be kept clean. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-76) 
1521.19 - POSTING OF INSTRUCTIONS; RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPRIETOR FOR PROPER USE OF MACHINES. 
    Self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning establishments shall have posted in a prominent place, proximate to the dry cleaning devices situated therein, complete step-by-step instructions for their use. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to make certain that clothing and items that cannot be properly cleaned and dried will not be placed in the machine. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-77) 
1521.20 - POSTING OF EMERGENCY TELEPHONE NUMBERS. 
    A list of telephone numbers shall be conspicuously posted in both the customer and maintenance areas of competent persons readily available for emergency assistance who are thoroughly familiar with the equipment involved and with emergency action necessary to protect the public safety. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-78) 
1521.21 - STORAGE OF SOLVENT; DISPOSAL OF FILTER RESIDUE. 
    Solvents shall be stored in approved closed containers bearing suitable warning labels, and shall be transferred from the containers by leak-free lines. All on-the-premises storage facilities for solvents shall meet the requirements of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention. Filter residue and other residue containing solvents shall be disposed of so as not to create a health hazard, fire hazard or nuisance. A covered metal container, bearing suitable warning labels, shall be used for temporary storage outside the building. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-79) 
1521.22 - LIGHTING EQUIPMENT AND ELECTRICAL DEVICES. 
    Lighting shall be by electricity. All electrical equipment devices and wiring for light and power shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code. The customer part of the dry cleaning establishment shall be illuminated either by natural light of at least ten foot-candles or by artificial light of at least 30 foot-candles, as shown by an illumination test (illuminameter). 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-80) 
1521.23 - LOCATION OF ELECTRICAL SWITCHES, WATER SOFTENERS AND HEATERS. 
    In every self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning establishment, all electrical outlets and switches, and all facilities and mechanisms for the heating or softening of water for the production of heat, for the operation of venting and cooling devices and for the storage of dry cleaning solvents shall be inaccessible to the general public. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-81) 
1521.24 - CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES. 
    All areas within the establishment shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Proper refuse receptacles and fire extinguishing equipment, adequate for the conditions involved, shall be suitably located about the premises. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-82) 
1521.25 - SAFETY PRECAUTIONS FOR EMPLOYEES. 
    Respiratory protective equipment such as self-contained breathing apparatus and other respiratory protective devices approved for the particular solvent used, shall be provided for maintenance personnel, and shall be kept in proper repair and available for immediate use. All employees shall be thoroughly instructed in procedures to avoid excessive inhalation of solvent vapors, and shall be fully informed as to the hazards involved in their departments and in the work they perform. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-83) 
1521.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See Section 1509.99 for general Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 1525 - FIRE PROTECTION AND ALARM EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE 

1525.01 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    No person shall engage in the business of the sale or service of any fire extinguisher, portable or fixed fire extinguisher systems, fire detection equipment, alarm systems or sprinkler system without a permit therefor, which shall be issued by the fire marshal of the fire prevention bureau. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-84) 
1525.02 - APPROVAL OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; CODE COMPLIANCE. 
    All persons engaged in the sale and service of any fire extinguisher, portable or fixed fire extinguisher systems, fire detection equipment, fire alarm systems or sprinkler system in the city shall comply with applicable rules and regulations of the bureau of fire prevention of the city, all applicable codes, including, but not limited to, the National Fire Codes, Life Safety Code, National Building Code and Fire Prevention Code and all other applicable provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the city, Occupation Safety Health Act, May 19, 1972, and all amendments thereafter. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-84.1) 
1525.03 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
    The mayor may revoke any permit issued under the provisions of sections 1525.01 and 1525.02, subject to an appeal of any permittee to a court of competent jurisdiction whenever any permittee is aggrieved, upon the following grounds: 
(a)  When the permittee fails to comply with any lawful order of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(b)  Whenever the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Whenever the sale or service by any permittee of any fire extinguisher, portable or fixed fire extinguisher systems, fire protection equipment, fire alarm systems or sprinkler system results in, either directly or indirectly, a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-84.2) 
1525.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of section 1525.01 or 1525.02, or who makes a false statement concerning any material fact in submitting an application for a license, or for a renewal of a license, or in any hearing concerning the revocation thereof shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-84.3) 
ARTICLE 1529 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal inspection, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-15; authority of local fire departments, W. Va. Code, § 8-15-1 et seq., Art. 29-3A. 

1529.01 - DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY TO PREVENT SPREAD OF FIRE. 
    The chief of the fire department or the mayor shall have the power to direct the pulling down or destroying of any fence, house, building or other thing, if deemed necessary to prevent the spreading of any fire. The owner of such property shall be entitled to be paid by the city the actual damage which he may have sustained by reason of the same having been pulled down or destroyed at such direction; provided, that no person shall be entitled to recover any compensation for property which would have been destroyed by fire if the same had not been pulled down or destroyed, under such direction, but the owner shall only be entitled to compensation for such property as could have been saved with ordinary care and diligence had no such direction been given. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-1) 
1529.02 - TOY BALLOONS. 
    No person shall inflate toy balloons with flammable or hazardous material or sell or use toy balloons so inflated. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-2) 
1529.03 - FURNACES, BOILERS AND HEATING APPARATUS. 
    No person shall have any furnace, boiler, heating apparatus or water heaters erected in such manner that there will be danger of igniting any surrounding woodwork or combustible wall and such apparatus shall be vented to the outside with venting terminating two feet above the roof or into an inside chimney in such manner as to eliminate toxic fumes and carbon monoxide gas. 
    All gas regulator valves installed on gas heating apparatus or in gas service lines to the apparatus shall be vented, where vent orifice is provided in the regulator, by approved tubing from the regulator into the apparatus fire combustion chamber. 
(1964 Code Sec. 12-3) 
1529.04 - SETTING FIRE, TO FURNISHINGS IN HOTELS, HOSPITALS. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall, in any hotel, motel, rooming house, lodginghouse, apartment house, tenement house, convalescent home, hospital, child care facility or similar place of abode, by any means whatsoever, through carelessness, neglect or negligence, set fire to or cause the burning of any bedding, furniture, rug, curtain, drape or other household furnishing or fitting or any other part of such buildings or premises in such a manner as to endanger the safety of any person or property. 
(b)  Notice to be posted. It shall be the duty of the manager, owner or lessee of any hotel or motel to post a notice containing subsection (a) hereof in a conspicuous place in each room occupied by guests in such hotel or motel; and it shall be the duty of the manager, owner or lessee of any rooming house, lodginghouse, apartment house, tenement house, convalescent home, hospital, child care facility or similar place of abode to post such notice containing such section in a conspicuous place upon such premises. 
(1964 Code Secs. 12-4, 12-5) 
1529.05 - OPEN BURNING. 
    All open burning shall be prohibited except small and properly contained fires for the purpose of food preparation, light, warmth or proper disposal of flags. 
(Ord. 2-26-07) 
1529.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 1509.99 for general Code penalty. 
PART SEVENTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE 
ARTICLE 1705 - DIVISION OF BUILDING INSPECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Permits and inspections, § 7.3 et seq. 
State Law reference- Building regulation, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-13; building permits, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-14; municipal inspection, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-15. 

1705.01 - ESTABLISHED. 
    There is hereby established the division of building inspection. The supervisor of building inspection shall be in charge of such division which shall also contain the chief building inspector, chief plumbing inspector, chief electrical inspector, chief mechanical inspector and such other personnel as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1705.02 - DUTIES OF CHIEF OF DIVISION. 
    It shall be the duty of the supervisor of the division of building inspection to supervise and coordinate the activities of the division and of the various inspectors composing the same so as to provide efficient and economical inspection of building construction and maintenance and repairs, and to protect the public against inferior workmanship and materials and faulty construction during construction and maintenance and repairs. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1705.03 - ASSESSMENT OF AFTER BUSINESS HOUR INSPECTIONS. 
    It shall be the duty of the supervisor of building inspection to assess the costs of inspection made after regular business hours upon the owners of such buildings who have made a request for an after regular business hour inspection. For purposes of this section, "regular business hours" means the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding recognized City holidays. The costs to be assessed for such inspection shall consist of the total cost to the city, consisting of the amount of wages due the inspector and any incidental costs that the city would have to pay for such as fringe benefits and the like, and any fees due for such inspection as set out in the Official Building Code of the city. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1705.04 - DUTIES OF CHIEF BUILDING INSPECTOR. 
    The duties of the chief building inspector shall be as defined in the building code of the city. He shall report to and be under the supervision of and be responsible to the supervisor of building inspection. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1705.05 - DUTIES OF CHIEF PLUMBING INSPECTOR. 
    The duties of the chief plumbing inspector shall be as defined in the official building code of the city. He shall report to and be under the supervision of and be responsible to the supervisor of building inspection. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1705.06 - DUTIES OF CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. 
    The duties of the chief electrical inspector shall be as defined in the official building code of the city. He shall report to and be under the supervision of and be responsible to the supervisor of building inspection. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1705.07 - DUTIES OF CHIEF MECHANICAL INSPECTOR. 
    The duties of the chief mechanical inspector shall be as defined in the official building code of the city. He shall report to and be under the supervision of and be responsible to the supervisor of building inspection. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1705.99 - GENERAL CODE PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this Part Seventeen - Building and Housing Code, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days or both. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
ARTICLE 1711 - OFFICIAL BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4; building regulations, see W. Va. Code, § 8-12-13; municipal inspection, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-15. 

1711.01 - ADOPTION. 
(a)  The International Building Code 2015 adopted as the Official Building Code of the State of West Virginia, as promulgated by the State Fire Commission pursuant to W. Va. Code §§ 29-3-5b, 8-12-13, and 7-1-3n, as amended, together with any amendments and modifications thereto as may hereafter be adopted and promulgated from time to time by the Commission, is hereby adopted as the Official Building Code of the City. 
(b)  The City of Huntington does not adopt any of the additional appendices authorized pursuant to the W. Va. Legislative Rule identified as § 87-4-1, et seq. and specifically authorized in § 87-4-7(7.3). 
(c)  The City of Huntington does adopt the provisions of the national codes with respect to the penalty for imprisonment, but the penalty for any violation shall be limited to a maximum of $500 and/or 30 days imprisonment for any single violation. 
(d)  The City of Huntington does not reject the International Property Maintenance Code and hereby incorporates said Code in its adoption of the Official Building Code. 
(Ord. of 11-27-06; Ord. of 6-28-10(1); Ord. of 10-15-13(1); Ord. of 9-12-16(2) ) 
1711.02 - COMPLIANCE. 
    No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of the Official Building Code of the city adopted by this article. The supervisor of building inspection shall have all those powers necessary to enforce the provisions of the Official Building Code of the city. 
(Ord. 4-28-03) 
1711.03 - COPIES. 
    One copy of the Official Building Code adopted by this article shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and the office of the division of building inspection and made available to the public for inspection and copying for a reasonable fee or charge. 
(Ord. 4-28-03) 
1711.04 - FIRE ZONES. 
    Deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. 4-28-03) 
1711.05 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
(Ord. 12-27-05) 
1711.06 - NON-CONTRACTOR WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT. 
    Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required of non-contractors for the following: 
(a)  Building. 
(1)  One story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
(2)  Fences not over six feet high. 
(3)  Oil derricks. 
(4)  Retaining walls which are not over four feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or II-A liquids. 
(5)  Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1. 
(6)  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above grade and not over any basement or story below which is not part of an accessible route. 
(7)  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
(8)  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
(9)  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, as applicable in section 101.2, which are less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground. 
(10)  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems. 
(11)  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
(12)  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of group R-3, as applicable in section 101.2 and group U occupancies. 
(13)  Movable cases, counters, and partitions not over five feet nine inches in height. 
(b)  Electrical. 
(1)  Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
(2)  The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do not apply to equipment and wiring for power supply, the installation of towers and antennas. 
(3)  A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(c)  Gas. 
(1)  Portable heating appliance. 
(2)  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(d)  Mechanical. 
(1)  Portable heating appliance. 
(2)  Portable ventilating equipment. 
(3)  Portable cooling unit. 
(4)  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by code. 
(5)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
(6)  Portable evaporative cooler. 
(7)  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower or less. 
(e)  Plumbing. 
(1)  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
(2)  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and installation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(Ord. 12-27-05) 
1711.07 - REPAIRS. 
    Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement of or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(Ord. 12-27-05) 
1711.08 - FEES. 
    The fee schedule is set forth in Section 108.2 of the International Building Code 2000, and requires a fee for each plan examination, building permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule as follows: 
Total Valuation of Building or Structure Permit Fees $0.00 to 499.00 $ 0.00 500.00 to 1,100.00 20.00 1,101.00 to 1,200.00 20.50 1,201.00 to 1,300.00 22.00 1,301.00 to 1,400.00 23.50 1,401.00 to 1,500.00 25.00 1,501.00 to 1,600.00 26.50 1,601.00 to 1,700.00 28.00 1,701.00 to 1,800.00 29.50 1,801.00 to 1,900.00 31.00 1,901.00 to 2,000.00 32.50 2,001.00 to 3,000.00 38.50 3,001.00 to 4,000.00 44.50 4,001.00 to 5,000.00 50.50 5,001.00 to 6,000.00 56.50 6,001.00 to 7,000.00 62.50 7,001.00 to 8,000.00 68.50 8,001.00 to 9,000.00 74.50 9,001.00 to 10,000.00 80.50 10,001.00 to 11,000.00 86.50 11,001.00 to 12,000.00 92.50 12,001.00 to 13,000.00 98.50 13,001.00 to 14,000.00 104.50 14,001.00 to 15,000.00 110.50 15,001.00 to 16,000.00 116.50 16,001.00 to 17,000.00 122.50 17,001.00 to 18,000.00 128.50 18,001.00 to 19,000.00 134.50 19,001.00 to 20,000.00 140.50 20,001.00 to 21,000.00 146.50 21,001.00 to 22,000.00 152.50 22,001.00 to 23,000.00 158.50 23,001.00 to 24,000.00 164.50 24,001.00 to 25,000.00 170.50 25,001.00 to 26,000.00 175.00 26,001.00 to 27,000.00 179.50 27,001.00 to 28,000.00 184.00 28,001.00 to 29,000.00 188.50 29,001.00 to 30,000.00 193.00 30,001.00 to 31,000.00 197.50 31,001.00 to 32,000.00 202.00 32,001.00 to 33,000.00 206.50 33,001.00 to 34,000.00 211.00 34,001.00 to 35,000.00 215.50 35,001.00 to 36,000.00 220.00 36,001.00 to 37,000.00 224.50 37,001.00 to 38,000.00 229.00 38,001.00 to 39,000.00 233.50 39,001.00 to 40,000.00 238.00 40,001.00 to 41,000.00 242.50 41,001.00 to 42,000.00 247.00 42,001.00 to 43,000.00 251.50 43,001.00 to 44,000.00 256.00 44,001.00 to 45,000.00 260.50 45,001.00 to 46,000.00 265.00 46,001.00 to 47,000.00 269.00 47,001.00 to 48,000.00 274.00 48,001.00 to 49,000.00 278.50 49,001.00 to 50,000.00 283.00 50,001.00 to 51,000.00 286.00 51,001.00 to 52,000.00 289.00 52,001.00 to 53,000.00 292.00 53,001.00 to 54,000.00 295.00 54,001.00 to 55,000.00 298.00 55,001.00 to 56,000.00 301.00 56,001.00 to 57,000.00 304.00 57,001.00 to 58,000.00 307.00 58,001.00 to 59,000.00 310.00 59,001.00 to 60,000.00 313.00 60,001.00 to 61,000.00 316.00 61,001.00 to 62,000.00 319.00 62,001.00 to 63,000.00 322.00 63,001.00 to 64,000.00 325.00 64,001.00 to 65,000.00 328.00 65,001.00 to 66,000.00 331.00 66,001.00 to 67,000.00 334.00 67,001.00 to 68,000.00 337.00 68,001.00 to 69,000.00 340.00 69,001.00 to 70,000.00 343.00 70,001.00 to 71,000.00 346.00 71,001.00 to 72,000.00 349.00 72,001.00 to 73,000.00 352.00 73,001.00 to 74,000.00 355.00 74,001.00 to 75,000.00 358.00 75,001.00 to 76,000.00 361.00 76,001.00 to 77,000.00 364.00 77,001.00 to 78,000.00 367.00 78,001.00 to 79,000.00 370.00 79,001.00 to 80,000.00 373.00 80,001.00 to 81,000.00 376.00 81,001.00 to 82,000.00 379.00 82,001.00 to 83,000.00 382.00 83,001.00 to 84,000.00 385.00 84,001.00 to 85,000.00 388.00 85,001.00 to 86,000.00 391.00 86,001.00 to 87,000.00 394.00 87,001.00 to 88,000.00 397.00 88,001.00 to 89,000.00 400.00 89,001.00 to 90,000.00 403.00 90,001.00 to 91,000.00 406.00 91,001.00 to 92,000.00 409.00 92,001.00 to 93,000.00 412.00 93,001.00 to 94,000.00 415.00 94,001.00 to 95,000.00 418.00 95,001.00 to 96,000.00 421.00 96,001.00 to 97,000.00 424.00 97,001.00 to 98,000.00 427.00 98,001.00 to 99,000.00 430.00 99,001.00 to 100,000.00 433.00 100,001.00 and up - add $2.50 per $1,000 and each part thereof.  
    In addition to the above fees based on the value of the building, an application fee of $20 per permit shall be required. These fees shall be waived for charitable organizations recognized by the IRS who perform work on residences for which they receive no compensation. The fees are further waived for the installation of ramps, stairs, lifts or other structural modifications to residences designed to facilitate the movement of disabled individuals. 
(Ord. 12-27-05) 
1711.09 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 12, 2016, repealed § 1711.09, which pertained to additions, insertions and changes to International Building Code 2012. See Code Comparative table for complete derivation. 
1711.99 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 12, 2016, repealed § 1711.99, which pertained to penalty. See Code Comparative table for complete derivation. 
ARTICLE 1723 - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- By an Ordinance passed April 9, 1990, Council provided that the provisions of this article insofar as they conflict with the provisions of the West Virginia State Building Code adopted under Article 1711 are hereby repealed. 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Art. 1109; unsafe buildings, Art. 1739. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4; building enforcement agency, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-16. 

1723.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Terms, words, phrases and their derivatives used but not specifically defined in this article shall have the meaning defined in the Uniform Building Code. 
(a)  "Boardinghouse" means a lodginghouse in which meals are provided. 
(b)  "Ceiling height" means the clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
(c)  "Dormitory" means a room occupied by more than two guests. 
(d)  "Dwelling unit" means a suite of two or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designed to be occupied by one family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and dining. 
(e)  "Efficiency living unit" means any room having cooking facilities used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes and meeting the requirements of Section H-503 (b), Exception, of the Uniform Building Code. 
(f)  "Guest" means any person hiring or occupying a room for living or sleeping purposes. 
(g)  "Guest room" means any room or rooms used, or intended to be used, by a guest for sleeping purposes. Every 100 square feet of superficial floor area in a dormitory is a guest room. 
(h)  "Habitable room" means any room meeting the requirements of this article for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connection corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage, cellars, utility rooms and similar spaces. 
(i)  "Health officer" means the director of the Cabell-Huntington Health Department. 
(j)  "Hot water" means water at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(k)  "Hotel" means any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention home or other institutions in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
(l)  "Kitchen" means a room used or designed to be used for the preparation of food. 
(m)  "Lodginghouse" means any building or portion thereof containing not more than five guest rooms which are used by not more than five guests where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. A lodginghouse shall comply with all of the requirements of this article for dwellings. 
(n)  "Nuisance". The following are defined as "nuisances": 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the Health Officer. 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants. 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities. 
(7)  Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer. 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the health officer. 
(o)  "Occupied space" means the total area of all buildings or structures on any lot or parcel of ground projected on a horizontal plane excluding permitted projections, as allowed by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(p)  "Rooming house". See "lodginghouse." 
(q)  "Service room" means any room used for storage, bath or utility purposes, and not included in the definition of habitable rooms. 
(r)  "Superficial floor area" means the net floor area within the enclosing walls of the room in which the ceiling height is not less than five feet excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures. 
(s)  "Uniform Building Code" means the city's Building Code, adopted by section 1711.01. 
(t)  "Used" means "used or designed or intended to be used." 
(u)  "Vent shaft" means a court used only to ventilate or light a water closet, bath, toilet or utility room or other service room. 
(v)  "Window" means a glazed opening, including glazed doors, which open upon a yard, court or recess from a court, or a vent shaft open and unobstructed to the sky. 
(w)  "Yard" means an open, unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by the zoning ordinance of the city, on the lot on which a building is situated. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-16) 
1723.02 - ADOPTION; HOUSING INSPECTOR. 
(a)  The Uniform Housing Code, 1985 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference, insofar as such Uniform Housing Code is not in conflict with the laws of the state and of the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of effectuating this article only, the term "building official" shall mean the housing inspector. 
(c)  Insofar as the Uniform Housing Code, 1985 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, conflicts with the Official Building Code adopted under article 1711, it is hereby repealed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-17; Ord. 2-22-88; Ord. 4-9-90) 
1723.03 - ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. 
    There shall be an enforcement agency which shall consist of the mayor, the housing inspector and one member at large, to be selected by and to serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor. The health officer and the fire chief shall serve as ex-officio members of such enforcement agency. The Housing Code enforcement agency shall have all those powers necessary and convenient to enforce the provisions of this article as well as those powers granted to the building official in the Uniform Housing Code. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-18) 
1723.04 - AMENDMENTS. 
    The Uniform Housing Code, adopted by section 1723.02, is hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 203 shall read as follows: 
In order to provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this article, there is hereby created a housing advisory and appeals board, consisting of five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to housing. The building official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary of the board. The housing advisory and appeals board shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office at his pleasure. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigation and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the building official with a duplicate copy to the appellant and may recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. 
(b)  Section 204 shall read as follows: 
No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any order issued by the building official hereunder. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1705.99 of the Codified Ordinances. 
(c)  Section 301 shall read as follows: 
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move or demolish any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the building official in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in the Uniform Building Code; providing that no person, firm or corporation shall be granted a permit for the purpose of demolishing any building or structure until such person, firm or corporation shall have paid a minimum fee to the Department of Public Works in the amount Of: Single Family Residence one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); Commercial, Industrial, Multi-Family Residential one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus $0.05/square feet of floor space, to cover cost of inspections, and shall have caused to be filed with the Building Official, a public liability policy of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the State, the limits of such policy to be not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for an injury to any person, not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for all injuries in any one accident and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for property damage which may be sustained by any person as a result of the issuance of such permit. If a re-inspection is required, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will apply. Permits will be valid for thirty (30) days. Extensions may be granted as the discretion of the Public Works Director. Costs of an extension shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Extermination treatment shall be done when, in the opinion of the Health Officer or his authorized representative, there is a suspected infestation of rodents, roaches, vermin, insects or other pests in or on the premises to be demolished. Extermination treatment shall be done only by a reputable bonded exterminator at least ten days before demolition commences and such extermination treatment shall be carried out with the utmost safety precautions to protect children, persons, and domestic animals by properly sealing the premises being exterminated and only approved insecticides, rodenticides or any other methods approved by the Health Officers shall be used. Upon completion of such extermination treatment, demolition or removal, the Director of Public Works shall cause an inspection of the premises to be made, and if such work is found be unsatisfactory, the permittee shall be subject to the criminal provisions found in Sections 1723.08 and 1705.99. 
(Ord. of 5-28-02; Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
1723.05 - UTILITY SERVICE TO VACANT DWELLING. 
    No person shall provide, or permit another to provide, utility services such as water, gas, electricity, sewerage or similar services to any vacant substandard dwelling unit until such dwelling unit has been inspected, brought into compliance with the Codified Ordinances and the Uniform Housing Code, hereinbefore mentioned, and a valid certificate of occupancy, as required, has been issued; provided, however, the building official shall permit the temporary use of such utility service as may be necessary for repair or alteration of a vacant substandard dwelling unit and shall, in writing, notify the supplier of such utility service of the time during which and the conditions under which such temporary service may be furnished. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-20) 
1723.06 - REPAIR OF SUBSTANDARD DWELLING; PERMIT. 
    No building, plumbing, electrical, gas or other permit required by the Codified Ordinances or the Uniform Building Code, hereinbefore mentioned, for the alteration or repair of an existing substandard unit shall be issued until the building official or other designated employee of the city has made an inspection of the property to determine the feasibility of such alteration or repair and shall have issued a statement, in writing, to the effect that the proposed alteration or repair of such substandard dwelling unit is feasible. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-21) 
1723.07 - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER. 
    Every owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him by this article even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this article. 
    Every owner or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building containing two or more dwelling units. 
    Every owner shall, where required by this article, the health ordinances of the city or the health officer, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and where infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all his rubbish, garbage and other organic waste in a manner required by the health ordinances of the city and approved by the health officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-22) 
1723.08 - VIOLATIONS. 
    No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-32) 
1723.99 - PENALTY. 
    Commencement of work prior to obtaining a permit will result in a doubling of the cost of the permit. Said persons who begin work without obtaining a permit will also be subject to the fines as outlined in section 1705.99 of the Building and Housing Code. 
(Ord. 5-28-02) 
ARTICLE 1731 - ELECTRICAL STANDARDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, W. Va. Code, § 8-11-4; authority to regulate electrical wiring standards, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-13(2); certification of electricians, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-14a; municipal inspection, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-15. 

1731.01 - APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. 
    There is hereby created the office of chief electrical inspector who shall hereinafter be referred to as the electrical inspector. The mayor shall appoint the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.02 - QUALIFICATIONS OF CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. 
    The person chosen to fill the office of chief electrical inspector shall be a competent electrician of good moral character, and have at least ten years' experience in electrical construction and shall be possessed of such executive ability as is required for the faithful performance of his duties, and shall have a thorough knowledge of standard materials and methods used in the installation of electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment. He shall be well versed in approved methods of electrical construction for safety to life and property, the laws of the state and ordinances of the city relating to electrical work, the rules and regulations issued under authority of the statutes, the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code and the provisions of other installation and safety codes approved by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.03 - CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR NOT TO ENGAGE IN ELECTRICAL BUSINESS. 
    Neither the chief electrical inspector nor any of his assistants or agents shall engage in the business or sale, installation or maintenance of electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment, either directly or indirectly, nor shall such persons have any financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city at any time during the chief electrical inspector's term of office. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.04 - ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER. 
    The chief electrical inspector shall see that the provisions of this article are enforced and shall enforce within the city the laws of the state and other ordinances of the city relating to the installation of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.05 - RECORDS. 
Editor's note- Former Section 1731.05 was repealed by Ordinance 1-27-97, passed January 27, 1997. 
1731.06 - LIST OF APPROVED ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES. 
Editor's note- Former Section 1731.06 was repealed by Ordinance 1-27-97, passed January 27, 1997. 
1731.07 - PERMITS FOR INSTALLATION OR ALTERATION OF ELECTRICAL WIRING. 
Editor's note- Former Section 1731.07 was repealed by Ordinance 1-27-97, passed January 27, 1997. 
1731.08 - INSPECTION; USE OF ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION BEFORE INSPECTION; INSPECTION FEES. 
    All electrical wiring, apparatus and appliances hereafter installed in the city, shall be inspected by the chief electrical inspector. No person shall use any new electrical installation in any building before the same has been inspected and approved by the chief electrical inspector. For making such inspections, the city shall be entitled to charge and receive from the owner of property inspection fees in accordance with the schedule of such fees set out in the Official Building Code of the city. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.09 - NOTICE OF INTENTION TO INSTALL WIRING OR TO MAKE ALTERATIONS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS. 
    No electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises, nor shall any alterations be made in any such existing wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without notifying the electrical inspector, except as stated in the following paragraphs: 
(a)  No inspection shall be required for minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping joints and repairing drop cords or appliances, providing the appliance can be installed without additions to electric wiring. 
(b)  No inspection shall be required for the installation of wiring, devices or equipment for telephone, telegraph, district messenger or telegraph systems or any signalling system, other than radio systems, operating at 50 volts or less. 
(c)  No inspection shall be required for maintenance and repair work on the premises of a firm or corporation regularly employing one or more journeymen electricians for the purpose. 
(d)  No inspection shall be required for the installation of electric wiring, devices or equipment installed for or by a public utility corporation operating under a franchise from the city to transmit and sell or use electrical energy, provided such wiring, devices or equipment are for use of the corporation in its operation as a public utility and installed in accordance with all other provisions of this article. 
(e)  No inspection shall be required for the installation of household appliances that have been approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., where the appliance can be plugged into the existing receptacle, provided the installation of the appliance meets the requirements of the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.10 - APPLICATIONS FOR ELECTRICAL INSPECTION SERVICE. 
Editor's note- Former Section 1731.10 was repealed by Ordinance 1-27-97, passed January 27, 1997. 
1731.11 - CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR'S RIGHT OF ENTRY. 
    The chief electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.12 - SCHEDULE OF INSPECTION FEES. 
    Before any permit is granted for the installation or alteration of electric wiring, or devices, appliances or equipment, the person making application for such permit shall pay to the city a fee in such amount as specified in the schedule of fees as set forth in the Official Building Code of the city. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.13 - WHEN INSPECTION FEES TO BE PAID. 
Editor's note- Former Section 1731.13 was repealed by Ordinance 1-27-97, passed January 27, 1997. 
1731.14 - REPAIR OF DEFECTIVE ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT OR EQUIPMENT DEFECTIVELY INSTALLED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 1731.14 was repealed by Ordinance 1-27-97, passed January 27, 1997. 
1731.15 - DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. 
    The chief electrical inspector shall have the authority to order the discontinuance of electric service supply to defective electrical equipment or electrical equipment that is defectively installed. In cases where the immediate disconnection of electrical equipment is necessary for the safety of persons or property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the chief electrical inspector shall have the authority to order the immediate discontinuance of electric service supply to such electrical equipment. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.16 - COMPLIANCE WITH OFFICIAL BUILDING CODE OF THE CITY. 
    All electrical wiring and installation of electrical apparatus and appliances for furnishing light, heat and power, done in the city, shall comply in all respects with the rules and regulations of the Official Building Code of the city, as set forth in article 1711 of these Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.17 - WORK DONE BY OWNER OF DWELLING. 
    Nothing is this article shall prevent any property owner of an owner/occupied dwelling from installing or maintaining electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment within his own dwellling providing such work shall be done by himself and does not otherwise violate this article. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
1731.18 - BOARD OF APPEALS. 
    Any person aggrieved by the enforcement against him of any of the provisions of this article shall have the right of appeal to the board of appeals. Application for such appeal shall be made to the board of appeals, in writing, within ten days from the date of such alleged adverse decision. 
(Ord. 1-27-97) 
ARTICLE 1735 - PLUMBING REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted December 9, 2013, amended article 1735 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 1735, §§ 1735.01-1735.37, pertained to similar subject matter. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 

1735.01 - PURPOSE OF ARTICLE. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimum plumbing standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction and quality of materials used in all plumbing systems within the city. Section 1735.10 is considered a basic concept of this article and the proper functioning of the code of board appeals is as essential as the standards included herein. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Plumber (apprentice)" means a person who is undergoing an apprenticeship or course of training, of not less than five years, for the purpose of learning the trade of plumbing. An apprentice, as herein defined, shall perform no work regulated by this article or amendments thereto, except as an assistant under the direct supervision of a master plumber, and in the immediate presence of a qualified master plumber or qualified journeyman plumber. 
(b)  "Plumber (journeyman)" means a person who is skilled in the work of installing and maintaining plumbing, drainage, gas fittings and special waste, under the direction, of a master plumber; and who has served at least five years time as an apprentice at the trade of plumbing. 
(c)  "Plumber (master)" means a person who maintains an established place of business for contracting, selling and installation of plumbing, gas piping and drainage work; who is skilled in the planning, superintending, practical installation and maintenance of plumbing and drainage; who obtains necessary permits; and who has served at least two years time as a licensed journeyman plumber. 
Additional definitions are found in Chapter 2 of the Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.03 - CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS. 
    A certificate of competency will not be required for: 
(a)  A property owner performing work as set forth in section 1735.17. 
(b)  Qualified employees of public utilities under the jurisdiction of the state public service commission when performing work for the employer. 
(c)  Qualified employees of manufacturing or chemical processing concerns when performing work for the employer. 
(d)  Qualified employees of firms or establishments engaged in selling and installing appliances, heating or air conditioning where a normal connection to an existing supply line is made. A normal connection is to be construed as being five feet or less in length to a supply line which is already existing in the room where the installation is being performed. 
    The items of appliances covered under this provision shall be designated by the director of public works. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.04-1735.10 - RESERVED. 
1735.11 - ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENT UTILITY SERVICE. 
    Gas or water utility companies shall not provide permanent meter connections to supply water or gas to any new or remodeled building until a proper notification from the plumbing inspector that water, gas, soil, waste, sewer and vent piping has complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.12 - PLACE OF BUSINESS OF MASTER PLUMBER. 
    Every certified master plumber shall have a bona-fide place of business, and shall display on the front of his place of business a sign, "Registered master plumber," bearing the name or names of the person in letters not less than three inches high. Such place of business shall be open to the public during regular business hours, and the master plumber's certificate shall be prominently displayed in such place of business. Vehicles used in the conduct of such business shall display on each side a sign bearing the name or names of the person, and the word "Registered" in letters not less than three inches high. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.13 - APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all plumbing work performed after February 25, 1965, subject to the exceptions outlined in section 106.2 of the Plumbing Code as set forth in the BOCA National Building Code, current edition as adopted by city ordinance, said Code being the Official Building Code of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.14 - CHIEF PLUMBING INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT; ASSISTANT. 
    Subject to necessary appropriations by council, the mayor shall appoint one competent person to be known as chief plumbing inspector and such assistants as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. Such plumbing inspector and assistant plumbing inspectors shall be a bona-fide registered master or journeyman plumber with at least five years experience and who maintains a residence in the city. Such chief plumbing inspector and assistants shall satisfactorily pass an examination as set up by the board of plumbing examiners. The chief plumbing inspector and assistant plumbing inspectors shall have no interest in the plumbing industry except in the official capacity of plumbing inspector. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.16 - PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS. 
    Before any plumbing, drainage or sewer work is undertaken in connection with any structure within the city, a permit for such work shall be secured by the master plumber or the owner or his agent as outlined in section 107.3 of the BOCA Code. Before a permit is issued which involves plumbing work, the drawings will be reviewed and approved by the chief plumbing inspector; provided, however, that no such permit shall be required for repairs to existing plumbing fixtures such as replacement of parts, stoppage of leaks, removal of stoppage and obstructions in drain lines, replacement of pipes and fixtures where no change in the location of the supply or drain line is involved. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.17 - PERMIT NOT REQUIRED FOR WORK DONE BY PROPERTY OWNER; EXCEPTIONS. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent any property owner of an owner-occupied dwelling from installing or maintaining plumbing within his own dwelling, providing such work is performed by himself. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate any provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.18 - PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING PERMITS; FEES. 
    Permits for all plumbing work shall be obtained as outlined in Section 107.0, Application for Permit of the BOCA Code. The master plumber who will do all plumbing work must be identified on the permit application. Permits will not be issued without a master plumber being identified. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.27 - REPAIR OR INSTALLATION OF HOUSE SEWER. 
    No person other than a master plumber or his employee duly certificated under the requirements of this article shall establish, repair or discontinue any sewer or drain connection to any public sanitary, combination or storm sewer. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.28 - SEWER TAPPING PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION. 
    No master plumber or his employee shall establish a new connection to any public sanitary, combination or storm sewer without first making application to the sanitary board for a sewer tapping permit. 
    Such application shall specify the exact location of the point at which the public sewer is to be tapped and the name of the owner of the property to be served by the sewer or drain connection. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.29 - BACKFILLING SEWER. 
    No sewer in any street or alley or on private property shall be backfilled until the chief plumbing inspector shall have made an inspection of the sewer tap and the new branch piping. Upon issuance of a certificate of approval by the chief plumbing inspector, the master plumber may properly backfill and cover the sewer. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.30 - SEWER TAP FEES. 
    Fees for sewer taps shall be paid in the amounts specified, and in accordance with the procedure established in section 1735.18 of this article. Such fees shall be paid directly to the sanitary board. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.31 - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SEWER TAP PERMIT. 
    No master plumber shall obtain a sewer tapping permit unless he is to perform the work himself or under his supervision. Assignment of such permit to another person will subject the master plumber to revocation of his certificate. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.32, 1735.33 - RESERVED. 
1735.34 - CONFORMITY WITH REGULATIONS. 
    No person shall engage in the business of plumbing or do work at the trade of plumbing in the city, or outside the boundaries of the city, if such plumbing is or will be connected to the municipal sewerage system, except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.35 - BOCA PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED. 
    The Plumbing Code contained in the Official Building Code of the city as set forth in article 1711 of these Codified Ordinances, shall, in all respects, be strictly observed, followed and enforced by the chief plumbing inspector. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.36 - INTERPRETATION OF ARTICLE. 
    It is the intention of this article that interpretation of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility of the code official. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
1735.37 - NONCONFORMITY WITH ARTICLE. 
    No person shall perform any plumbing which does not conform to or exceed the minimum requirements of material, design and installation as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13(1)) 
ARTICLE 1739 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 25, 2017, repealed the former Art. 1739, §§ 1739.01-1739.99, and enacted a new Art. 1739 as set out herein. The former Art. 1739 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Burnt structures, Art. 539; public nuisances, § 1109.01. 
State Law reference- Building enforcement agency, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-16. 

1739.01 - DECLARATION. 
    It is hereby declared that any dwelling or other building that is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare whether used for human habitation or not, shall be subject to regulation by the City of Huntington and may be abated by repair, alteration or improvement, or the vacating and closing or removal or demolition, or any combination thereof, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  "Code enforcement agency" means the inspections division and/or the unsafe buildings commission. 
(b)  "Code enforcement agency official" means any lawful agent of a code enforcement agency, including, but not limited to, any city inspector, fire marshal, or health officer. 
(c)  "Inspections division" for the purposes of this article shall include all building inspectors, electrical inspectors, plumbing inspectors, and fire marshals for the City of Huntington. 
(d)  "Owner" or "landowner" means a person who individually or jointly with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to the property, with or without actual possession of the property; 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent-of the owner; 
(3)  Is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner; 
(4)  Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents; or 
(5)  May control or direct the management or disposition of the property. 
(e)  "Remediate" or "remediation" may mean either the repair or demolition of an unsafe building. 
(f)  "Unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare" means: 
(1)  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings; 
(2)  The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress; 
(3)  Any portion of a dwelling, building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged; 
(4)  Any portion of a structure or building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the original designed value; 
(5)  The dwelling, building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way; 
(6)  The dwelling, building or structure, or any portion, is clearly unsafe for its use; 
(7)  The dwelling, building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, criminal activity or enables persons to resort to the dwelling, building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act; 
(8)  Any dwelling, building or structure constructed, exists or maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to any dwelling, building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction or of any law or ordinance that presents either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety; 
(9)  A dwelling, building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, contamination by any hazardous substance or material including, but not limited to, substance resulting from the illegal manufacture of drugs, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code enforcement agency to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease; 
(10)  Any dwelling, building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health; or 
(11)  Any portion of a building that remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.03 - APPLICATION. 
    This article shall only apply to such dwellings, structures or buildings which meet the definition of unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental to the public safety or welfare as set forth in subsections (a) or (b) below: 
(a)  A dwelling, structure or building shall be deemed unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental to the public safety or welfare if any one of the following definitions are met: 
(1)  Any portion of a dwelling, building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged; 
(2)  The dwelling, building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way; 
(3)  Any dwelling, building or structure constructed, exists or maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to any dwelling, building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction or of any law or ordinance that presents either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety. 
(b)  Alternatively, a dwelling, structure or building shall be deemed unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental to the public safety or welfare when subsections (1), (2), and (3), as set forth below, are met: 
(1)  The dwelling, building or structure meets any one of the following definitions: 
(A)  The dwelling, building or structure, or any portion, is clearly unsafe for its use; 
(B)  The dwelling, building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, criminal activity or enables persons to resort to the dwelling, building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act; 
(C)  A dwelling, building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, contamination by any hazardous substance or material including, but not limited to, substance resulting from the illegal manufacture of drugs, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code enforcement agency to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease; 
(D)  Any portion of a building that remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned. 
(2)  The building is (A) vacant, (B) abandoned, or (C) has been lawfully declared unfit for human habitation; and 
(3)  The reasonable estimated cost of repair, rehabilitation or corrective action exceeds the fair market value of the building. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.04 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS COMMISSION. 
    There is hereby created an enforcement agency to be known as the unsafe buildings commission. Such agency shall be composed of the mayor or his or her designee, the chief building inspector, the chief electrical inspector, the chief plumbing inspector, the City of Huntington Fire Chief, the City of Huntington Police Chief or designee, a sanitation officer from the Cabell-Huntington Health Department and one member at large, to be selected by and to serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor. The fire chief may designate the fire marshal to serve upon the commission in his or her stead. In the event any member is unable to attend a regular or special meeting of the commission, the mayor may designate and appoint an alternate member to serve in the absent member's place at such meeting. The mayor shall serve as chairperson, or may designate a chairperson, and a majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum. A permanent record shall be kept in the planning and development office and shall be open to inspection by any party in interest. The commission shall have the authority to make rules and regulations, not contrary to law, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article. 
    The purpose of the unsafe buildings commission is to act as an instrument of oversight for the repair, alteration, improvement, vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, or any combinations thereof, of dwellings, buildings, structures, or appurtenances that have been deemed unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare by the inspections division. Except in emergency situations as otherwise provided in this code or in state law, the authority to order a dwelling, building, structure, or appurtenance to be vacated and closed, removed or demolished rests solely with the unsafe building commission. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.05 - INSTIGATION OF INSPECTION. 
    Upon reasonably reliable notice of the potentially unsafe or unsanitary condition of a dwelling, structure, or building, a code enforcement agency official shall conduct an outdoor visual inspection from the right of way to determine whether an on-site and/or indoor inspection is necessary. When an on-site and/or indoor inspection is deemed necessary, code enforcement agency official shall conduct such inspection in accordance with subsection 1739.06 herein. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.06 - RIGHT OF INSPECTION. 
    In order to perform its duties effectively and protect the public interest, a member of the code enforcement agency, or any person delegated by the code enforcement agency for the purposes of this article, shall have authority to go upon and inspect any dwelling or other building or any part thereof, provided, that such entrance and inspection shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession and shall be consistent with the following: 
(1)  Except in exigent circumstances and as permitted by law, the enforcement agency shall provide reasonable advance notice to the owner and request permission from the owner to enter the property. 
(2)  If the owner cannot be located after reasonable inquiry by the code enforcement agency as required by this section, or if the owner refuses entry, the code enforcement agency may obtain an administrative search warrant from either the municipal court or the magistrate court located in the jurisdiction of the municipality or county where the structure, dwelling or building is located. Before obtaining an administrative search warrant, a code enforcement agency official is required to make a sworn statement and prima facie case showing that the code enforcement agency was unable to gain access to the structure, dwelling or building after reasonable and good faith efforts, and that there is a legitimate and substantial safety concern involving the structure, dwelling or building that supports the requested entry. 
(3)  If granted by the court, and if the owner can be located, the code enforcement agency shall provide the owner a copy of the administrative search warrant five days before entering the property. If applicable, the code enforcement agency shall also provide the same notice to any tenant or other person in possession of the structure, dwelling or building. 
(4)  Entry is for the sole purpose of inspection of the structure, dwelling or building for unsafe or unsanitary conditions and not for the purpose of criminal prosecution or gathering evidence for use in any criminal charge or proceeding unrelated to the unsafe or unsanitary condition of the structure, dwelling or building. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.07 - REMEDIATION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS. 
(1)  If, upon inspection, the inspections division determines a dwelling, structure or building is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare as set forth herein, the member of the Inspections Division shall provide lawful notice to the owner of the condition(s) and provide a list of actions needed and a reasonable timeline for completion. 
(2)  If an owner: 
(a)  Fails to cause the remediation of the structure within the given time for completion, or 
(b)  Does not agree to remediate the unsafe building, the supervisor of the inspections division shall recommend the unsafe building for hearing before the unsafe buildings commission. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.08 - NOTICE TO OWNERS TO SECURE AND STABILIZE A VACANT AND/OR ABANDONED STRUCTURE OR BUILDING. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, whenever a building is deemed by the inspections division to be unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare, as defined herein, a code official or the fire marshal may require the owner of said real property to secure the structure or building in a manner fitting with the condition of the building prior to any determination by the unsafe buildings commission. Said code official or fire marshal shall provide the owner with a written description of the method of securing the subject dwelling or building deemed appropriate for the circumstances. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.09 - HEARING BEFORE COMMISSION. 
(1)  Upon the recommendation of the supervisor of the inspections division, the unsafe buildings commission may issue a complaint against any building deemed by the inspections division to be unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare, as defined herein, and the owner thereof. Such complaint shall definitely locate the building, shall describe the conditions complained of and shall set a date and place for a hearing. Any complaint or order shall be served upon the owner in accordance with this article. 
(2)  At such hearing, the owner may appear in person or by agents or counsel, and may examine any witnesses who testify and may offer evidence in his own behalf. Either the commission or the owner may have the entire evidence recorded at their own expense, however, such shall not be mandatory. A lessee whose interests are substantially affected may appear and be heard in the same manner as the owner. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.10 - FINDINGS; ORDERS; PERFORMANCE. 
(a)  If the majority of the members of the unsafe buildings commission present at such hearing commission find that any dwelling, structure, or building meets the criteria for an unsafe building set in subsection 1739.03 herein, and the owner requests time to remediate the property, the commission may grant a continuance to the owner under the following circumstances: 
(1)  In order for the commission to grant a continuance of the hearing to provide time for an owner to remediate the unsafe building, the owner or agent must provide documentary evidence of the remediation plan to the commission. If documentary evidence is not provided, the commission may grant one 30-day continuance for the purposes of providing documentary evidence. Acceptable documentary evidence includes, but is not limited to, designs, contractor agreements, and receipts of materials purchased for the remediation. Evidence of a valid building permit or demolition permit shall be required in order to receive a continuance from the commission every time a continuance is requested unless the supervisor of building inspections represents that one is not required for the work to be performed. A building permit alone shall not be considered acceptable documentary evidence and no additional time shall be granted based solely on the acquisition of a building permit or demolition permit. 
(2)  If an owner request time to perform remediation and supplies documentary evidence adequate to convince the commission that said remediation is impending, the commission may grant a reasonable continuance not to exceed six months. At each continued hearing, the owner must provide additional documentary evidence showing the progress of the remediation in order to obtain another continuance. 
(3)  If, at any lawfully noticed or continued hearing, the owner fails to appear or fails to provide the required additional documentary evidence, the commission may use any and all powers within its authority to remediate the unsafe building including but not limited to causing such work to be done either by contract or by the purchase of necessary materials and the employment of workers and equipment. 
(b)  If the majority of the members of the commission present at such hearing find that any dwelling, structure, or building meets the criteria for an unsafe building set in subsection 1739.03 herein, and that lawful notice was provided to the owner, and reasonable efforts were undertaken to seek agreement from the owner prior to taking action, regardless of whether the owner appears at the hearing, the commission has the power to order the vacating, closing, removal or demolition of the subject dwelling, structure or building by the municipality in the absence of owner agreement or court order. 
(c)  Any order issued by the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  The date of the last inspection, 
(2)  The name of the inspector, 
(3)  A reasonable description of the unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental condition(s), 
(4)  The corrective measures required, 
(5)  The allotted time permitted to correct, and 
(6)  The allotted time to apply to circuit court for a temporary injunction. 
(d)  Within 15 days of issuing an order, the commission shall cause such order to be filed with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.11 - INJUNCTION; HEARING BY CIRCUIT COURT. 
(a)  The owner of the property shall have the right to apply to the circuit court of the county for a temporary injunction restraining the unsafe buildings commission pending final disposition of the cause. In the event such application is made, a hearing thereon shall be had within 20 days, or as soon thereafter as possible, and the court shall enter such final order or decree as the law and justice may require. 
(b)  Continuances of the hearing provided for in this subsection may be made for cause only. If a continuance is granted upon request by the owner, the owner is required to pay into court, in the form of a bond, any reasonable and necessary costs related to the property likely to be incurred by the municipality during the continuance. 
(c)  At the conclusion of a hearing held under this subsection, if the court finds that the property is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental to the public safety or welfare, the court shall make and enter an order granting the relief as requested by the municipality. The court may disburse any moneys paid into court by the owner in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.12 - NOTICE. 
(a)  Any complaint or order issued by the commission shall be noticed as follows: 
(1)  By conspicuously posting and attaching a copy of the complaint or order to the subject property; and 
(2)  By serving the complaint or order upon the owner or landowner in accordance with the law of the State of West Virginia concerning the service of process in civil actions, except that personal service of a complaint or order may be made by a code enforcement agency official. If service is made by certified mail under Rule 4(d)(1)(D) of the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure and delivery of the complaint or order is refused, the code enforcement agency official, promptly upon the receipt of the notice of the refusal, shall mail to the person or entity being noticed, by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the summons and complaint. If the first class mailing is not returned as undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service, service of the complaint or order is presumed to have been effectuated. 
Upon service of the complaint or order consistent with this subsection, the violation may be prosecuted consistent with state and local law. 
(b)  If the code enforcement agency cannot effect personal service on the owner, a code enforcement agency official shall subscribe a written affidavit, to be maintained for a minimum of two years, that demonstrates the structure, dwelling or building falls within one of the categories set forth in section 1739.03 of this article sets forth the basis in reasonable detail including documentation of same, and memorializes the code enforcement agency official's efforts to contact or get permission for entry and corrective action from the owner; and the code enforcement agency shall publish notice of its intent to enter the property for the purpose of demolition or correction, along with the address of the property, the name of the owner(s) and the date of the proposed action, as a class II legal advertisement consistent with the requirements of W. Va. ch. 59, art. 3, § 2, the first of which shall run at least thirty days before the date of the proposed action by the enforcement agency, and the last being no later than 20 days before the date of the proposed action by the enforcement agency. 
(c)  If there is no response to the notice by the owner or landowner in the time specified in the notice, then the municipality shall have the authority to proceed in correction or demolition of the subject dwelling, building or structure. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.13 - ASSESSING AND COLLECTING COSTS. 
(a)  Liens. The owner or owners of any dwelling or building under determination of the state fire marshal, as provided in W. Va. Code, § 29-3-12, or under order of the code enforcement agency shall pay for the costs of repairing, altering, or improving or vacating and closing, removing or demolishing any dwelling or building. 
Within 90 days of the completion of any remediation work performed by the municipality, the code enforcement agency shall file a lien against the real property in question for an amount that reflects all costs incurred by the municipality for repairing, altering or improving, or of vacating and closing, removing or demolishing any dwelling or building. 
(b)  Civil actions to recover costs. The municipality has the right to institute a civil action in circuit court against the landowner or other responsible party to get an order to take corrective action up to and including demolition of any structure, dwelling or building that is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare; and to recover all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the municipality with respect to the property and for reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred in the prosecution of the action: 
(1)  Not less than ten days prior to instituting a civil action as provided for in this section, the municipality shall send notice to the landowner by certified mail, return receipt requested, advising the landowner of the governing body's intention to institute such action. 
(2)  The notice shall be sent to the most recent address of the landowner of record in the office of the assessor of the county where the subject property is located and to any other address for the landowner as may exist on record with the municipality. If, for any reason, such certified mail is returned without evidence of proper receipt thereof, the municipality shall resend the notice(s) by first class mail, postage prepaid, and shall also post notice on the front door or other conspicuous location on the subject property. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.14 - REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE. 
    The authority and the procedure set forth in this article shall not be construed as exclusive, but shall be in addition to other police powers possessed by the city for dealing with conflagrations, health conditions and other problems affecting the safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.15 - LESSOR VIOLATIONS. 
    To the extent not otherwise authorized by state law, all notices of violation or correction for violations that do not fall within one of the categories set forth in section 1739.03 issued by the code enforcement agency shall be served in accordance with the process set forth in the state building code. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
1739.99 - PENALTY. 
    Any violation of this article may be prosecuted by the municipality consistent with state and local laws. Unless otherwise authorized by state law, prosecution of a violation shall be initiated by a complaint presented to and sworn or affirmed before a municipal judge. Unless otherwise provided by statute, the presentation and oath or affirmation shall be made by a code enforcement agency official or municipal attorney showing reason to have reliable information and belief. If from the facts stated in the complaint the municipal judge finds probable cause, the complaint becomes the charging instrument initiating a criminal proceeding. A complaint lawfully authorized by this subsection along with a summons setting forth the date, time and place of appearance before a municipal judge shall be served in accordance with the law of the State of West Virginia concerning the service of process in civil actions, except that personal service of a summons and complaint may be made by a code enforcement agency official. If service is made by certified mail under Rule 4(d)(1)(D) of the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure and delivery of the summons and complaint is refused, the code enforcement agency official, promptly upon the receipt of the notice of the refusal, shall mail to the person or entity being noticed, by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the summons and complaint. If the first class mailing is not returned as undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service, service of the summons and complaint is presumed to have been effectuated. Upon service of the summons and complaint consistent with this subsection, the violation may be prosecuted consistent with state and local law. 
(Ord. of 9-25-17(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1741 - VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 26, 2016, amended article 1741 title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such article pertained to vacant buildings. 

1741.01 - PURPOSE. 
(a)  The city has determined that uninspected and unmonitored vacant buildings (i) present a fire hazard; (ii) are often utilized by vagrants and transients (including drug abusers and traffickers) as dangerous and unsafe temporary shelters; (iii) detract from private and/or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings; and (iv) require additional regulation and services to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Owners of vacant buildings shall register such vacant buildings with the city, make payment of a fee as set forth herein, and otherwise conform to the requirements of this vacant structure code. 
(c)  It is the intent of this article that, through a registration, inspection, and monitoring process, and other improved public safety efforts, vacant buildings will be kept weather tight and secure from trespassers, will provide safe entry to police officers and firefighters in times of emergency, will not impede private and/or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain surrounding properties, and will not otherwise present a public hazard. 
(d)  It is the city's further intent for the provisions of this article to streamline and consolidate the existing procedure (that is, complaint, research, notification, inspection, orders, fines, liens, appeals and lien enforcement) by placing the responsibility to register and maintain a vacant structure on the owner of a building before a condition of the building falls into disrepair or otherwise necessarily warrants a complaint. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ) 
1741.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
(a)  BOARDED: "Boarded" shall mean a building or structure subject to the provisions of this section and shall be deemed to be "boarded" if in place of one or more exterior doors, other than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is a sheet or sheets of plywood or similar material covering the space for such door or window. 
(b)  BUSINESS DISTRICT: Solely for the purposes of this article, the "Business District" shall include the following: 
(1)  All parcels fronting Veterans Memorial Boulevard from 6th Street to 13th Street; 
(2)  All parcels fronting Third Avenue from 6th Street to Hal Greer Boulevard; 
(3)  All parcels fronting Fourth Avenue from 1st Street to Hal Greer Boulevard; 
(4)  All parcels fronting Fifth Avenue from 6th Street to Hal Greer Boulevard; 
(5)  All parcels fronting Sixth Avenue from 6th Street to 12th Street; 
(6)  All parcels fronting Seventh Avenue from 6th Street to 12th Street; 
(7)  All parcels south of 21/2 Alley from Hal Greer Boulevard to 22nd Street, west of 22nd Street from 21/2 Alley to 51/2 Alley, north of 51/2 Alley from Hal Greer Boulevard to 22nd Street, and east of Hal Greer Boulevard from 21/2 Alley to 51/2 Alley; 
(8)  All parcels fronting Hal Greer Boulevard from 51/2 Alley to Washington Boulevard; 
(9)  All parcels fronting 14th Street West from Washington Avenue to the railroad track underpass; 
(10)  Any and all properties fronting an alley that is bounded both to the north and the south avenues listed herein. 
The planning office shall maintain a map of the business district described herein which shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(c)  COMMERCIAL BUILDING: Any structure used or intended to be used in whole or in part for purposes other than residential purposes on which the property user or employees are engaged in work for which it is intended that compensation be received for goods or services. Examples include, but are not limited to, offices, retail shops, restaurants, service establishments, wholesales, warehousing, and production of goods. In order to be a commercial building for the purposes of this ordinance, the business use or activity must be at a scale greater than a home occupation. All buildings located within the "business district," defined herein, are deemed "commercial buildings" for the purposes of this article. 
(d)  DIRECTOR: Solely for the purposes of this article, the term "director" shall mean the mayor or designee. 
(e)  EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE AND MAJOR SYSTEMS: The phrase "exterior maintenance and major systems" shall mean the safe and lawful maintenance of the facade, windows, doors, roof and other parts of the exterior of the building and the maintenance of its major systems consisting of the roof, the electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply systems, the sewer system, and the sidewalk, driveway, if any, area of the lot, as applicable. 
(f)  OCCUPIED: Any building or structure shall be deemed to be "occupied" if one or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any part of the building as the licensed business-occupant, or as the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of this section, evidence offered to prove that a building is so "occupied" may include, but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal Service; proof of continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and sewer services; a valid city business license, or the most recent, federal, state, or city income tax statements indicating that the subject property is the official business or residence address of the person or business claiming occupancy; or proof of pre-rental inspection. 
(g)  OPEN: A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be "open" if any one or more exterior doors other than a storm door is broken, open and, or closed but, without a properly functioning lock to secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not capable of being locked and secured from intrusions, or any combination of the same. 
(h)  OWNER: "Owner" or "property owner" shall mean a person who individually or jointly with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to the property, with or without actual possession of the property; 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent of the owner; 
(3)  Is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner; 
(4)  Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents; or 
(5)  Is entitled to control or direct the management or disposition of the property. 
For the purposes of this article, an "agent" shall not include a person contracted with the property owner solely for the sale or listing for sale of the property, commonly referred to as a "real estate agent." 
(i)  REGISTRATION FEE: "Registration fee" shall mean, accordance with W. Va. Code § 8-12-16c, the fee exacted from vacant building owners for the maintenance and upkeep of said property. 
(j)  VACANT: 
(1)  A building shall be deemed to be vacant if no person or persons actually, currently conducts a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully resides or lives in any part of the building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupants, or tenant(s) on a permanent, nontransient basis. 
(2)  A building or structure shall be deemed vacant and subject to the registration and possible penalty provisions provided herein if the exterior maintenance and major systems of the building and the surrounding real property thereof, as defined in this section, are in violation of the building codes or health and sanitation codes and if there is not proof of continual utility service evidencing actual use of electric, gas (i.e., applicable heating sources), water service, etc. "Continual" means having no interruption of service lasting 30 days or more in any given 360-day period. In order for such continual utility service to be considered as being actually in use as described in this section, it must be more than merely registered to the owner for purposes of billing and must be utilized, at a minimum, in order to keep the property and the major systems of the building in compliance with building and safety codes. The person or entity asserting that there has been continued utility service has the burden to produce actual bills evidencing utility service for the relevant period. 
(3)  A new building under construction or a building that has been granted a waiver under section 1741.07 of this article is not deemed a vacant building. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ; Ord. of 9-26-16(1) ) 
1741.03 - APPLICABILITY. 
    The requirements of this section shall be applicable to each owner of any commercial building, as defined herein, that has been vacant for more than 30 consecutive days. Each such owner shall cause to be filed a registration statement in conformity with section 1741.04(a). For the purposes of this section, "owner" include: 
(a)  If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall provide the names and residence addresses of all officers and directors of the corporation and shall be accompanied by a copy of the most recent annual franchise tax report filed with the secretary of state. 
(b)  If an estate, the name and business address of the executor of the estate. 
(c)  If a trust, the names and address of all trustees, grantors, and beneficiaries. 
(d)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all partners with an interest of 10% or greater. 
(e)  If any other form of unincorporated association, the names and residence addresses of all principals with an interest of 10% or greater. 
(f)  If an individual person, the name and residence address of that individual person. 
    The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to any building owned by city, state, or federal government or any of their respective agencies or political subdivisions. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ; Ord. of 9-26-16(1) ) 
1741.04 - REGISTRATION STATEMENT; LOCAL AGENT; AND FEES. 
(a)  Registration statement: Each such owner shall cause to be filed a registration statement, which shall include the street address and parcel number of each such vacant building, the names and addresses of all owners, as hereinafter described, and any other information deemed necessary by the director and/or designee. Beginning with the first anniversary of the initial registration of each vacant building, the property owner of a registered vacant building shall pay the registration fee required by subsection 1741.04(c). All property owners of properties registered under this article shall remit payment of the fee imposed herein by the last day of the month in which the property was originally registered. 
    Registration shall be required for all vacant buildings, whether vacant and secure, vacant and open or vacant and boarded, and shall be required whenever any building has remained vacant for 30 consecutive days or more. In no instance shall the registration of a vacant building and the payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate the owner, agent or responsible party from responsibility for compliance with any other Building Code or Housing Code requirement. 
(b)  Local agent: If none of the persons outlined in section 1741.03 is shown at an address within the state, the registration statement also shall provide the name and address of a person who resides within the state and who is authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owners and who shall be designated as a responsible, local party or agent, both for purposes of notification in the event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare and for purposes of service of any and all notices or registration statements as herein authorized in connection herewith. 
(c)  Fees: The owner of the vacant property as of the last day of the month when the property has been registered in each calendar year shall be responsible for the payment of the non-refundable registration fee. 
    Said fee shall be billed based on the duration of the vacancy as determined by the following scale: 
(1)  No fee for properties that are vacant for less than one year; 
(2)  For properties that are vacant for at least one year but less than two years, $0.20 per square foot; 
(3)  For properties that are vacant for at least two years but less than three years, $0.40 per square foot; 
(4)  For properties that are vacant for at least three years but less than four years, $0.60 per square foot; 
(5)  For properties that are vacant for at least four years but less than five years, $0.80 per square foot; 
(6)  For properties that are vacant for at least five years, $1.00 per square foot; 
(7)  For every year past five years, the fee shall increase $0.20 per square foot each year; and 
(8)  For all vacant properties located in the "business district" as defined herein, the above fees shall be doubled. 
    For the purposes of calculation of the fees under this section, the amount of square footage charged to the owner shall not be less than 1,200 square feet or greater than 15,000 square feet on any one structure. For square footage, the director shall rely on the measurements assigned by the assessor's office in the county wherein the property is located. 
    The duration of the vacancy for the purposes of determining the fee runs with the property and will not be affected by a change in ownership. A change in ownership of a vacant structure shall not remove the vacant structure from the vacant properties registry. All waivers granted under section 1741.07 shall expire upon change of ownership. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ; Ord. of 9-26-16(1) ) 
1741.05 - INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Maintenance provisions: All vacant structures shall also comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  Vacant structures shall be secured so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Securing of vacant structures includes, but is not limited to, closing and locking windows, doors, walk through sliding and garage gates, and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of the property and/or structures. In the case of broken windows, securing means re-glazing or boarding the windows, provided that in the business district, plain, unsurfaced plywood may not be used. 
(2)  All vacant structures and premises thereof shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition. The structure is to be cleared of all rubbish and garbage, as determined by the city, not including building materials or components to be used in the future renovation at that structure. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(3)  Upon notice from the director, the owner may be required to improve the street view of the structure in such a way that it does not appear to be in disrepair and nonthreatening to passersby. 
(4)  The owner of a vacant structure shall perform or provide for the performance of periodic maintenance duties such as grass cutting or leaf removal on a timely basis. All noxious weeds are prohibited. 
(5)  Unstable interior and exterior surfaces and components are to be removed. Unstable or unsound accessory buildings are to be razed or renovated. 
(6)  All loose or deteriorated trim, gutter or overhang extensions (masonry or frame) are to be removed or reattached to prevent falling. 
(7)  All exterior wood surfaces shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective treatments. All metal surfaces shall be coated to protect from rust and decay. 
(8)  Utilities need to be connected to the structure unless deemed unsafe by the division of inspections or the fire marshal. 
(9)  Other such requirements as deemed necessary by the director or designee, division of inspections, or the fire marshal. 
(10)  The owner shall inspect the property on a regular basis to determine if the structure is in compliance with the requirements of this article and all applicable provisions of the city's building code. The owner's failure to inspect the building on a regular basis does not excuse the owner from compliance with this article. 
(b)  Inspections: 
(1)  At the time of registration, the chief building inspector or designee shall determine whether an immediate inspection of the vacant structure is proper to identify any public safety issues that need to be addressed. Inspections shall also be available to verify the status of any property concerning occupancy, vacancy, etc. 
(2)  At least annually, but more frequently if necessary, a city official shall conduct inspections of structures on the vacant property registry, and, to the extent feasible under the circumstances to determine whether the structure is being kept weather tight and secure from trespassers and compliant with the maintenance requirements listed in this section. 
(3)  If an internal inspection is deemed necessary, the owner will be notified of the same and arrangements made for the same. If the owner fails or refuses to consent to and arrange for an inspection, the city will seek an administrative search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall include the municipal court, to authorize inspection of the premises for the purpose of determining the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to insure its structural integrity and that it will be safe for entry by firefighters and police officers in time of emergency, and that the build in and its contents do not present a hazard to the public during the time that the building remains vacant. 
(c)  Corrective action: The owners shall be notified in writing of any corrective action deemed necessary for life, safety and building code matters by city officials, the applicable code provisions or regulations, and will be afforded a reasonable time to the corrective action. 
    If corrective action is not taken by the owner within a reasonable time, in addition to imposition of the penalties listed in section 1741.99, the city may, if deemed necessary for the safety of the public, act to bring the vacant building or property into compliance or otherwise eliminate the public nuisance caused by any noncompliant conditions. The costs of any repairs, demolition, and/or maintenance, along with any related legal and administrative costs incurred by the city are to be paid by the owner. Collection of these costs may be enforced in civil proceedings against the owner. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ; Ord. of 9-26-16(1) ) 
1741.06 - APPEAL RIGHTS. 
(a)  Request for reconsideration: The owner shall have the right to request reconsideration by the director of (1) the imposition of the registration fees and/or (2) the designation of a building as a vacant structure by filing an application in writing with the applicable $50 non-refundable filing fee to the director no later than 15 calendar days after the date of notification to the owner that a property has been placed on the vacant property registry or that fees are due under this article. On the request for reconsideration, the owner shall bear the burden of providing satisfactory proof of occupancy, that the building in question is not a vacant structure, or that the building is exempt from registration. 
(b)  Appeal: If the owner either (1) filed a request for reconsideration and received an unfavorable determination or (2) received an unfavorable decision from the director, the owner may appeal the director's decision to a review committee consisting of the city councilman for the district in which the structure is located or designee, the city planner, and the mayor and/or designee. To appeal, the owner must file an application in writing with the applicable $50 non-refundable filing fee no later than 30 calendar days from the date of the director and/or designee's decision. The review committee shall issue a written decision either concurring with or rejecting the findings and conclusions of the director within 60 days of receipt of appeal. Thereafter the decision of the review committee is final unless within 30 days of such decision the owner appeals for injunctive relief to the circuit court of the county wherein the property is situate. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ) 
1741.07 - WAIVER OF REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT. 
(a)  A waiver of the registration requirement or an extension of a waiver may be granted upon application of the owner if the owner provides satisfactory proof to the director and/or designee, to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, that the vacancy is temporary and may be due to illness of the owner, active military service, or some other reasonable explanation believed to be short term in nature and documentable as necessary. 
(b)  Within 30 days after the waiver application is received by the director and/or designee, the director and/or designee shall grant or deny the waiver, or request for extension, in writing, and dispatch the written decisions by mail to the owner. The director's decision is appealable under section 1741.06(b). 
(c)  Any waiver granted shall include a beginning date and an ending date and shall be no longer than 90 days without good cause shown. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ) 
1741.08 - DELINQUENT REGISTRATION FEE AS A LIEN. 
(a)  Except for those owners who have properly perfected an appeal pursuant to section 1741.06, if an owner fails to pay any amount due within 45 days under section 1741.04, said amount shall constitute a debt due and owing to the city and the city may commence a civil action to collect such unpaid debt. 
(b)  In lieu of, or in addition to, commencing a civil action as authorized by subsection (a) above, the city may, in accordance and conjunction with W. Va. Code § 8-12-16c, file a lien for unpaid registration fees against the property where the vacant structure is situated. In the event service is not attained by certified mail, alternative means of service may be used consistent with the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure for service. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ) 
1741.09 - DUTY TO AMEND REGISTRATION STATEMENT. 
    If the status of the registration information changes during the course of any calendar year, it is the responsibility of the owner, responsible party or agent for the same to contact the director within 30 days of the occurrence of such change and advise the director in writing of those changes. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ; Ord. of 9-26-16(1) ) 
1741.10 - RETURN BY DIRECTOR. 
    If any owner fails to file a registration statement as required in section 1741.04 of this article within 30 days of the structure becoming vacant as defined by this article or makes and files willfully or otherwise, a false or fraudulent registration statement, the director and/or designee may proceed to make or cause to be made such registration statement from any information available to him/her. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ) 
1741.11 - DEDICATED ACCOUNT. 
    All fees collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited into a separate, dedicated account and shall only be used to: 
(a)  Implement, monitor, and administer this article; 
(b)  Repair, close, or demolish a vacant structure as authorized in W. Va. Code § 8-12-16c(f); and 
(c)  Improve public safety efforts, especially for police and fire personnel, who most often contend with the dangerous situations manifested in vacant properties. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ) 
1741.99 - PENALTIES. 
    The failure or refusal for any reason of any owner, or agent of an owner acting on behalf of the owner, to register a vacant building, to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section within 30 days after they become due, or to adhere to the maintenance requirements of section 1741.05 shall constitute a violation punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine in the amount of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each violation. It shall be a separate violation for each month that an owner knowingly fails or refuses to comply with the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. of 1-25-16(1) ) 
ARTICLE 1743 - VACANT RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS 

1743.01 - PURPOSE. 
(a)  The city has determined that uninspected and unmonitored vacant buildings (i) present a fire hazard; (ii) are often utilized by vagrants and transients (including drug abusers and traffickers) as dangerous and unsafe temporary shelters; (iii) detract from private and/or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings; and (iv) require additional regulation and services to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Owners of vacant buildings shall register such vacant buildings with the city, make payment of a fee as set forth herein, and otherwise conform to the requirements of this vacant structure code. 
(c)  It is the intent of this article that, through a registration, inspection, and monitoring process, and other improved public safety efforts, vacant buildings will be kept weather tight and secure from trespassers, will provide safe entry to police officers and firefighters in times of emergency, will not impede private and/or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain surrounding properties, and will not otherwise present a public hazard. 
(d)  It is the city's further intent for the provisions of this article to streamline and consolidate the existing procedure (that is, complaint, research, notification, inspection, orders, fines, liens, appeals and lien enforcement) by placing the responsibility to register and maintain a vacant structure on the owner of a building before a condition of the building falls into disrepair or otherwise necessarily warrants a complaint. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
(a)  Boarded: "Boarded" shall mean a building or structure subject to the provisions of this section and shall be deemed to be "boarded" if in place of one or more exterior doors, other than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is a sheet or sheets of plywood or similar material covering the space for such door or window. 
(b)  Business district: Solely for the purposes of this article, the "business district" shall include the following: 
(1)  All parcels fronting Veterans Memorial Boulevard from 6th Street to 13th Street; 
(2)  All parcels fronting Third Avenue from 6th Street to Hal Greer Boulevard; 
(3)  All parcels fronting Fourth Avenue from 1st Street to Hal Greer Boulevard; 
(4)  All parcels fronting Fifth Avenue from 6th Street to Hal Greer Boulevard; 
(5)  All parcels fronting Sixth Avenue from 6th Street to 12th Street; 
(6)  All parcels fronting Seventh Avenue from 6th Street to 12th Street; 
(7)  All parcels south of 21/2 Alley from Hal Greer Boulevard to 22nd Street, west of 22nd Street from 21/2 Alley to 51/2 Alley, north of 51/2 Alley from Hal Greer Boulevard to 22nd Street, and east of Hal Greer Boulevard from 21/2 Alley to 51/2 Alley; 
(8)  All parcels fronting Hal Greer Boulevard from 51/2 Alley to Washington Boulevard; 
(9)  All parcels fronting 14th Street West from Washington Avenue to the railroad track underpass; 
(10)  Any and all properties fronting an alley that is bounded both to the north and the south avenues listed herein. 
The planning office shall maintain a map of the business district described herein which shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(c)  Director: Solely for the purposes of this article, the term "director" shall mean the mayor or designee. 
(d)  Exterior maintenance and major systems: The phrase "exterior maintenance and major systems" shall mean the safe and lawful maintenance of the facade, windows, doors, roof and other parts of the exterior of the building and the maintenance of its major systems consisting of the roof, the electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply systems, the sewer system, and the sidewalk, driveway, if any, area of the lot, as applicable. 
(e)  Occupied: Any building or structure shall be deemed to be "occupied" if one or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any part of the building as the licensed business-occupant, or as the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of this section, evidence offered to prove that a building is so "occupied" may include, but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal Service; proof of continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and sewer services; a valid city business license, or the most recent, federal, state, or city income tax statements indicating that the subject property is the official business or residence address of the person or business claiming occupancy; or proof of pre-rental inspection. 
(f)  Open: A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be "open" if any one or more exterior doors other than a storm door is broken, open and, or closed but, without a properly functioning lock to secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not capable of being locked and secured from intrusions, or any combination of the same. 
(g)  Owner: "Owner" or "property owner" shall mean a person who individually or jointly with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to the property, with or without actual possession of the property; 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent of the owner; 
(3)  Is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner; 
(4)  Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents; or 
(5)  Is entitled to control or direct the management or disposition of the property. 
For the purposes of this article, an "agent" shall not include a person contracted with the property owner solely for the sale or listing for sale of the property, commonly referred to as a "real estate agent." 
(h)  Registration fee: "Registration fee" shall mean, accordance with W. Va. § 8-12-16c, the fee exacted from vacant building owners for the maintenance and upkeep of said property. 
(i)  Residential building: Any structure used or intended to be used by its occupants in whole as a permanent place of abode, which is made one's home as opposed to one's place of business and which has housekeeping and cooking facilities for its occupants only. The structure may include single-family, two-family, or multiple family dwelling units or apartments. A residential building shall not include transient accommodations such as hotels, motels, or tourist cabins, fraternity or sorority houses, or mixed-use structures. All buildings located within the "business district," defined herein, are deemed "commercial buildings" for the purposes of this article and shall be guided by article 1741. 
(j)  Vacant: 
(1)  A building shall be deemed to be vacant if no person or persons actually, currently conducts a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully resides or lives in any part of the building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupants, or tenant(s) on a permanent, nontransient basis. 
(2)  A building or structure shall be deemed vacant and subject to the registration and possible penalty provisions provided herein if the exterior maintenance and major systems of the building and the surrounding real property thereof, as defined in this section, are in violation of the building codes or health and sanitation codes and if there is not proof of continual utility service evidencing actual use of electric, gas (i.e., applicable heating sources), water service, etc. "Continual" means having no interruption of service lasting 30 days or more in any given 360-day period. In order for such continual utility service to be considered as being actually in use as described in this section, it must be more than merely registered to the owner for purposes of billing and must be utilized, at a minimum, in order to keep the property and the major systems of the building in compliance with building and safety codes. The person or entity asserting that there has been continued utility service has the burden to produce actual bills evidencing utility service for the relevant period. 
(3)  A new building under construction or a building that has been granted a waiver under section 1743.07 of this article is not deemed a vacant building. 
(4)  Also exempted is any residential building that has obtained a valid, city-issued building permit based on a job cost of at least 25-percent of the appraised valued of the property. This exemption shall be for the life of the building permit. For the purposes of this article only, the "appraised value" used shall be the appraised value set by the assessor's office in the county wherein the property is located. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.03 - APPLICABILITY. 
    The requirements of this section shall be applicable to each owner of any residential building, as defined herein, that has been vacant for more than 210 consecutive days. Each such owner shall cause to be filed a registration statement in conformity with section 1743.04(a). For the purposes of this section, "owner" include: 
(a)  If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall provide the names and residence addresses of all officers and directors of the corporation and shall be accompanied by a copy of the most recent annual franchise tax report filed with the secretary of state. 
(b)  If an estate, the name and business address of the executor of the estate. 
(c)  If a trust, the names and address of all trustees, grantors, and beneficiaries. 
(d)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all partners with an interest of 10% or greater. 
(e)  If any other form of unincorporated association, the names and residence addresses of all principals with an interest of 10% or greater. 
(f)  If an individual person, the name and residence address of that individual person. 
    The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to any building owned by city, state, or federal government or any of their respective agencies or political subdivisions. Any owner whose property has been vacant for 30 days or more may voluntarily register their property before the expiration of 210 days. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.04 - REGISTRATION STATEMENT; LOCAL AGENT; AND FEES. 
(a)  Registration statement: Each such owner shall cause to be filed a registration statement, which shall include the street address and parcel number of each such vacant building, the names and addresses of all owners, as hereinafter described, and any other information deemed necessary by the director and/or designee. Beginning with the first anniversary of the initial registration of each vacant building, the property owner of a registered vacant building shall pay the registration fee required by subsection 1743.04(c). All property owners of properties registered under this Article shall remit payment of the fee imposed herein by the last day of the month in which the property was originally registered. 
Registration shall be required for all vacant buildings, whether vacant and secure, vacant and open or vacant and boarded, and shall be required whenever any building has remained vacant for 210 consecutive days or more. In no instance shall the registration of a vacant building and the payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate the owner, agent or responsible party from responsibility for compliance with any other Building Code or Housing Code requirement. 
(b)  Local agent: If none of the persons outlined in section 1743.03 is shown at an address within the state, the registration statement also shall provide the name and address of a person who resides within the state and who is authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owners and who shall be designated as a responsible, local party or agent, both for purposes of notification in the event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare and for purposes of service of any and all notices or registration statements as herein authorized in connection herewith. 
(c)  Fees: The owner of the vacant property as of the last day of the month when the property has been registered in each calendar year shall be responsible for the payment of the non-refundable registration fee. 
Said fee shall be billed based on the duration of the vacancy as determined by the following scale: 
(1)  No fee for properties that are vacant for less than one year; 
(2)  For properties that are vacant for at least one year but less than two years, $0.20 per square foot; 
(3)  For properties that are vacant for at least two years but less than three years, $0.40 per square foot; 
(4)  For properties that are vacant for at least three years but less than four years, $0.60 per square foot; 
(5)  For properties that are vacant for at least four years but less than five years, $0.80 per square foot; and 
(6)  For properties that are vacant for at least five years, $1.00 per square foot. 
(7)  For every year past five years, the fee shall increase $0.20 per square foot each year. 
(8)  For all vacant properties located in the "business district" as defined herein, the above fees shall be doubled. 
    For the purposes of calculation of the fees under this section, the amount of square footage charged to the owner shall not be less than 1,200 square feet or greater than 15,000 square feet on any one structure. For square footage, the director shall rely on the measurements assigned by the assessor's office in the county wherein the property is located. 
    The duration of the vacancy for the purposes of determining the fee runs with the property and will not be affected by a change in ownership. A change in ownership of a vacant structure shall not remove the vacant structure from the vacant properties registry. All waivers granted under section 1743.07 shall expire upon change of ownership. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.05 - INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  Maintenance provisions: All vacant structures shall also comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  Vacant structures shall be secured so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Securing of vacant structures includes, but is not limited to, closing and locking windows, doors, walk through sliding and garage gates, and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of the property and/or structures. In the case of broken windows, securing means re-glazing or boarding the windows, provided that in the Business District, plain, unsurfaced plywood may not be used. 
(2)  All vacant structures and premises thereof shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition. The structure is to be cleared of all rubbish and garbage, as determined by the city, not including building materials or components to be used in the future renovation at that structure. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(3)  Upon notice from the director, the owner may be required to improve the street view of the structure in such a way that it does not appear to be in disrepair and nonthreatening to passersby. 
(4)  The owner of a vacant structure shall perform or provide for the performance of periodic maintenance duties such as grass cutting or leaf removal on a timely basis. All noxious weeds are prohibited. 
(5)  Unstable interior and exterior surfaces and components are to be removed. Unstable or unsound accessory buildings are to be razed or renovated. 
(6)  All loose or deteriorated trim, gutter or overhang extensions (masonry or frame) are to be removed or reattached to prevent falling. 
(7)  All exterior wood surfaces shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective treatments. All metal surfaces shall be coated to protect from rust and decay. 
(8)  Utilities need to be connected to the structure unless deemed unsafe by the division of inspections or the fire marshal. 
(9)  Other such requirements as deemed necessary by the director or designee, division of inspections, or the fire marshal. 
(10)  The owner shall inspect the property on a regular basis to determine if the structure is in compliance with the requirements of this article and all applicable provisions of the city's building code. The owner's failure to inspect the building on a regular basis does not excuse the owner from compliance with this article. 
(b)  Inspections: 
(1)  At the time of registration, the chief building inspector or designee shall determine whether an immediate inspection of the vacant structure is proper to identify any public safety issues that need to be addressed. Inspections shall also be available to verify the status of any property concerning occupancy, vacancy, etc. 
(2)  At least annually, but more frequently if necessary, a city official shall conduct inspections of structures on the vacant property registry, and, to the extent feasible under the circumstances to determine whether the structure is being kept weather tight and secure from trespassers and compliant with the maintenance requirements listed in this section. 
(3)  If an internal inspection is deemed necessary, the owner will be notified of the same and arrangements made for the same. If the owner fails or refuses to consent to and arrange for an inspection, the city will seek an administrative search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall include the municipal court, to authorize inspection of the premises for the purpose of determining the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to insure its structural integrity and that it will be safe for entry by fire fighters and police officers in time of emergency, and that the build in and its contents do not present a hazard to the public during the time that the building remains vacant. 
(c)  Corrective action: The owners shall be notified in writing of any corrective action deemed necessary for life, safety and building code matters by City officials, the applicable code provisions or regulations, and will be afforded a reasonable time to the corrective action. 
If corrective action is not taken by the owner within a reasonable time, in addition to imposition of the penalties listed in section 1743.99, the city may, if deemed necessary for the safety of the public, act to bring the vacant building or property into compliance or otherwise eliminate the public nuisance caused by any noncompliant conditions. The costs of any repairs, demolition, and/or maintenance, along with any related legal and administrative costs incurred by the city are to be paid by the owner. Collection of these costs may be enforced in civil proceedings against the owner. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.06 - APPEAL RIGHTS. 
(a)  Request for reconsideration: The owner shall have the right to request reconsideration by the director of (1) the imposition of the registration fees and/or (2) the designation of a building as a vacant structure by filing an application in writing with the applicable $50 non-refundable filing fee to the director no later than 15 calendar days after the date of notification to the owner that a property has been placed on the vacant property registry or that fees are due under this article. On the request for reconsideration, the owner shall bear the burden of providing satisfactory proof of occupancy, that the building in question is not a vacant structure, or that the building is exempt from registration. 
(b)  Appeal: If the owner either (1) filed a request for reconsideration and received an unfavorable determination or (2) received an unfavorable decision from the director, the owner may appeal the director's decision to a review committee consisting of the city councilman for the district in which the structure is located or designee, the city planner, and the mayor and/or designee. To appeal, the owner must file an application in writing with the applicable $50 non-refundable filing fee no later than 30 calendar days from the date of the director and/or designee's decision. The review committee shall issue a written decision either concurring with or rejecting the findings and conclusions of the director within 60 days of receipt of appeal. Thereafter the decision of the review committee is final unless within 30 days of such decision the owner appeals for injunctive relief to the circuit court of the county wherein the property is situate. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.07 - WAIVER OF REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT. 
(a)  A waiver of the registration requirement or an extension of a waiver may be granted upon application of the owner if the owner provides satisfactory proof to the director and/or designee, to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, that the vacancy is temporary and may be due to illness of the owner, active military service, or some other reasonable explanation believed to be short term in nature and documentable as necessary. 
(b)  Within 30 days after the waiver application is received by the director and/or designee, the director and/or designee shall grant or deny the waiver, or request for extension, in writing, and dispatch the written decisions by mail to the owner. The director's decision is appealable under section 1743.06(b). 
(c)  Any waiver granted shall include a beginning date and an ending date and shall be no longer than 90 days without good cause shown. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.08 - DELINQUENT REGISTRATION FEE AS A LIEN. 
(a)  Except for those owners who have properly perfected an appeal pursuant to section 1743.06, if an owner fails to pay any amount due within 45 days under section 1743.04, said amount shall constitute a debt due and owing to the city and the city may commence a civil action to collect such unpaid debt. 
(b)  In lieu of, or in addition to, commencing a civil action as authorized by subsection (a) above, the city may, in accordance and conjunction with W. Va. § 8-12-16c, file a lien for unpaid registration fees against the property where the vacant structure is situated. In the event service is not attained by certified mail, alternative means of service may be used consistent with the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure for service. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.09 - DUTY TO AMEND REGISTRATION STATEMENT. 
    If the status of the registration information changes during the course of any calendar year, it is the responsibility of the owner, responsible party or agent for the same to contact the director within 30 days of the occurrence of such change and advise the director in writing of those changes. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.10 - RETURN BY DIRECTOR. 
    If any owner fails to file a registration statement as required in section 1743.04 of this article within 30 days of the structure becoming vacant as defined by this article or makes and files willfully or otherwise, a false or fraudulent registration statement, the director and/or designee may proceed to make or cause to be made such registration statement from any information available to him/her. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.11 - DEDICATED ACCOUNT. 
    All fees collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited into a separate, dedicated account and shall only be used to: 
(a)  Implement, monitor, and administer this article: 
(b)  Repair, close, or demolish a vacant structure as authorized in W. Va. § 8-12-16c(f); and 
(c)  Improve public safety efforts, especially for police and fire personnel, who most often contend with the dangerous situations manifested in vacant properties. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
1743.99 - PENALTIES. 
    The failure or refusal for any reason of any owner, or agent of an owner acting on behalf of the owner, to register a vacant building, to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section within 30 days after they become due, or to adhere to the maintenance requirements of section 1743.05 shall constitute a violation punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine in the amount of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each violation. It shall be a separate violation for each month that an owner knowingly fails or refuses to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-26-16(2) ) 
ARTICLE 1747 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Commercial vehicles, Art. 347. 
State Law reference- Permits for excess size and weight on State routes, W. Va. Code, § 17C-17-11. 

1747.01 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    No person shall move any building or other structure, or cause the same to be moved, over the streets or alleys of the city, without having first obtained therefor a permit from the director of public works. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-11) 
1747.02 - PERMIT APPLICATION. 
    Any person desiring the permit as required in section 1747.01 shall file with the director of public works an application therefor in writing on a blank in such form as may be approved by the director of public works and furnished for that purpose by the city. Every such application shall describe the land from which and to which the building or other structure is to be moved, by block, lot or tract, and in addition thereto shall contain such other detailed information as may be required by the director of public works. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-12) 
1747.03 - USE OF STATE ROUTE. 
    Before a permit as required by section 1747.01 has been issued, if a state route is to be followed or traversed, the person who has made application for such permit shall notify the state commissioner of highways of any state route to be followed or traversed and shall secure from the commissioner of highways a permit to do so. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-13) 
1747.04 - NOTICE TO POLICE DEPARTMENT; UTILITIES. 
    Any applicant for a permit required in section 1747.01 shall, before such permit is issued, notify the police department of the time of such moving, the place from which the building or structure is to be moved and the place to which the building or structure is to be moved and all other relevant information that may be required by the police department. Such person shall likewise notify the local telephone company and the electric power company of such removal, and the route to be traversed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-14) 
1747.05 - LIABILITY INSURANCE AND BOND. 
    Before a permit required in section 1747.01 is issued, the applicant therefor shall post with the director of public works: 
(a)  A public liability policy of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the state, in which the city shall be made an insured party, indemnifying the city against loss, the limits of such policy to be not less than $100,000 for an injury to any person, not less than $300,000 for all injuries in any one accident and $50,000 for property damage which may be sustained by any person as a result of the issuance of such permit and the moving of such building or other structure as provided in this article; and 
(b)  A bond with good surety of an approved surety or indemnity company licensed to do business in the state, in the penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $10,000 for each building or other structure to be moved, the amount of such bond to be determined by the director of public works on the basis of the size and weight of the building or other structure and the distance which such building or other structure is to be moved, which bond shall be given upon the condition that the principal will indemnify and save harmless the city from any loss, damages or expenses whatsoever in any manner occasioned by, or arising from the moving of such building or other structure over the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways of the city, or the work done in consequence thereof, or the manner of doing such work; and such bond shall remain in force for a period of 12 months from the last date on which such building or other structure was moved over the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or ways. 
(1964 Code Sec. 7-15) 
1747.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 1705.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 1751 - SIGNS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Unauthorized signs, § 313.06. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(31). 

1751.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Area" means the surface included within the framework of any sign measured from outside to outside of such framework, ladders and scroll work not included. 
(b)  "Awning sign" means any form of advertising upon the surface of or affixed to any awning or shade which folds or rolls, other than the name of the owner of the business in the premises to which such awning is affixed or attached. 
(c)  "Banner sign" means any sign made of canvas or other cloth stretched on a frame and attached to a building or hung without a frame. 
(d)  "Frontage" means a section of the front of any building. 
(e)  "Ground sign" means any sign erected, constructed or maintained for the purpose of displaying outdoor advertising by means of posters, pictures, pictorial or reading matter, when such sign or advertising display is supported by uprights, braces or other structural members placed upon the ground or fixed therein and not attached to any part of any building. 
(f)  "Marquee sign" means any sign affixed to any hood or canopy over the entrance to any building, which extends wholly or partly across any public space, and is supported by such marquee, or the building or structure to which such marquee is attached. 
(g)  "Occupant" means the person or association owning, renting or occupying any property. 
(h)  "Parasite sign" means any sign hung or supported from any other sign to which it is not attached as an integral part thereof. 
(i)  "Projecting sign" means any letter, words, model, sign, device or representation used in the nature of an advertisement, announcement or direction, extending over public space or beyond the face of the wall of any building. Projecting signs shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Signs, illuminated or nonilluminated, affixed at right angles to any building or structure and extending over public space. 
(2)  Flat signs, illuminated or nonilluminated, which are affixed in a rigid manner, and lie parallel to and in the same plane as the wall or structure to which they are attached and extend over public space in excess of twelve inches. 
(j)  "Roof signs" means any sign erected, constructed or maintained upon the roof of any building. 
(k)  "Sign" means any device or surface used for display on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures or other symbols are painted, printed, stamped, raised or in any manner outlined or attached. 
(l)  "Wall sign" means any sign, bulletin or poster erected on or in a plane parallel with the facing of the building wall, and that may be affixed to the front, rear or side wall of any building; provided, that it shall not extend over any public place more than twelve inches. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-1) 
1751.02 - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING; LICENSE. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in the business of outdoor advertising by sign painting, erecting, constructing or maintaining any of the kinds or classes of signs mentioned by section 1751.01, in the city, without first having procured a license from the director of the division of finance to conduct such business. 
(b)  Application; examination of applicant: Issuance. The license required by subsection (a) hereof shall be issued upon the favorable recommendation of the director of public works on written application therefor in such form as he may prescribe. Before recommending the issuance of a license, the director of public works shall examine the applicant's qualifications and competency to engage in the sign business. Such examination shall be practical and elementary in character, but sufficient to test the applicant's qualifications and knowledge of approved methods in connection with such business. 
(c)  Fees; renewal. The annual fee for the license required by subsection (a) hereof shall be $20. Such license may be renewed on July 1 of each year thereafter upon the payment of the annual license fee. 
(d)  Nontransferable. Such license shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Revocation. A license to engage in outdoor advertising business may be revoked at any time by the mayor for a violation by the licensee of any of the applicable provisions of this article, and such revocation shall not be in bar of any prosecution of such violation. A person whose license has been revoked shall not be licensed again within six months from the date of such revocation. 
(1964 Code Secs. 30-2 to 30-6; Ord. of 5-13-13(3)) 
1751.03 - BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED OF OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS. 
    No person shall engage in the business of outdoor advertising until such person shall have filed with the director of the division of finance a bond in the penal sum of $10,000, or a policy of public liability insurance in the sums of $10,000, $20,000 and $5,000 property damage insurance, duly executed by a surety company licensed to do business in the state, conditioned to indemnify and save the city harmless from all liability, damage or loss which any person may suffer, either in person or property, by reason of the erection, construction or maintenance of any sign. The bond required by the provisions of this section shall cover all signs erected, constructed and maintained by licensees to whom licenses have been issued under the provisions of section 1751.02(a). 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-7) 
1751.04 - PERMIT TO ERECT SIGNS. 
(a)  Required; application. No sign shall hereafter be erected except as provided in this article and until a permit therefor has been issued by the director of public works upon application in writing signed by the applicant or his authorized agent or representative, accompanied by plans and specifications showing dimensions, material and details of construction of the sign for which a permit is asked. Such application shall show the facts relative to the ownership of the property upon which the sign is to be constructed and his right to erect such sign thereon, or the written permission for the erection of such sign from the owner or occupant of such property. The director of public works may prescribe such other regulations, consistent with the provisions of this article as to the form and contents of all applications for the permits herein required. 
(b)  Not required for certain portable signs. Portable signs not exceeding four feet in length or height, where not otherwise prohibited by these Codified Ordinances or other city ordinances, may be erected and displayed without a permit. 
(c)  Fees. The fees for the permit required by subsection (a) hereof, up to and not to exceed five years, shall be as follows: 
Type Fee Ground signs  Under 100 sq. ft. $ 5.00  Over 100 sq. ft.  10.00 Roof signs  Under 100 sq. ft.   5.00  Over 100 sq. ft.   10.00 Wall signs  Under 100 sq. ft.   5.00  Over 100 sq. ft.   10.00 Projecting signs  Under 25 sq. ft.   5.00  Over 25 sq. ft.   10.00 Marquee signs  15.00  
except, that advertisers using a standard wall or roof sign under 25 square feet in area for general display in large quantities may obtain a blanket permit for the erection and maintenance of such signs. The fee for such a permit shall be $50 for the first 100 signs or fraction thereof and $50 for each additional 100 signs or fraction thereof. 
(d)  Permittee of signs covered by blanket permit. The permittee operating under a blanket permit as referred to in subsection (c) hereof shall file with the director of the division of finance the location of each sign covered by each blanket permit together with evidence of full and complete insurance protecting the city as required by section 1751.05. Such permittee shall be solely responsible for the maintenance of such signs and they shall be exempt from annual inspections. 
(1964 Code Secs. 30-8 to 30-11) 
1751.05 - LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY. 
    No permit required by section 1751.04(a) for the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of any of the signs mentioned and described in this article, other than such signs as are erected, constructed or maintained by licensees to engage in the business of outdoor advertising under the provisions of section 1751.02(a), shall be issued until the applicant or the permittee have filed with the director of the division of finance a policy of public liability and property damage insurance conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the city from any claims which may arise either to person or property by virtue of the granting, maintenance or use of the permit. The amount of coverage of the policy shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000 for injury of one person and the sum of $300,000 for injury to two or more persons for any one accident, and in the sum of $25,000 for damage or injury to property. Such policy of liability and property damage insurance shall be continued in force during the entire period of the permit, and no permit shall be effective until such insurance is deposited as aforesaid, and shall apply in all cases of the granting of sign permits where such sign is upon, over or along any street or public highway, or within thirty feet of the boundary of any public street or highway; provided, that all projecting signs having an area of five square feet or less on each side; all wall signs and all wall bulletins, regardless of size; and all roof signs, regardless of size, shall not require insurance coverage by the owner, or permittee as hereinbefore set forth; in all such cases a group or master policy shall be carried by the city protecting itself against all claims, and in the amounts herein specified; an insurance fee of $0.50 shall be collected from the owner of each of such exempted signs, annually, and at the time of the annual sign inspection, to cover the cost of the insurance, and such charge shall be in addition to the inspection fee as hereinbefore set forth, and shall be in addition to all other fees and costs set forth in this article; provided further, that in the case of all persons already carrying insurance for the foregoing amounts, or more, such persons shall be permitted to file with the director of the division of finance a certificate or endorsement to policy, insuring the city as hereinbefore provided, and such certificate or endorsement when so received by the director of the division of finance shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with the insurance provisions herein set forth. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-12) 
1751.06 - GROUND SIGNS. 
(a)  Ground signs of a temporary nature advertising real estate for sale or rent may be erected by the owner or the occupant of such real estate or by the owner's agent upon the specific property advertised for rent or sale without a permit; provided, that such signs shall not exceed 36 square feet in area. 
(b)  Ground signs of a temporary nature advertising the candidacy of an individual for elective office, or the program of any political party or group, may be erected without a permit; provided, that such signs shall not exceed 36 square feet in total area and are not erected within the limits of any public right-of-way. 
(c)  Principal use ground signs for businesses such as service stations, restaurants and motels, which serve the motoring public at interchanges of limited access highways, including interstate and elevated highways, shall be limited to that height which is necessary for reasonable visibility of such signs from the limited access highway being served, as determined by the director of public works in the exercise of reasonable discretion. In other structural respects, such signs shall conform to the City Building Code. 
(d)  Other ground signs shall be limited in height to correspond with structural height limitations specified in the zoning ordinance, and shall conform in all structural aspects to the Building Code. If such signs are illuminated, the lighting fixtures may project not more than six feet beyond the building line. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-13) 
1751.07 - ROOF SIGNS. 
    No roof sign shall be placed on any building so as to prevent the free passage from one part or so as to interfere with any openings in such roof, or project beyond the outer edge of the walls of the building. All roof signs shall be constucted so as to leave a clear space of not less than two feet between the roof level and the lowest part of the structure and there shall be at least five feet clearance between the vertical supports thereof. Every roof sign shall be set back at least two feet from the face of any wall, but if illuminated, the light reflectors may project six feet beyond the building line. All roof signs shall be entirely of incombustible material, including the uprights, supports and braces of the same; except, that ornamental moldings and battens behind the steel facings and decorative lattice work may be of wooden construction. All roof signs shall be constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds to the square foot of superficial area subject to such pressure, and when erected upon any roof not constructed entirely of fireproof material, the bearing plates of such sign shall bear directly or indirectly upon the masonry walls of the building, or upon steel girders or metal columns which are of sufficient strength to withstand the live and dead load stresses of the roof sign thereon. No roof sign having a tight closed or solid surface shall be at any point over 31 feet above the roof level. Roof signs not having a tight closed or solid surface may be erected upon any fireproof building to a height not exceeding 50 feet above the roof level, but the portions of such roof signs covered and exposed to wind pressure shall not exceed 35 percent of the total area of such signs. All roof signs shall be thoroughly secured to the buildings upon which they are installed by iron or metal anchors, bolts not less than one-half inch in diameter, supports, galvanized chains or stranded cables, steel rods or braces. Every roof sign and all the supports, braces, guys and anchors thereof shall at all times be kept in good repair, and, unless of noncorroding metal, shall be thoroughly and properly painted at least once each two years, and the director of public works may order the removal of any roof sign not maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-14) 
1751.08 - WALL SIGNS AND WALL BULLETINS. 
    No wall sign, wall bulletin or part of a wall bulletin or wall sign shall extend beyond the building line of the building or structure to which it is affixed or attached more than 12 inches; except, that if the same is illuminated, the lighting reflectors may project six feet beyond such building line. All such wall signs or wall bulletins shall be safely and adequately attached to the walls of the building or structure by means of iron or metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws, or by sign hooks where the top of such sign is not more than ten feet above the sidewalk. No wall sign or wall bulletin shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to permit the accumulation of paper, leaves or trash behind the same, and where plate glass is used for a wall sign or wall bulletin at a greater height than eight feet above the sidewalk, no piece of glass shall be more than 15 square feet in area. No wall sign or wall bulletin shall be erected and maintained so as to cover the doors or windows of any building, except by special permit authorized by the chiefs of the police and fire departments, or so as to prevent free ingress or egress to or from any window, door or fire escape of the building upon which it is erected. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-15) 
1751.09 - PROJECTING SIGNS. 
    No projecting sign shall be erected, altered or maintained when the lowest edge of such sign is less than ten feet above any sidewalk or less than 14 feet above any street, alley or way used for vehicular traffic, nor shall any part of any projecting sign over a public sidewalk extend nearer than two feet from the curb line of such public sidewalk. All horizontally projecting signs shall be so constructed and erected that they can be swung in either direction flat against the building to which they are attached. No vertical projecting sign shall extend above the roof or the top of the cornice of the building to which it is attached except that when such vertical projecting sign does not exceed 36 inches in width it may extend not more than ten feet above the roof or top of the cornice of the building to which it is attached. Any sign attached to the corner of a building and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be a projecting sign and shall be subject to all the restrictions and regulations of this article pertaining to projecting signs. Every projecting sign shall be constructed and braced to withstand a horizontal wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds for every square foot of surface exposed and shall be securely attached to the building by iron or metal anchors, bolts, supports, galvanized chains or stranded cables or steel rods, and the method of attachment shall in every instance be subject to the approval of the director of public works. No projecting sign shall be set at an angle of less than 90 degrees to the building on which it is erected or to which it is attached, except where two streets intersect, and no part of an "A" shape projecting sign may be more than three feet from the building upon which it is erected or to which it is attached. All nonilluminated projecting signs of 40 square feet or less in area shall have a facing of sheet metal or other incombustible material, and all projecting signs exceeding 40 square feet in area shall be constructed entirely of incombustible material. All electrically illuminated projecting signs shall be constructed entirely of incombustible material and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. Such signs may project over public space at an angle of 90 degrees to the building to which they are attached; provided, that horizontal signs not over four feet in height and ten feet in length shall be kept back of the curb line not less than 24 inches, unless 15 feet or more above the curb, and in such cases shall not project beyond the curb, and vertical signs not more than four feet in width and the bottom edges of which are 15 feet or more above the sidewalk shall be kept back of the curb line not less than 24 inches. An all-metal sign will be permitted to project from a building into public space under the same conditions as an electrically illuminated projecting sign; provided, that it is not more than 36 inches in height, not more than 15 square feet in area and is illuminated with reflected light from lights and reflectors attached thereto. The center of such sign shall not be more than three feet from the face of the building to which it is attached, all electrically illuminated on both sides, except where placed flat against a building. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-16) 
1751.10 - MARQUEE SIGNS. 
    Marquee signs may extend to the edges of the marquee to which they are attached, but no such sign shall be less than ten feet in the clear above the sidewalk, nor shall the top of such sign extend more than six feet above nor two feet below such marquee when the same is at right angles to the sidewalk or have a width in excess of six feet. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-17) 
1751.11 - AWNING SIGNS. 
    Signs on awnings which fold or roll and are used only for shade or rain, and which advertise only the business in the premises to which such awning is attached, shall require no permit nor any license fee; otherwise, the license fee shall be the same as for ground signs. Awning signs shall not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk nor less than 14 feet above any street, alley or way used for vehicular traffic. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-18) 
1751.12 - BANNERS. 
    No section of a banner sign made of canvas or other cloth shall be more than 100 square feet in area and not more than one such section shall be attached to any 20-foot frontage of a building abutting public property. No banner or similar sign shall be placed in contact with an electric sign, and no permit shall be granted for a banner sign for a period exceeding 30 days, but such permit may be renewed for a period of not more than 90 days from the date of the original permit. No commercial banner signs shall be erected across a public sidewalk, street, alley or other public property. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-19) 
1751.13 - SIGNS ADVERTISING ENTERTAINMENTS. 
    Signs used for the advertising of a circus, carnival, theatrical performance or similar enterprise shall not be erected or maintained, except upon the premises of the exhibitor or upon boards erected and maintained by persons engaged in the business of outdoor advertising, without a permit for the erection and maintenance of the same upon specific structures. Such permits shall be issued upon the payment of such fees and upon such conditions as may be prescribed by the director of public works, and in every instance the permittee shall be required to post a sufficient bond with the director of the division of finance to pay the cost of removing such advertising matter in case it is not removed within 48 hours after the last performance or exhibition for which such advertising is used. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-20) 
1751.14 - PARASITE SIGNS. 
    No person shall hang or place any parasite sign or place any advertisement upon any sidewalk, hydrant, lamppost, tree, telephone, telegraph or electric light pole, fence or building in the city, or advertise by signs tacked, posted or tied to any public property. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-21) 
1751.15 - ENLARGEMENT OR ALTERATION OF SIGNS. 
    No ground sign, roof sign, wall sign, projecting sign, marquee sign, awning or banner sign in existence prior to June 24, 1946, shall be enlarged, rebuilt, structurally altered or relocated, except in accordance with the provisions of this article and until a permit therefor has been issued by the director of public works and the fee for such permit paid, as provided for by section 1751.04. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-22) 
1751.16 - SIGNS ATTACHED TO OR OBSTRUCTING FIRE ESCAPES. 
    No signs of any description shall be installed, erected or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any window or door leading to any fire escape, nor shall any sign of any kind be attached or affixed in any form or manner to a fire escape. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-23) 
1751.17 - INFORMATION TO BE MARKED ON SIGNS. 
    Every sign as described in this article constructed or maintained after June 24, 1946, shall be plainly marked with the name of the person erecting and maintaining such sign, together with the permit number, and, in the case of banner signs, the date on which the permit therefor was issued or renewed shall also be prominently displayed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-24) 
1751.18 - MAINTENANCE OF GROUND SIGNS. 
    Any person occupying any vacant lot or premises with a ground sign shall be subject to the same duties and responsibilities as the owner of the lot or premises with respect to keeping the same clean, sanitary, inoffensive and free and clear of all noxious substances in the vicinity of such sign. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-25) 
1751.19 - APPEALS FROM ACTIONS OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. 
    Any person aggrieved at any action of the director of public works under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal from the ruling, action or decision of the director of public works to council, and the action of council upon such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-26) 
1751.20 - SIGNS NOT TO BE ERECTED CONTRARY TO COVENANTS. 
    No person shall erect, maintain or construct any ground sign or any other sign upon any lot or premises contrary to any building or other restrictive covenants to which such lot or premises is subject. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-27) 
1751.21 - COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE. 
    No person shall construct, erect or maintain any sign contrary to the provisions of this article. 
    Where any sign for which a permit is required by this article is constructed, erected or maintained prior to obtaining such permit or the renewal of an expired permit, the person unlawfully constructing, erecting or maintaining such sign shall be required to pay twice the amount of the fees specified for a permit; but the payment of such double fees shall not entitle such person to construct, erect or maintain such sign and shall not relieve such person from fully complying with the requirements of this article or from any other penalties prescribed in the Codified Ordinances. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-28) 
1751.22 - SIGNS IN URBAN RENEWAL AREA TO CONFORM TO URBAN RENEWAL PLAN. 
    All existing graphics as of January 1, 1974, which are located within the area of the Urban Renewal Project No. W. Va. R-18, also known as Downtown Project No. 1, and which are regulated by a resolution of Council adopted on June 11, 1973, shall conform to the regulations of such resolution by January 1, 1977. 
(1964 Code Sec. 30-29) 
1751.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 1705.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 1755 - TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Flood plain requirements, Art. 1349. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, W. Va. Code, § 8-12-5(30). 

1755.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
(a)  "House trailer" means any portable vehicular structure or vehicle constructed and designed so as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes. "House trailer" also shall mean a "mobile home" as defined in Section 5 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City. 
(b)  "House trailer dealer" means any person, firm or corporation which sells or offers for sale house trailers. 
(c)  "Trailer park" means any plot or parcel of land upon which two or more house trailers are located for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether a charge is made for such accommodation. "Trailer park" also shall mean a "mobile home park" as defined in Section 5 of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-1) 
1755.02 - DRAINAGE OF SITES. 
    Each trailer park shall be located on a well-drained site of ample size, free from rocks, brush or weeds and properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-2) 
1755.03 - LOCATION OF HOUSE TRAILERS; HOUSE TRAILER SPACES. 
    Each house trailer shall be located at least eight feet from any other house trailer. This minimum clearance shall be maintained on all four sides of each house trailer. The house trailer spaces, as laid out in each trailer tourist park, shall be clearly defined by markers at each corner. 
    All house trailers shall be located at least four feet from any of the following: streets, alleys or highways, property lines bounding the house trailer park, buildings, garbage or refuse depositories or water faucets within the house trailer park. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-3) 
1755.04 - SERVICE BUILDINGS. 
    Each trailer park shall provide service buildings to house toilet facilities, bathing facilities and other sanitary facilities required in this article. 
    Service buildings housing the toilet facilities shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems, and shall be located not closer than ten feet from any house trailer and shall be located on the extreme rear of the trailer park; provided, that permanently constructed service buildings in existence on October 9, 1950, may, in the discretion of the health officer, be adjudged as sufficient compliance with this paragraph. 
    The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times during the day or night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of moisture-proof materials, including well painted woodwork that will permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning, scouring and washing. The floor shall be of concrete or other water impervious material and shall be elevated not less than four inches above ground level, with adequate floor drains. 
    All service buildings shall be equipped with adequate slop sinks. 
    All service buildings shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free from any condition that will be a menace to the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-4) 
1755.05 - SEWAGE DISPOSAL. 
    In trailer parks, waste from showers, bathtubs, toilets, slop sinks and laundries shall be discharged into the public sewer system of the city whenever such connection is available. When such connection is not available, the waste shall be discharged into a private disposal plant or septic tank system, of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard. Any private disposal plant or septic tank shall be approved by the health officer and the plumbing inspector. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-5) 
1755.06 - TOILET FACILITIES, BATHS, SHOWERS AND WASH BASINS. 
    Each trailer park shall be equipped with toilets, baths or showers, and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  Toilet facilities for men and women shall be either in separate buildings or at least 20 feet apart or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. 
(b)  Toilet facilities for women shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for every 15 house trailer spaces or fraction thereof and there shall be one shower or bathtub for every 15 house trailer spaces or fraction thereof and one lavatory or wash basin for every 20 house trailer spaces or fraction thereof. Each toilet, shower and bathtub shall be in a private compartment. 
(c)  Toilet facilities for men shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for every 15 house trailer spaces or fraction thereof and there shall be one shower or bathtub for every 15 house trailer spaces or fraction thereof, one lavatory or wash basin for every 20 house trailer spaces or fraction thereof and one urinal for every 20 house trailer spaces or fraction thereof. Each toilet, shower or bathtub shall be in a private compartment. 
    Any house trailer having its own built-in bath and toilet facilities shall be required to comply with applicable city plumbing and health ordinances and laws. Trailer parks used exclusively by house trailers equipped with satisfactory bath and toilet facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this section except that such trailer parks shall provide and maintain at least one set of toilet facilities for women and one set for men in the service building. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-6) 
1755.07 - CONDITION OF GROUNDS. 
    The grounds of the trailer parks shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will be a menace to the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-7) 
1755.08 - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH; CONTAINERS. 
    In trailer parks, covered solid metal garbage pails and covered solid metal rubbish containers shall be provided and shall be of such capacity and number as to properly take care of all garbage and refuse emanating from the house trailers served by such pails and containers. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-8) 
1755.09 - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH; DISPOSITION. 
    In trailer parks, all garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of these Codified Ordinances relative to the disposition of garbage and rubbish or otherwise removed from the premises in accordance with any regulation deemed necessary by the health officer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-9) 
1755.10 - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH; INCINERATOR. 
    In trailer parks, an incinerator constructed and operated in conformity with applicable laws shall be furnished for the burning of all combustible waste or rubbish, unless removal of such waste or rubbish two times a week is provided. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-10) 
1755.11 - FIRES. 
    In trailer parks, fires shall not, at any time, be so located as to endanger automobiles or other property. Unextinguished fires in trailer parks shall not be left unattended at any time. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-11) 
1755.12 - WATER SUPPLY; COMMON DRINKING VESSELS. 
    In trailer parks, an adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the trailer park, and shall be provided through an approved pipe distribution system connected directly with water mains of the city. The water supply shall be furnished from faucets only, which shall be located within at least 50 feet from any house trailer space. No common drinking vessels shall be permitted. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-12) 
1755.13 - ANIMALS AND PETS. 
    No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any trailer park. Pet animals in trailer parks shall be tied up or confined in a proper enclosure. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-13) 
1755.14 - RIGHT OF ENTRY OF HEALTH OFFICER. 
    The health officer shall, at all times, have the right to enter upon the premises of trailer parks. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-14) 
1755.15 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The health officer shall have power to prescribe reasonable rules and regulations, not in conflict with provisions of this article, governing the operation of trailer parks as he may deem necessary. No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any rule or regulation so prescribed. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-15) 
1755.16 - COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE. 
    All trailer parks shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-16) 
1755.17 - TRAILER PARK PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    No person shall establish, maintain, operate or conduct within the city any trailer park for use of transients or other persons by the day, week, month, season or otherwise, whether a charge is or is not made, unless such person shall first obtain a permit therefor as provided in this article. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-17) 
1755.18 - CONTENTS AND FILING OF APPLICATIONS. 
    Applications for trailer park permits shall be filed with the mayor. Such applications shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  The location and legal description of the trailer park. 
(c)  Such further information as may be requested by the mayor to determine if the proposed park will comply with legal requirements. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-18) 
1755.19 - INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS. 
    The application for a trailer park permit shall be investigated by the health officer, the plumbing inspector, the chief of the fire department and the chief of police. If it is found that the applicant is of good moral character and that the proposed trailer park will be in compliance with all provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the mayor shall approve the application. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-19) 
1755.20 - LICENSE ISSUANCE; ANNUAL FEE. 
    Upon approval of an application for a license as provided in the proceeding section, the applicant shall be notified by the finance director, and the trailer park license shall then be issued by the finance director if, but not until, the annual license fee has been paid. 
    The annual license fee for each trailer park shall be $20. The annual permit fee shall be payable on July 1 of each year at the office of the director of the division of finance. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-20; Ord. of 5-13-13(5)) 
1755.21 - POSTING OF PERMIT. 
    The trailer park permit issued pursuant to this article shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the trailer tourist park at all times. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-21) 
1755.22 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 13, 2013, repealed § 1755.22, which pertained to permit transfer; fee. See Comparative Section Table for complete derivation. 
1755.23 - PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION. 
    The health officer may, at any time, in his discretion, suspend the permit issued under the authority of this article for failure to comply with any requirements set forth in this article or for any other violation of law. 
    In case of revocation of a trailer park permit, a notice shall be served on the park manager or park owner, specifying the failure of the permittee to comply with this article and requesting him to appear before a board of review composed of the chief of police, the chief of the fire department and the director of public works, not less than 24 hours after service of the notice. The trailer park manager or owner shall be confronted with the charge of violation, and shall be required to show cause why the permit should not be revoked and he shall have the right to introduce such relevant evidence as he may desire. After the hearing, the board of review, by a two-thirds vote, may reinstate the permit or revoke the permit. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-23) 
1755.24 - TRAILER PARK MANAGER REQUIRED; QUALIFICATIONS; OFFICE. 
    Each trailer park shall be under the direct management of the owner or his agent. Such person shall be of good reputation and character and shall operate and manage the park from an office located on the grounds or adjacent thereto. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-24) 
1755.25 - DUTIES OF MANAGER. 
    The trailer park manager shall: 
(a)  Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of any kind. 
(b)  Provide for the regular cleaning, painting, repairing and disinfecting of all buildings within the park area. 
(c)  Report to the health officer all cases of disease in the park. 
(d)  Report to the proper authorities all acts of disorderly conduct or any nuisance. 
(e)  Prevent trespassing upon the premises of adjacent property owners. 
(f)  Post copies of this article and of all other applicable laws and regulations at conspicuous places in the trailer tourist park. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-25) 
1755.26 - REGISTER OF HOUSE TRAILER OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS REQUIRED. 
    The owner of each trailer park and any agent he may have in direct charge shall keep a register containing a record of all house trailer owners and occupants located within the trailer tourist park. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-26) 
1755.27 - REGISTER; INFORMATION REQUIRED. 
    The register required to be kept by the preceding section shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of each house trailer occupant or owner. 
(b)  The make, model and year of all automobiles and house trailers. 
(c)  License number and state issuing such licenses. 
(d)  The dates of arrival and departure of each house trailer. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-27) 
1755.28 - REGISTER INSPECTION; RETENTION FOR THREE YEARS. 
    The trailer park owner or manager shall keep the register required by this article available for inspection at all time, by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed for period of three years following the date of registration. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-28) 
1755.29 - HOUSE TRAILERS; INSPECTION. 
    Every house trailer located within the city shall have been inspected by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., Nationwide Consumer Testing Institute, Inc. or Pittsburg Testing Laboratory, and, as evidence of such inspection, shall bear the label with the words "Listed in accordance with HUD Manufactured Home Standards Program," meaning that the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., Nationwide Consumer Testing Institute, Inc. or Pittsburg Testing Laboratory has evaluated, tested and inspected representative house trailers of the manufacturer and established follow-up inspections consisting of making a structural, plumbing, heating or electrical inspection on each house trailer or mobile home so labeled. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any house trailer: 
(a)  Located within the city prior to February 11, 1974; or 
(b)  Which is authorized pursuant to section 21 of the zoning ordinance by the board of zoning appeals to be used as a temporary building for business or industrial use incidental to residential construction and development. Additionally, the director of public works, upon a showing that a particular house trailer has been inspected by a third party inspector which has a record of thorough and competent inspection of house trailers to insure compliance with the HUD Standard referred to above or a stricter safety standard as determined by the director of public works, may approve the location of such trailer within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-29) 
1755.30 - SIGN DISPLAYING SECTION 1755.29. 
    Every house trailer dealer shall prominently display in a conspicuous location a sign, no smaller than three feet in length and three feet in width, which shall contain: 
(a)  In letters at least eight inches in height the phrase, "NOTICE: TO HUNTINGTON RESIDENTS"; and 
(b)  The full text of section 1755.29. 
(1964 Code Sec. 35-30) 
1755.99 - PENALTY. 
Editor's note- See section 1705.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty. 
ARTICLE 1760 - LAND BANK FAST TRACK AUTHORITY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 22, 2018, repealed the former Article 1760, §§ 1760.01-1760.15, and enacted a new Art. 1760 as set out herein. The former Art. 1760 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

1760.01 - SHORT TITLE. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "land bank fast track act". 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.02 - PURPOSE. 
    The City of Huntington is a member of the Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program enacted by the West Virginia Legislature. W. Va. Code § 8-1-5a [2007]. The legislation authorizes pilot municipalities to exercise broad-based home rule to improve urban and state development. The legislation establishes a framework for municipalities to explore new ideas to see if they can or should be implemented on a statewide basis. 
    The City of Huntington finds that there exists a continuing need to strengthen and revitalize the economy and that it is in the best interests of the city to assemble or dispose of public property in a coordinated manner to foster the development of that property and to promote economic growth. It is declared to be a valid public purpose for a land bank fast track authority created under this article to acquire, assemble, dispose of, and quiet title to property. It is further declared to be a valid public purpose for the land bank fast track authority created under this article to provide for the financing of the acquisition, assembly, disposition, and quieting of title to property, and to exercise other powers granted under this article. The City of Huntington finds that the land bank fast track authority and powers conferred by this article constitute a necessary program and serve a necessary public purpose. 
    This article was originally an authorized enactment under the Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program and intended to reduce the expense and burden on the state and its subdivisions of tax lien sale system, to provide for the transfer of delinquent and nonentered land to those more responsible or better able to bear the duties of citizenship, to increase property value and prevent urban blight and deterioration. This reenactment incorporates statutory enactments of the West Virginia Legislature from 2014 and 2017, and all authority herein is derived from these enactments of the West Virginia Legislature. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.03 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this article: 
(a)  "Board" means the board of directors of a land reuse agency also known herein as the City of Huntington Land Bank Fast Track Authority; 
(b)  "Deconstruct" means to attempt to remove salvageable pieces of a housing unit prior to or as part of demolition or renovation; 
(c)  "Financial institution" means a bank, savings association, operating subsidiary of a bank or savings association, credit union, association licensed to originate mortgage loans or an assignee of a mortgage or note originated by such an institution; 
(d)  "Land reuse agency" or "the authority" means the City of Huntington Land Bank Fast Track Authority; 
(e)  "Municipality" means the City of Huntington; and 
(f)  "Real property" means all lands, including improvements and fixtures on them and property of any nature appurtenant to them or used in connection with them and every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable, in them, including terms of years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage or otherwise, and indebtedness secured by the liens. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.04 - CREATION AND EXISTENCE. 
    The City of Huntington Land Bank Fast Track Authority is hereby continued consistent with its previous existence under authority of the West Virginia Home Rule Board, and the current authority of W. Va. Code § 31-18E-1, et seq. The name of the agency shall be the "City of Huntington Land Bank Fast Track Authority". The number of board members shall be seven, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of council in compliance with the requirements of section 1760.06 below. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.05 - MEETING OPEN TO THE PUBLIC; PUBLIC HEARINGS. 
    All matters before the board, except those exempt under the applicable open meetings laws, shall be considered and voted on in an opening meeting. Any matter put before a vote by the board shall be first subject to the provision of a public hearing on the issue. The public hearing requirement shall be met where the chair provides an opportunity for any person in attendance to speak on the issue prior to vote. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.06 - COMPOSITION OF BOARD. 
(a)  Eligibility to serve on board. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, a public officer is eligible to serve as a board member, and the acceptance of the appointment neither terminates nor impairs that public office; 
(2)  A municipal employee is eligible to serve as a board member; 
(3)  The board shall include at least one voting member who: 
(A)  Is a resident of the City of Huntington; 
(B)  Is not a public official or municipal employee; and 
(C)  Maintains membership with a recognized civic organization within the City of Huntington; 
(4)  A member removed under subdivision (3), subsection (d) of this section is ineligible for reappointment to the board unless the reappointment is confirmed unanimously by the board; 
(5)  As used in this subsection, the term "public officer" means an individual who is elected to office. 
(c)  Officers. The members of the board shall select annually from among their members a chair, vice chair, secretary, treasurer and other officers as the board determines. 
(d)  Rules. The board shall establish rules on all of the following: 
(1)  Duties of officers; 
(2)  Attendance and participation of members in its regular and special meetings; 
(3)  A procedure to remove a member by a majority vote of the other members for failure to comply with a rule; and 
(4)  Other matters necessary to govern the conduct of a land reuse agency. 
(e)  Vacancies. A vacancy on the board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. Upon removal under subdivision (3), subsection (d) of this section, the position becomes vacant. 
(f)  Compensation. Board members serve without compensation. The board may reimburse a member for expenses actually incurred in the performance of duties on behalf of the land reuse agency. 
(g)  Meetings. 
(1)  The board shall meet as follows: 
(A)  In regular session according to a schedule adopted by the board; 
(B)  In special session: 
(i)  As convened by the chair; or 
(ii)  Upon written notice signed by a majority of the members; 
(2)  A majority of the board, excluding vacancies, is a quorum. Physical presence is required under this paragraph. 
(h)  Voting. 
(1)  Except as set forth in subdivision (2) or (3) of this subsection or elsewhere in this article, action of the board must be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the board present and voting. 
(2)  Action of the board on the following matters must be approved by a majority of the entire board membership: 
(A)  Adoption of bylaws; 
(B)  Adoption of rules under subsection (d) of this section; 
(C)  Hiring or firing of an employee or contractor of the land reuse agency. This function may, by majority vote of the entire board membership, be delegated by the board to a specified officer or committee of the land reuse agency; 
(D)  Incurring of debt; 
(E)  Adoption or amendment of the annual budget; or 
(F)  Sale, lease, encumbrance or alienation of real property or personal property with a value of more than $50,000. 
(3)  A resolution under section 1760.14 of this article, relating to dissolution of the agency, must be approved by two thirds of the entire board membership. 
(4)  A member of the board may not vote by proxy. 
(5)  A member may request a recorded vote on any resolution or action of the land reuse agency. 
(i)  Immunity. The City of Huntington shall not be liable personally on the bonds or other obligations of the land reuse agency pursuant to W. Va. Code § 31-18E-5 et seq. Rights of creditors of the authority are solely against the authority. 
(j)  Board member terms. Each board member shall be appointed for a term of three years and may serve no more than three terms. Board members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of council. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.07 - STAFFING. 
(a)  Employees. The board may employ or enter into a contract for an executive director, counsel and legal staff, technical experts and other individuals and may determine the qualifications and fix the compensation and benefits of those employees. 
(b)  Contracts. The board may enter into a contract with the City of Huntington for: 
(1)  The city to provide staffing services to the authority; or 
(2)  The authority to provide staffing services to the city. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.08 - POWERS OF AUTHORITY. 
    The City Of Huntington Land Bank Fast Track Authority is a public body, corporate and politic, exercising public and essential governmental functions, and having all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this ordinance, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  To adopt, amend and repeal bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business; 
(2)  To sue and be sued in its own name and be a party in a civil action. This paragraph includes an action to clear title to property of the authority; 
(3)  To adopt a seal and to alter the same at pleasure; 
(4)  To borrow from federal government funds, from the state, from private lenders or from the City of Huntington upon its consent, as necessary, for the operation and work of the land reuse agency; 
(5)  To issue negotiable revenue bonds and notes according to the provisions of this ordinance; 
(6)  To procure insurance or guarantees from the federal government or the state of the payment of debt incurred by the land reuse agency and to pay premiums in connection with the insurance or guarantee; 
(7)  To enter into contracts and other instruments necessary, incidental or convenient to the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers. This paragraph includes intergovernmental cooperation agreements for the joint exercise of powers under this ordinance; 
(8)  To enter into contracts and intergovernmental cooperation agreements with other governmental entities for the performance of functions by the entities on behalf of the authority or by the authority on behalf of the entities; 
(9)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers of the authority. Any contract or instrument signed shall be executed by and for the authority if the contract or instrument is signed, including an authorized facsimile signature, by: 
(A)  The chair or vice chair of the authority; and 
(B)  Either: 
(i)  The secretary or assistant secretary of the authority; or 
(ii)  The treasurer or assistant treasurer of the authority; 
(10)  To procure insurance against losses in connection with the real property, assets or activities of the authority; 
(11)  To invest money of the land reuse agency at the discretion of the board in instruments, obligations, securities or property determined proper by the board and to name and use depositories for its money; 
(12)  To enter into contracts for the management of, the collection of rent from or the sale of real property of the authority; 
(13)  To design, develop, construct, demolish, reconstruct, deconstruct, rehabilitate, renovate, relocate and otherwise improve real property or rights or interests in real property; 
(14)  To fix, charge and collect rents, fees and charges for the use of real property of the authority and for services provided by the authority; 
(15)  To grant or acquire licenses, easements, leases or options with respect to real property of the land reuse agency; 
(16)  To enter into partnerships, joint ventures and other collaborative relationships with municipalities, counties and other public and private entities for the ownership, management, development and disposition of real property; 
(17)  To organize and reorganize the executive, administrative, clerical and other departments of the authority and to fix the duties, powers and compensation of employees, agents and consultants of the authority; and 
(18)  To do all other things necessary or convenient to achieve the objectives and purposes of the authority or other law related to the purposes and responsibility of the authority. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.09 - ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY. 
(a)  Title to property. The authority shall hold in its own name all real property it acquires. 
(b)  Tax exemption. 
(1)  Except as set forth in subdivision (2) of this subsection, the real property the authority and its income and operations are exempt from property tax pursuant to W. Va. Code § 31-18E-9(b). 
(2)  Subdivision (1) of this subsection does not apply to real property after the fifth consecutive year in which the real property is continuously leased to a private third party. However, real property continues to be exempt from property taxes if it is leased to a nonprofit or governmental agency at substantially less than fair market value. 
(c)  Methods of acquisition. The authority may acquire real property or interests in real property by any means on terms and conditions and in a manner it considers proper: Provided, that the authority may not acquire any interest in oil, gas or minerals which have been severed from the realty. 
(d)  Acquisitions from municipalities or counties. 
(1)  The authority may acquire real property by purchase contracts, lease purchase agreements, installment sales contracts and land contracts and may accept transfers from the City of Huntington, or the Counties of Wayne and Cabell for property within the city limits, upon terms and conditions as agreed to by the authority and the municipality or county. 
(2)  A municipality or county may transfer to the authority real property and interests in real property of the municipality or county on terms and conditions and according to procedures determined by the municipality or county as long as the real property is located within the jurisdiction of the authority. 
(3)  The Huntington Urban Renewal Authority may, with the consent of the City of Huntington and without a redevelopment contract, convey property to the authority. A conveyance under this subdivision shall be with fee simple title, free of all liens and encumbrances. 
(e)  Maintenance. The authority shall maintain all of its real property in accordance with the statutes of the State of West Virginia and ordinances of the City of Huntington. 
(f)  Prohibition. 
(1)  Subject to the provisions of subdivision (2) of this subsection, the authority may not own or hold real property located outside the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Huntington. 
(2)  The authority may be granted authority pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement with the City or Cabell or Wayne County to manage and maintain real property located within the jurisdiction of the municipality or county. 
(g)  Acquisition of tax delinquent properties. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, pursuant to this article or otherwise by intergovernmental cooperation agreement, the authority may acquire an interest in tax delinquent property through the provisions of chapter eleven-a of the West Virginia Code. Notwithstanding the provisions of section eight, article three, chapter eleven-a of the West Virginia Code, if no person present at the tax sale bids the amount of the taxes, interest and charges due on any unredeemed tract or lot or undivided interest in real estate offered for sale, the sheriff shall, prior to certifying the real estate to the auditor for disposition pursuant to W. Va. Code ch. 11-a, art. 3, § 44, provide a list of all of said real estate within the authority's jurisdiction to the authority and the authority shall be given an opportunity to purchase the tax lien and pay the taxes, interest and charges due for any unredeemed tract or lot or undivided interest therein as if the authority were an individual who purchased the tax lien at the tax sale, all of which procedures are set forth in W. Va. Code § 31-18E-9(g). 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of West Virginia Code to the contrary, if authorized by the City of Huntington, or otherwise by intergovernmental cooperation agreement, the authority shall have the right of first refusal to purchase any tax-delinquent property which is within the City of Huntington municipal limits, and has an assessed value of $25,000 or less or has been condemned: Provided, That the authority satisfies the requirements of subdivision (3) of this subsection. A list of properties which meet the criteria of this subdivision shall regularly be compiled by the sheriff of the county, and the authority may purchase any qualifying tax-delinquent property for an amount equal to the taxes owed and any related fees before such property is placed for public auction. Such authority is in accordance with W. Va. Code § 31-18E-9(g)(2). 
(3)  When the authority exercises a right of first refusal in accordance with subdivision (2) of this section, the authority shall, within 15 days, provide written notice to all owners of real property that is adjacent to the tax-delinquent property. Any such property owner shall have a period of 120 days from the receipt of notice, actual or constructive, to exercise a right to purchase the tax-delinquent property from the authority for an amount equal to the amount paid for the property by the authority: Provided, that in the event more than one adjacent land owner desires to purchase the tax-delinquent property, it shall be sold to the adjacent property owner offering the highest bid. It is the duty of the adjacent property owner to establish that he or she is the actual owner of property that is adjacent to the tax-delinquent property and all state and local taxes and all fees on his or her adjacent property are current and non-delinquent. All such procedures are in compliance with W. Va. Code § 31-18E-9(g), and are subject to the sunset provisions of W. Va. Code § 31-18E-9(g)(4). 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.10 - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY. 
(a)  Public access to inventory. The authority shall maintain and make available for public review and inspection an inventory of real property held by the authority. 
(b)  Power. The authority may convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease, grant or mortgage interests in real property of the authority in the form and by the method determined to be in the best interests of the authority. 
(c)  Consideration. 
(1)  The authority shall determine the amount and form of consideration necessary to convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease as lessor, grant or mortgage interests in real property. 
(2)  Consideration may take the form of monetary payments and secured financial obligations, covenants and conditions related to the present and future use of the property, contractual commitments of the transferee and other forms of consideration as determined by the board to be in the best interest of the authority. 
(d)  Policies and procedures. 
(1)  The board shall determine and state in the authority policies and procedures the general terms and conditions for consideration to be received by the authority for the transfer of real property and interests in real property, including but not limited to, a process for distribution of any proceeds to any claimants, taxing entities and the authority. 
(2)  Requirements which may be applicable to the disposition of real property and interests in real property by municipalities or counties shall not be applicable to the disposition of real property and interests in real property by the authority. 
(e)  Ranking of priorities. 
(1)  The authority may establish a hierarchical ranking of priorities for the use of real property conveyed by the authority, including use for: 
(A)  Purely public spaces and places; 
(B)  Affordable housing; 
(C)  Conservation areas; and 
(D)  Retail, commercial and industrial activities. 
(2)  The priorities established may be for the entire land reuse jurisdiction or may be set according to the needs of different neighborhoods or other locations within the land reuse jurisdiction, or according to the nature of the real property. 
(f)  Land use plans. The authority shall consider all duly adopted land use plans and make reasonable efforts to coordinate the disposition of authority real property with the land use plans. 
(g)  The board may delegate to officers and employees the authority to enter into and execute agreements, instruments of conveyance and other related documents pertaining to the conveyance of real property by the authority. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.11 - FINANCING OF THE AUTHORITY. 
(a)  General rule. The authority may receive funding through grants and loans from: 
(1)  The federal government; 
(2)  The state; 
(3)  A municipality or county; and 
(5)  Private or other public sources. 
(b)  Funding. The authority may receive and retain payments for services rendered, for rents and leasehold payments received, for consideration for disposition of real and personal property, for proceeds of insurance coverage for losses incurred, for income from investments and for an asset and activity lawfully permitted to a land reuse agency under this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.12 - BORROWING AND ISSUANCE OF BONDS. 
(a)  Authority. 
(1)  The authority may issue a bond for any of its corporate purposes in accordance with this ordinance and the authority set forth in W. Va. Code § 31-18E-12. 
(2)  The principal and interest of a bond is payable from the authority's general revenue. 
(3)  The bond may be secured by any of the following: 
(A)  A pledge of revenue. This paragraph includes a grant or contribution from: (i) The federal government or a federal agency or instrumentality; or (ii) the state, a state agency or an instrumentality of the state; or 
(B)  A mortgage of property of the authority. 
(b)  Nature. The bond is a negotiable instrument under the provisions of W. Va. Code ch. 46, art. 8. 
(c)  Tax exempt. A bond and the income from the bond is exempt from taxation by: (1) the state; and (2) a political subdivision. 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  A bond must be authorized by resolution of the board and shall be a limited obligation of the authority. 
(2)  The principal and interest, costs of issuance and other costs incidental to the bond are payable solely from the income and revenue derived from the sale, lease or other disposition of the assets of the authority. The authority may secure the bond by a mortgage or other security device covering all or part of the project from which the pledged revenues may be derived. 
(3)  A refunding bond issued under this section: 
(A)  Is payable from: (i) A source described in this article; or (ii) the investment of the proceeds of the refunding bonds; and 
(B)  Is not an indebtedness or pledge of the general credit of a political subdivision within the meaning of a constitutional or statutory limitation of indebtedness and shall contain a recital to that effect. 
(4)  A bond must comply with the authorizing resolution as to: 
(A)  Form; 
(B)  Denomination; 
(C)  Interest rate; 
(D)  Maturity; and 
(E)  Execution. 
(5)  A bond may be subject to redemption at the option of and in the manner determined by the board in the authorizing resolution. 
(e)  The city may elect to guarantee, insure or otherwise become primarily or secondarily obligated on the indebtedness of a land reuse agency, subject, however, to all other provisions of law of this state applicable to municipal or county indebtedness. 
(f)  Sale. 
(1)  A bond shall be issued, sold and delivered in accordance with the terms and provisions of the authorizing resolution. The board, to effectuate its best interest, may determine the manner of sale, public or private, and the price of the bond. 
(2)  The resolution issuing a bond must be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction in which the land reuse agency is located. 
(g)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the members of the authority nor a person executing the bond shall be liable personally on the bonds by reason of the issuance of the bond. 
(2)  The bond or other obligation of the authority related to a bond shall not be a debt of a municipality, county or of the state. A statement to this effect shall appear on the face of the bond or obligation. 
(3)  On the bond or other obligation of the authority related to a bond, all of the following apply: 
(A)  The state has no liability. This paragraph applies to the revenue and property of the state; and 
(B)  A City of Huntington has no liability. This paragraph applies to the revenue and property of the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.13 - PUBLIC RECORDS AND PUBLIC ACCESS. 
(a)  Public records. The board shall keep minutes and a record of its proceedings. 
(b)  Public access. The authority is subject to W. Va. Code ch. 6, art. 9-A, relating to open meetings, and W. Va. Code ch. 29-b, relating to public records. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.14 - DISSOLUTION OF AUTHORITY. 
(a)  General rule. The authority may be dissolved as a public body corporate and politic upon compliance with all of the following: 
(1)  Sixty calendar days advance written notice of consideration of a resolution to request dissolution must be: 
(A)  Given to the City of Huntington which created the land reuse agency; 
(B)  Published in a local newspaper of general circulation; and 
(C)  Sent by certified mail to the trustees of outstanding bonds of the authority; 
(2)  Satisfaction of all outstanding liabilities; and 
(3)  Approval of a resolution requesting dissolution. 
(b)  Authority. Upon receipt of a proper resolution described in subsection (a) of this section, the City of Huntington may dissolve the land reuse agency by adoption of an ordinance or order. If approved, the governing body of the city shall file a certified copy of the ordinance or order with the Secretary of State and notify the West Virginia Housing Development Fund of the dissolution of the authority. The Secretary of State shall cause the termination of the existence of the authority to be noted on the record of incorporation. Upon the filing, the authority shall cease to function. 
(c)  Transfer of assets. Upon dissolution of the authority, real property, personal property and other assets of the authority become the assets of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.15 - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST. 
(a)  Ethics Act. The acts and decisions of members of the board and of employees of the authority are subject to W. Va. Code ch. 6-b [the Ethics Statute]. 
(b)  Supplemental rules and guidelines. The board may adopt: 
(1)  Supplemental rules addressing potential conflicts of interest; and 
(2)  Ethical guidelines for members of the board and land reuse agency employees. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.16 - EXPEDITED QUIET TITLE PROCEEDINGS. 
(a)  Authorization. 
(1)  The authority may file an action in circuit court to quiet title to real property in which the authority has an interest. 
(2)  The authority may join in a single complaint to quiet title to one or more parcels of real property. 
(3)  For purposes of an action under this section, the authority shall be deemed to be the holder of sufficient legal and equitable interests and possessory rights so as to qualify the land reuse agency as an adequate complainant in the action. 
(b)  Procedural requirements. 
(1)  Prior to the filing of an action to quiet title, the authority must conduct an examination of title to determine the identity of any person possessing a claim or interest in or to the real property. 
(2)  Service of the complaint to quiet title shall be provided in accordance with the requirements to serve a civil complaint generally, including that service to interested parties be made as follows: 
(A)  By first class mail to the identity and address reasonably ascertainable by an inspection of public records; 
(B)  In the case of occupied real property, by first class mail, addressed to "occupant"; 
(C)  By posting a copy of the notice on the real property. 
(D)  By publication; and 
(E)  As ordered by the court. 
(3)  As part of the complaint to quiet title, the authority must file an affidavit identifying: 
(A)  Persons discovered under subdivision (1) of this subsection; and 
(B)  The form of service under subdivision (2) of this subsection. 
(c)  Hearing. 
(1)  The court shall schedule a hearing on the complaint within 90 days following filing of the complaint and as to all matters upon which an answer was not filed by an interested party. 
(2)  The court shall issue its final judgment within 120 days of the filing of the complaint. 
(d)  The procedures set forth herein are under the authority of W. Va. Code § 31-18E-16. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.17 - CONSTRUCTION, INTENT AND SCOPE. 
    This article shall be construed liberally to effectuate the legislative intent and the purposes as complete and independent authorization for the implementation of this article, and all powers granted shall be broadly interpreted to effectuate the intent and purposes and not as a limitation of powers. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
1760.18 - ANNUAL AUDIT AND REPORT. 
(a)  The authority shall annually, within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year, submit an audit of income and expenditures, together with a report of its activities for the preceding year, to the West Virginia Housing Development Fund. 
(b)  A duplicate of the audit and the report shall be filed with the City of Huntington. 
(Ord. of 1-22-18(1) ) 
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE 
    Source material for the Codified Ordinances of Huntington was either ordinances or resolutions enacted by Council, or new matter ordained by the Adopting Ordinance. Sections of the Codified Ordinances without any history indicate that such sections contain new matter ordained by the Adopting Ordinance. In the following table, the disposition of all source material in the Huntington Codified Ordinances is indicated. 
1964 Code Section C.O. Section 1-13.1, 1-13.2 103.02, 103.03 1-15 135.01 1-17(a), (c) 107.01, 107.02 1-18 109.01 1-19 137.03 2-1, 2-2 137.01, 137.02 2-3 131.01 2-3.1 103.01 2-18 to 2-22 105.01 to 105.05 2-25 147.02 2-26.1 147.04 2-26.3 to 2-26.5 147.06 to 147.08 2-26.7 147.10 2-26.8 147.99 2-27 to 2-33 149.01 to 149.07 2-39 to 2-41 151.01 to 151.03 2-42 to 2-44 153.01 to 153.03 2-45 to 2-47 155.01 to 155.03 2-48 to 2-50 157.01 to 157.03 3-1(e) 529.03 3-6 to 3-10 781.01 to 781.05 4-2 to 4-7 505.03 to 505.08 4-9 to 4-13 505.09 to 505.13 4-14 to 4-25 507.01 to 507.12 5-1 to 5-3 963.01 to 963.03 5-6 963.04 6-1 to 6-11 159.01 to 159.10, 159.99 7-1 to 7-5 1711.01 to 1711.05 7-7 1705.02 7-8 to 7-10 1705.04 to 1705.06 7-11 to 7-15 1747.01 to 1747.05 7-16 to 7-22 1723.01 to 1723.07 7-32 1723.08 8-1 to 8-7 713.01 to 713.07 8-9 to 8-18 713.09 to 713.18 8.1-1 to 8.1-3 161.01 to 161.03 9-1 to 9-8 113.01 to 113.08 10-1 to 10-15 1731.01 to 1731.15 10-17 1731.18 11-1 to 11-5 143.01 to 143.05 11-9 to 11-21 143.09, 143.11 to 143.14 12-1 to 12-5 1529.01 to 1529.04 12-6 1505.01 12-8 to 12-10 1505.03 to 1505.05 12-17 to 12-20 1509.02 to 1509.04, 1509.99 12-47 to 12-58 1517.01 to 1517.10 12-59 to 12-83 1521.01 to 1521.25 12-84 to 12-84.3 1525.01 to 1525.03, 1525.99 13-1 to 13-8 955.01 to 955.08 13-10 to 13-12 163.01 to 163.03 13-17 to 13-23 163.08 to 163.14 13-24 to 13-29 955.09 to 955.14 14-2 1115.02 14-4 to 14-18 1117.01 to 1117.15 15-1 to 15-8 913.02 to 913.09 15-10 to 15-16 913.11 to 913.17 15-17 913.01 15-18 to 15-24 913.18 to 913.24 16-19 to 16-23 951.17 to 951.21 16-24 to 16-26 953.01 to 953.03 17-1 to 17-4 1105.01 to 1105.05 17-5 to 17-7 1109.01 to 1109.03 17-8 to 17-19 1113.01 to 1113.08 17-20 1113.99 17-22 1113.09 18-1 to 18-11 1131.01 to 1131.11 20-1 to 20-16 735.01 to 735.15, 735.99 20-17 to 20-20 739.01 to 739.05 20-22 to 20-28 739.06 to 739.12 20-30 to 20-33 739.14 to 739.17 20-35 to 20-37 739.19 to 739.23 20-39 to 20-49 743.02 to 743.12 20-55 to 20-60 747.01 to 747.05, 747.99 20-61 to 20-76 751.01 to 751.16 20-77 to 20-84 721.01 to 721.07, 721.99 22-1 301.05(b), 301.48 22-6.1 959.01 22-20 303.08(a) 22-22 303.08(c) 22-25 303.08(b) 22-26 361.32 22-30 303.07(a) to (h) 22-34.1 331.09 22-36, 22-37 305.01, 305.02 22-42 313.05(c) 22-45 to 22-47 305.03 to 305.05 22-48 335.01(b)(3) 22-50 335.03(a) 22-51 305.06(a) 22-53 305.06(b) 22-57 305.07 22-61 305.08 22-63, 22-64 305.09(a), (b) 22-67 343.09 22-75 349.08(b) 22-77.1 349.21 22-78 349.02(b) 22-90 533.16 22-98 335.02(b) 22-107 305.10 22-125 345.33 22-126 347.06 22-128 349.22 22-129.1 349.23 22-143 361.03(a)(19), (20), (d) 22-145, 22-146 361.13, 361.14 22-148 361.11(b) 22-150 361.15 22-152 361.16 22-152.1 311.05 22-154 to 22-160.1 361.17 to 361.26 22-161 305.12 22-162 361.27(a) 22-163 305.11 22-168 361.29 22-168.1 361.07 22-169.1 363.09 22-170 305.13 22-171 to 22-179 363.01 to 363.08, 363.99 22-181 to 22-184 375.01 to 375.04 22-186, 22-187 375.05, 375.06 22-189 373.09 22-193 373.10 22-195, 22-196 373.11, 373.12 22-197 373.07 22-198 375.07 22-206 to 22-211 165.01 to 165.06(a) 23-1 503.01 23-2, 23-3 513.05(a) to (d) 23-5, 23-6 513.10, 513.11 23-7 513.12, 529.01 23-13 517.11 23-16 529.04 23-17 533.07 23-19 533.05(c) 23-22 533.08 23-26 529.05 23-28 509.03 23-29, 23-30 529.06, 529.07, 529.99 23-31 533.09 23-33 311.06 23-34 529.08 23-35 509.01(a) to (d) 23-36 501.10 23-39 525.04 23-40, 23-41 501.09, 501.11 23-42 545.07 23-47 529.09 23-48 to 23-52 533.10 to 533.14, 533.99(b) 23-56 to 23-59 191.03(a), 191.04 to 191.06 23-60 525.05, 525.99(b) 23-61 533.15 24-1 to 24-6 725.01 to 725.06 25-1 to 25-9 1305.01 to 1305.09 25-10 to 25-16 1309.01 to 1309.07 25-18 to 25-21 167.01 to 167.04 26-1 to 26-26 1735.01 to 1735.26 26-30 to 26-33 1735.27 to 1735.31 26-36 to 26-37 1735.32 to 1735.34 26-40, 26-41 1735.36, 1735.37 27-1 to 27-9 141.01 to 141.09 27-12 141.11 27-16 141.13 27-18 to 27-32 141.14 to 141.17(a) to (c)(1), (3), (4), (d) 28-1 to 28-5 705.01 to 705.05 28-7 to 28-9 705.06 to 705.08 28-10 to 28-23 709.01 to 709.13, 709.99 29-1 933.58 29-34 to 29-39 941.01 to 941.05, 941.99 29-42 933.59 30-1 to 30-29 1751.01 to 1751.22 31-1 to 31-5 905.01 to 905.05 31-7 to 31-11 905.07 to 905.11 31-11.1 905.12 31-12 to 31-15 905.13 to 905.16 31-16 907.02 31-17 907.03(a) 31-19 to 31-26 907.05 to 907.12 31-27 to 31-40 909.03 to 909.15, 909.99 31-41, 31-42 911.01, 911.02 33-1 to 33-7 755.01 to 755.07 33-8, 33-9 759.01, 759.02 33-11 to 33-11.4 759.04 to 759.08 33-12 to 33-23 763.01 to 763.12 33-24 to 33-51 765.01 to 765.28, 765.99(a), (b) 35-1 to 35-30 1755.01 to 1755.30 36-1 to 36-5 915.01 to 915.05  
Ord. No. C.O. Section 3-11-35 169.01 to 169.04 8-25-80 1717.01, 1717.02 9-8-80 509.01 10-27-80 141.10 6-8-81 361.06(d), 361.30, 777.01 7-13-81 717.99 7-27-81 1743.01 to 1743.10, 1743.99 8-10-81 191.01, 1735.18 8-31-81 713.08, 717.01 12-28-81 147.01 to 147.03, 147.07, 147.08 3-22-82 141.12 6-28-82 907.01, 907.04 7-26-82 161.04, 161.05 8-9-82 107.01, 529.01 9-13-82 165.06(b) 10-25-82 181.01 12-13-82 913.10 2-14-83 191.03(b) 3-15-83 141.17(c)(2) 3-28-83 1705.03 4-25-83 163.04 to 163.06, 163.13, 1723.04 5-9-83 739.13, 739.18, 743.01 6-13-83 907.03(b), (c), 909.01, 909.02 7-11-83 785.01 to 785.03 9-12-83 765.99(c) 12-28-83 1739.01, 1739.03, 1739.05 to 1739.08 1-9-84 759.03 2-13-84 1115.01 2-28-84 905.06 4-9-84 107.01 5-29-84 1739.02, 1739.04 6-11-84 163.07 9-24-84 361.03(a)(21) 1-28-85 933.01 to 933.57, 933.99 3-21-85 143.06 to 143.08, 143.10, 147.02, 147.04, 147.05, 147.07, 147.09, 1505.02 5-13-85 303.07(i) 5-29-85 959.03 6-24-85 303.09(c) 7-22-85 769.01 to 769.19, 769.21, 769.99, 951.01 to 951.15, 951.99(a) 7-30-85 773.01 to 773.08, 773.99 8-26-85 361.28, 1115.03 10-28-85 333.01, 363.09 4-28-86 951.16, 951.22, 951.99(b) 5-12-86 1509.01 Adopting Ordinance 101.01 to 101.08, 101.99, 111.01 to 111.06, 191.02, 301.01 to 301.05(a), 301.06 to 301.47, 303.01 to 303.06, 303.07(j), 303.99, 305.14, 311.01 to 311.04, 313.01 to 313.04, 313.06, 313.07, 331.01 to 331.08, 333.02, 333.03, 335.01(c) to 335.02(a), 335.03(b) to 335.04, 337.01 to 337.12, 339.01 to 339.10, 341.01 to 341.05, 343.01 to 343.08, 345.01 to 345.32, 347.01 to 347.05, 349.01, 349.02(a), 349.03 to 349.08(a), 349.09 to 349.20, 351.01 to 351.11, 361.01 to 361.03(a)(18), 361.03(b), (c), 361.04 to 361.06(c), 361.08 to 361.11(a), 361.12, 361.27(b), 361.31, 361.99, 371.01 to 371.08, 373.01 to 373.06, 373.08, 501.01 to 501.08, 501.99, 505.01, 505.02, 509.02, 509.99, 513.01 to 513.04, 513.06 to 513.09, 513.99, 517.01 to 517.10, 517.99, 521.01 to 521.08, 521.99, 525.01 to 525.03, 529.02, 533.01 to 533.04, 533.06, 541.01, 541.02, 541.99, 545.01 to 545.06, 545.08, 545.99, 769.20, 955.99, 959.02, 1705.01, 1705.99, 1731.16, 1731.17, 1735.35 8-11-86 183.01 to 183.05 8-25-86 Repeals 1717.02(c) 8-25-86 143.06 to 143.08, 143.10, 1505.02 11-24-86 547.01 to 547.05 1-26-87 933.24 2-23-87 1723.04(c) 3-9-87 361.28(a)(7) 4-13-87 361.03(a)(22) 4-27-87 726.01 6-8-87 955.01 to 955.25 8-10-87 501.12 9-28-87 335.01(b), (f) 9-28-87 137.04 10-13-87 107.01 to 107.04 10-13-87 727.01 to 727.03, 727.99 2-22-88 1735.35 2-22-88 1731.16 2-22-88 1723.02(a) 2-22-88 1717.01 2-22-88 1711.01 4-25-88 955.16 4-25-88 951.21 5-23-88 105.06 7-25-88 373.12 10-11-88 509.04, 509.99 11-14-88 917.01 to 917.14, 917.99 9-11-89 185.01 to 185.12, 185.99 10-10-89 548.01 to 548.03, 548.99 2-13-90 147.01 to 147.11, 147.99 2-13-90 773.01 to 773.10, 951.05, 951.99, repeals 951.08, 955.18 to 955.23, 955.99 4-9-90 1711.01 to 1711.05, 1711.99, 1723.02(c), 1735.35(b), repeals 1717.01, 1717.02, 1717.99 5-14-90 786.01, 786.02 6-11-90 739.24 6-25-90 521.06, 521.99(c) 8-27-90 953.02, 953.03 9-24-90 739.25 12-27-90 951.21 1-28-91 137.04 1-28-91 137.05 3-11-91 787.01 to 787.53, 787.99 Repeals 765.01 to 765.28, 765.99 3-25-91 773.03 8-26-91 517.01(b), 517.99(b) 8-26-91 190.01 10-15-91 521.06(h) 10-15-91 202.02 10-28-91 752.01 to 752.10, 752.99 11-12-91 141.09, 141.10 2-24-92 505.07 3-23-92 363.99(a) 4-13-92 773.03(c) 4-27-92 361.28(b) 4-27-92 1739.09 5-11-92 200.01 to 201.03 5-26-92 107.01(f)(10) 5-26-92 787.57 7-27-92 951.99 9-14-92 917.06 10-26-92 147.04, 147.09, 147.12 11-9-92 1743.01 to 1743.09, 1743.99 12-14-92 955.15 12-14-92 787.24 3-8-93 952.01 to 952.12 3-22-93 147.08 6-14-93 361.99(a) 6-14-93 363.99(a) 6-14-93 303.07(i) 6-14-93 303.99(b) 8-23-93 773.11 9-27-93 345.35 9-27-93 301.40 10-12-93 143.06 12-13-93 752.04 1-24-94 786.01 2-28-94 787.58 8-22-94 1735.18 8-22-94 1731.12 8-22-94 1711.05 9-26-94 913.24(a) 9-26-94 951.05 10-24-94 187.01 10-24-94 143.15 11-14-94 773.12 11-28-94 547.01(c), 547.02(b) 1-9-95 361.11(b) 2-27-95 191.06 2-27-95 161.03 4-10-95 507.03 4-24-95 953.03(e) 5-8-95 200.01 6-26-95 951.08 9-25-95 107.01 9-25-95 200.01 to 201.04 10-9-95 201.02 10-9-95 787.60 10-23-95 951.02 3-25-96 529.10 5-28-96 705.01 to 705.99 6-24-96 951.08 8-12-96 Repeals 349.21 9-23-96 1739.02 9-23-96 121.01 12-9-96 963.01 to 963.04 12-23-96 303.07 1-13-97 169.05 to 169.07 1-27-97 545.10 1-27-97 1735.01 to 1735.99 1-27-97 1711.01 to 1711.99 1-27-97 1705.01 to 1705.99 1-27-97 1731.01 to 1731.99 3-10-97 933.01 to 941.99 9-8-97 361.03 9-8-97 1739.06, 1739.09 10-27-97 Repeals 141.17 10-27-97 201.05 10-27-97 547.01 to 547.13 10-27-97 1711.01 to 1711.99 12-22-97 169.01 12-22-97 169.05 1-12-98 1711.06 1-12-98 773.03, 773.04 3-9-98 191.06 4-13-98 786.01 to 786.03 5-26-98 787.01 to 787.99 8-10-98 507.14, 507.99 9-14-98 951.04 10-26-98 190.02 10-26-98 933.24, 933.25 11-23-98 541.02 to 541.99 11-23-98 1739.06, 1739.09 11-23-98 1509.01 12-14-98 1313.01 to 1367.03 12-28-98 541.02 2-22-99 1735.18 4-26-99 545.10 4-26-99 Repeals 311.03 5-10-99 373.12 5-10-99 1711.06 6-28-99 507.15 9-13-99 1113.02 10-25-99 739.25 10-25-99 Repeals 185.01 to 185.12, 185.99 11-8-99 752.02, 752.05 12-13-99 333.01 12-13-99 349.08 12-13-99 373.13, 373.99 12-13-99 1739.10 12-27-99 527.01 to 527.09, 527.99 12-27-99 Repeals 509.03(d) 3-13-00 1315.02 3-13-00 1325.04 3-13-00 1341.45 4-24-00 200.05 4-24-00 787.54 6-12-00 763.01 to 763.12 6-26-00 363.01 to 363.09, 363.99 7-10-00 exotic license fee 7-10-00 201.01 8-28-00 951.08 11-27-00 774.01 to 774.15 12-26-00 Articles 1375, 1377, 1381, 1383, 1385, 1387, 1389, 1391, 1393 1-22-01 105.01, 105.06 2-12-01 Repeals 159.01 to 159.10, 159.99 3-12-01 169.02, 169.04, 169.05 3-26-01 752.11 to 752.13 3-26-01 1735.01, 1735.02, 1735.04, 1735.05, 1735.07, 1735.10, 1735.13, 1735.16, 1735.18, 1735.36 4-9-01 1341.05, 1341.46 4-23-01 203.01 to 203.30 5-29-01 739.19, 739.20 6-11-01 525.06, 525.99 6-25-01 Repeals 501.12 7-9-01 933.22 7-9-01 933.56 8-27-01 163.01 9-10-01 107.01 11-13-01 951.04, 951.05, 951.08, 951.99 11-13-01 909.01 to 909.21, 909.99 11-26-01 773.05 11-26-01 505.13 2-11-02 202.10 3-25-02 726.02, 726.03 3-25-02 951.08 4-22-02 743.11 5-28-02 1723.04, 1723.99 6-10-02 772.01 to 772.15 6-10-02 1509.01 8-12-02 507.01, 507.08 8-12-02 773.13 1-13-03 190.03 2-10-03 307.01, 307.02 3-10-03 772.08 3-10-03 773.08 3-24-03 772.04, 772.15 3-24-03 790.01 to 790.03 4-14-03 1341.01 4-14-03 1343.03 4-28-03 1171.01 to 1171.06, 1171.99 7-14-03 1529.05 10-13-03 99.01 to 99.05, 99.99 5-12-03 204.01, 204.02 1-26-04 536.01 to 536.05, 536.99 2-9-04 539.01 to 539.03, 539.99 2-9-04 1315.02, 1329.06, 1331.06, 1333.12, 1341.47 3-8-04 536.04 3-8-04 1315.02, 1327.05 4-26-04 1337.03 5-24-06 933.07, 933.22 to 933.25 6-14-04 788.01 to 788.08 7-12-04 191.07 8-9-04 190.03 9-27-04 535.01 to 535.05 12-27-04 543.01 to 543.04 12-27-04 1359.01 12-27-04 1361.01 3-28-05 547.02, 547.11 3-28-05 787.11 5-23-05 787.07, 787.08, 787.56, 787.99 6-27-05 507.06 6-27-05 533.17 7-11-05 107.01(f)(10) 7-11-05 345.31 7-11-05 533.18 9-26-05 525.05 11-28-05 1343.06(g) 11-28-05 1357.01 12-12-05 1343.07 12-27-05 1711.05 to 1711.09, 1711.99 2-27-06 165.07 3-20-06 773.03 3-27-06 739.20 9-11-06 787.16 9-25-06 787.10 9-25-06 1739.99 10-10-06 1739.05 11-27-06 1711.01 12-11-06 533.15 2-26-07 1529.05 2-26-07 361.33, 361.99 2-26-07 165.06 2-26-07 351.12 3-26-07 333.01 6-25-07 1739.11 to 1739.14, 1739.99 8-13-07 361.19 8-27-07 107.01 10-9-07 509.05 10-9-07 769.02 10-22-07 1345.01 to 1345.13 11-13-07 787.54 12-10-07 1741.01 to 1741.09, 1741.99 4-28-08 348.01 to 348.07 4-28-08 307.02 6-10-08 547.01 to 547.06 6-23-08 787.54 7-14-08 373.12 7-28-08 951.08 11-12-08 954.01 to 954.13 12-22-08 201.03, 201.04 12-30-08 131.02 2-23-09 101.09 4-27-09 772.02, 772.04 6-8-09 953.03 6-8-09 752.04 6-8-09 933.22 6-22-09 1110.01 to 1110.10 8-24-09 1760.01 to 1760.15 8-24-09 773.12 to 773.14 10-26-09 773.15 12-14-09 1355.01 12-14-09 1359.01 12-14-09 1361.01 12-14-09 508.01 to 508.05 12-28-09 107.01 to 107.04 12-28-09 790.02, 790.03 2-8-10 1359.01 2-8-10 1363.01 to 1363.05 2-8-10 1357.01  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE-ORDINANCES 
    This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the City used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the Republication and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 
Adoption 
Date Section  Section 
this Code  4-26-10(1)       Rpld 954.01-954.13  6-28-10(1) 1711.01  8- 9-10(1) 507.02 507.04 507.05 507.08  8- 9-10(2)       Added 774.01-774.38  8- 9-10(3)       Added 776.01-776.44  8- 9-10(4)       Rpld 787.08 787.09 787.13 787.54 787.56 10- 6-2010(1) 774.37 11- 8-10(1)       Added 969.01, 969.02, 969.99 12-13-10(1) 530.01-530.03 530.99 12-27-10(1)       Added 531.01-531.03, 531.99 12-27-10(2)       Added 970.01-970.03, 970.99  1-10-11(1) 787.54(f)       Added 787.54(j)  1-24-11(1) 530.02  1-24-11(2) 1315.02 300.-310.  1-24-11(3) 1325.02 1325.03  1-24-11(4)       Added 1341.48  3-14-11(1)       Rpld 787.08 787.09 787.13 787.54 787.56  3-28-11(1) 1357.01 10-25-11(1) 773.03 10-25-11(2) 951.08 11-28-11(1) 1315.02 57. 11-28-11(2)       Added 1327.05 U.  4- 9-12(1) 191.01  5-29-12(1) 933.01-933.56 941.01-941.13  6-25-12(1) 333.01       Added 333.01a, 333.01b  6-25-12(2) 333.04  6-25-12(3) 1315.02 911.  6-25-12(4)       Added 1327.05 V.  6-25-12(5)       Added 1341.49  8-27-12(1)       Rpld 361.19  8-27-12(2) 361.19  8-27-12(3) 529.03       Rpld 529.06, 529.07 529.99  8-27-12(4) 1353.03  9- 9-13(1) 951.01-951.22, 951.99 10- 9-12(1)       Rpld 361.23, 361.24 10-22-12(1)       Rpld 969.01, 969.02, 969.99       Added 969.01-969.18 12-10-12(1) 752.04  3-11-13(1)       Rpld 970.01-970.03, 970.99       Added 970.01-970.10, 970.99  3-11-13(2) 774.37  3-11-13(2)       Rpld 774.01-774.38  3-25-13(1)       Added 534.01-534.06, 534.99  5-13-13(1)       Rpld 743.01-743.12  5-13-13(2) 751.03 751.12  5-13-13(3) 1751.02  5-13-13(4) 752.02  5-13-13(5) 1755.20       Rpld 1755.22  5-13-13(6) 705.03  5-13-13(7)       Rpld 739.01-739.25       Added 739.01-739.13  5-13-13(8)       Rpld 735.01-735.15, 735.99       Added 735.01-735.16, 735.99  5-23-13(1)       Added 502.01-502.07  7-22-13(1)       Added 533.19 10-15-13(1) 1711.01  8-12-13(1) 345.35  9- 9-13(4) 951.01-951.22, 951.99 11-12-13(1) 726.02 12- 9-13(1) 1735.01-1735.37 12-23-13(1) 147.01-147.12, 147.99  1-13-14(1)       Added 1111.01-1111.08  2-10-14(1)       Rpld 1349.01-1349.17       Added 1349A-1349J  3-24-14(1) 363.99  5-27-14(1) 201.03, 201.04  6-23-14(1)       Added 930.01-930.05       Added 935.01-935.20       Rpld 955.01-955.17       Added 955.18-955.20  6-23-14(4)       Added Art. 773, Preamble 773.01-773.03 773.15  7-28-14(1) 1723.04  7-28-14(2)       Added 106.01  7-28-14(3) 535.01-535.08, 535.99  8-11-14(1) 1509.01 11-24-14(1) 1359.01 11-24-14(2) 1357.01 12-22-14(1) 200.01-200.15  1-12-15(1)       Rpld 201.01-201.05  1-26-15(1) 373.05 373.07 373.13  1-26-15(2) 337.03  1-26-15(3) 375.01 375.03       Rpld 375.06  1-26-15(4) 361.28  4-13-15(1) 905.11  4-13-15(3) 1349A-1349J  4-13-15(4)       Added 115.01-115.04  4-13-15(5) 951.08  4-13-15(6) 1363.01       Rpld 1363.05  4-27-15(1)       Added 1315.02 763.       Added 1329.06 R.       Added 1331.06 S.       Added 1333.12 X.  5-11-15(1) 529.01  5-26-15(1)       Added 1315.02 738.       Added 1329.02 Z.       Rnbd 1329.02 Z.-CC.       as 1329.02 AA.-DD.       Added 1331.06 T.       Added 1333.02 S.       Rnbd 1333.02 S.-V.       as 1333.02 T.-W.  6- 8-15(1)       Added 521.06(i)  6- 8-15(2) 787.54  6-22-15(1) 787.16 763.02  7-13-15(1) 502.05  9-28-15(1) 772.04  9-28-15(2) 1353.03  9-28-15(3)       Added 1315.02 118.       Added 1315.02 247.       Added 1315.02 663.       Added 1327.05 W., X.       Added 1329.02 EE., FF.       Added 1329.06 S.       Added 1331.02 CC., DD.       Added 1331.06 U.       Added 1333.02 X.-Z.  9-28-15(4) 1341.22       Added 1341.50 11-23-15(1)       Added 1315.02 227. 1321.04 D. 1323.05 O. 1325.04 O.       Added 1341.51 11-23-15(2) 141.16 12-28-15(1) 1327.05 T.  1-11-16(1) 545.09 545.11  1-25-16(1) 1741.01-1741.11, 1741.99  1-25-16(2)       Added 202.20  2-22-16(1)       Added 1315.02 498.       Added 1329.06 T.       Added 1333.12 Y.       Added 1341.52  2-22-16(2)       Added 748.01-748.03, 748.99  2-22-16(3)       Added 545.14 545.99  4-11-16(1) 769.01 769.02  4-11-16(2) 933.13  4-25-16(1) 529.03 529.11  6-27-16(1) 1-4       Added Adopting ord., p. ix   1-25-16(3) 202.20   9-12-16(1) 951.08   9-12-16(2) 1711.01       Rpld 1711.09       Rpld 1711.99   9-12-16(3) 1509.01   9-26-16(1) Art. 1741(title) 1741.02-1741.05 1741.09   9-26-16(2)       Added 1743.01-1743.11, 1743.99 11-28-16(1)       Added 971.01-971.10 12-12-16(1) 749.02, 739.03 12-27-16(2) 933.22   4-10-17(1)       Added 960.01-960.06   5- 8-17(1)       Added 527.10   6-12-17(1) 191.01   9-11-17(1)       Added 549.01, 549.02, 549.99   9-25-17(1) 1739.01-1739.15, 1739.99 12-26-17(1) 521.07 521.09   1-22-18(1) 1760.01-1760.18   4- 9-18(1)       Added 1340.01-1340.10, 1340.99   4- 9-18(2)       Added 710.01-710.09  
