THE CODE OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO, WYOMING
The General Ordinances of Buffalo, Wyoming
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE COUNCIL
Nancy Ann Osborne, Assistant Planner
Buffalo-Johnson County Planning Office
This Codification was aided by a grant from the Old West Regional Commission authorized
under the Wyoming Community Technical Assistance Program.
PREFACE
This volume constitutes the 1982 revision and codification of the general ordinances of
Buffalo, Wyoming. The first revision contained ordinances up to and including Ordinance No.
758 passed March 7, 1972. The second revision contained ordinances up to and including
Ordinance No. 983.
The ordinances were codified, edited and researched by Nancy Ann Osborne and was aided
by a grant from the Old West Regional Commission authorized under the Wyoming Community
Technical Assistance Program.
Assistance and cooperation of the city officials, employees and Mr. Dennis Kirven, City
Attorney, was gratefully appreciated.
It should be noted that the book has been arranged in alphabetical order by chapter. Each
chapter has its own index for ease in locating particular subject matter. Footnotes appearing
throughout the Code refers to applicable state law or cross reference to other related provisions
in the Code. Historical citations appear at the end of each section enabling the user to
determine the ordinance from which the present section has been derived.
It is recognized that if any Code is to accomplish its intended purpose, it must be kept up to
date. Therefore, this Code has been set on a Compugraphic MDC computer disk. The
information is stored on the disk and can be recalled for any changes or corrections.
Nancy Ann Osborne
Assistant Planner
Buffalo-Johnson County Planning Office
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
Reorganization of Town of City of Buffalo
PART II
The Code
Chapter
1. General Provisions
2. Administration
2A. Airport Board – Repealed
2B. The Buffalo Trails Board
2C. Main Street Development Commission
2D. Buffalo Parks Board
3. Alcoholic Beverages
4. Animals and Fowl
4A. Bicycles
5. Buildings
5A. Building Contractors - Repealed
6. Circuses, Carnivals, Menageries and Concessions
7. Electricity - Repealed
8. Fire Department
9. Fire Prevention - Repealed
10. Garbage, Trash and Other Waste Matter
11. Gas - Repealed
12. Gasoline Distributors at Airport - Repealed
13. Motor Vehicles and Traffic
14. Municipal Court
15. Nuisances
16. Offenses - Miscellaneous
17. Parks and Playgrounds
Appendix – Parks and Playgrounds
18. Plumbing and Steam Fitting - Repealed
18A. Sales Tax – Repealed
18B. Salvage Yards and Salvage Dealers
19. Secondhand Dealers - Repealed
20. Streets and Sidewalks
21. Subdivisions and Approval of Roads
22. Taxicabs and Other Vehicles for Hire
23. Trading Stamps or Similar Devices - Repealed
24. Trailers and Trailer Courts
25. Transient Merchants and Religious or Charitable Permits
26. Tree Cutters
27. Water and Sewers
Appendix – Minimum Standards for Water Distribution and Sanitary Sewer Construction
28. Willow Grove Cemetery - Repealed
29. Zoning
Appendix – Floodway and Floodway Fringe Districts
PART 1
REORGANIZATION OF TOWN OF CITY OF BUFFALO
Resolution Abandoning Charter – Organization
Under General Laws
WHEREAS, The City of Buffalo, in the County of Johnson, State of Wyoming, a municipal corporation,
was heretofore organized and is now existing by virtue of a special charter heretofore granted to said
City of Buffalo by the Legislature of the State (then Territory) of Wyoming; and
WHEREAS, the said City of Buffalo desires to abandon such special charter and reorganize under the
general laws of the State of Wyoming, as provided by Article 13, Section 1 of the Constitution of said
State, and by an Act of the Twelfth State Legislature of the State of Wyoming, approved February 20,
1913, entitled “An Act authorizing certain cities and towns organized under a separate charter from the
Legislature to surrender their charter and organize under the provisions of the General Laws relative to
the incorporation of towns, and prescribing the method for so doing,” and
WHEREAS, it has been shown by the last general United States census, taken in the year 1910, that
the said City of Buffalo has a resident population of not less than one thousand nor more than thirty-five
hundred, to-wit, a population of one thousand three hundred sixty-eight (1,368) as more fully appears by
the certificate of E. Dana Durand, Director of the Census, which said certificate is in words and figures
following:
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND LABOR
BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
WASHINGTON
February 19, 1913,
I hereby certify, that according to the official count of the returns of the Thirteenth Census of the
United States, on file in the Bureau of the Census, the population of Buffalo Town, Johnson County,
Wyoming, is one thousand three hundred sixty-eight (1,368).
E. DANA DURAND,
Director of the Census.
WHEREAS, said City of Buffalo is entitled to be organized and to exist under the general laws of the
State of Wyoming, relating to the incorporation of towns, now therefore,
For the purpose of effecting the abandonment of the special charter of said City of Buffalo, and for the
purpose of effecting the reorganization thereof as above and heretofore stated and recited,
BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Trustees of the City of Buffalo, that the special charter granted to
the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, by the Legislature of the Territory, now State of Wyoming, be and the same
is abandoned, and that said City of Buffalo be and the same hereby is organized under the general laws
of the State of Wyoming relative to the incorporation of towns, with all of the powers, privileges and rights
granted to such towns under the laws of the State of Wyoming, and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that no right of property accrued to the municipality or to any person
shall be affected by such abandonment and reorganization, and all ordinances of the City of Buffalo now
in force, and not repugnant to the provisions of the general laws of the State of Wyoming shall remain
and continue in force until amended or repealed by the Mayor and council. (Resolution app. February 24,
1913.)
Proclamation of Governor.
WHEREAS, The City of Buffalo, Johnson County, Wyoming, a municipal corporation heretofore
organized and existing under and by virtue of a special charter granted to said City of Buffalo by the
Legislature of the State, then Territory, of Wyoming, and
WHEREAS, as shown by the last general United State census, said City of Buffalo has a resident
population of not less than one thousand nor more than thirty-five hundred, to-wit: A population of one
thousand three hundred sixty-eight, and
WHEREAS, said City of Buffalo did by resolution passed by the Board of Trustees and approved by
the Acting Mayor on February 24, 1913, abandon said charter and organize under the general laws of
the State of Wyoming, relative to the incorporation of towns as provided by an Act of the Twelfth State
Legislature approved February 20, 1913, entitled, “An Act authorizing certain cities and towns organized
under a separate charter from the Legislature to surrender their charter and organize under the
provisions of the general laws relative to the incorporation of towns, and prescribing the method for so
doing,” and
WHEREAS, said resolutions and the approval thereof have been duly certified to the undersigned
governor of the State of Wyoming, under the seal of said City of Buffalo,
Now, Therefore, I, Joseph M. Carey, Governor of the State of Wyoming, do hereby proclaim and
declare that the said City of Buffalo, Johnson County, Wyoming, a municipal corporation, is duly
organized under the provisions of the general laws of the State of Wyoming relative to the incorporation
of towns, with all the powers and obligations pertaining thereto.
Given under my hand and the great seal of the State, at the Capitol, in Cheyenne, this 4th day of
March A.D. 1913.
(Seal) JOSEPH M. CAREY
Governor
By the Governor:
FRANK L. HOUX
Secretary of State
By T.H. WESCOTT, Deputy
(RECORDED office of County Clerk, Johnson Co., Wyo.,
Book K. Misc. Rec. Pg. 366)
PART II
THE CODE
Chapter 1
General Provisions
§ 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
§ 1-3. Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
§ 1-4. Headlines of sections.
§ 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
§ 1-6. Official city datum plane established.
§ 1-7. Elevations with reference to datum plane.
§ 1-8. Corporate seal.
§ 1-9. Reasonable time or notice.
§ 1-10. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
SEC. 1-1. HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as
“The Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1982.”, and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the “Buffalo
City Code, 1982”.
SEC. 1-2. DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this Code and of other ordinances of the City of Buffalo, the following definitions and rules of
construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context
clearly requires otherwise:
Bond: When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
City: The words “the city”, “city” or “City of Buffalo” mean the Town of the City of Buffalo, in the County of Johnson, in
the State of Wyoming.
Computation of time: The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and
including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday, that day shall be excluded.
Council: The word “council” shall mean the Council of the Town of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
County: The words “the county” mean the County of Johnson, in the State of Wyoming.
Gender: Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.
In the city; in the corporate limits of the city: The words “in the city” or “in the corporate limits of the city” mean
and include any territory within the corporate limits of the Town of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, and the police
jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the City of Buffalo by
general or special act, except as otherwise specified.
Joint authority: All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.
Month: The word “month” means a calendar month.
Number: Words used in a singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular.
1-1
Oath: The word “oath” includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” are equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed”.
Or, and: The word “or” may be read as “and” and the word “and” as “or”, where the sense requires it.
Owner: The word “owner”, applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of the whole, but any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land, and shall include
any agent of such owner, and where such owner is a body corporate it shall include the managing agent or officer
within the City of Buffalo.
Person: The word “person” includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any
other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
Personal Property: The words “personal property” include every species of property, except real property.
Preceding, following: The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property: The word “property” includes real, personal and mixed property.
Real Property: The words “real property” include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Shall, may: The word “shall” is mandatory. The word “may” is permissive.
Sidewalk: The word “sidewalk” means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature, subscription: The word “signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when the person cannot write,
when his name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness.
State: The words “the state” mean the State of Wyoming.
Street: The word “street” means and includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the City of Buffalo.
Tenant, occupant: The words “tenant” and “occupant”, applied to a building or land, mean any person who occupies
the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Writing, written: The words “writing” and “written” include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of
representing words and letters.
Year: The word “year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
SEC. 1-3. PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the ordinances existing at the time
of the adoption in this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
SEC. 1-4. HEADLINES OF SECTIONS.
The headlines of the sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section; nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its headlines, is amended or re-enacted.
SEC. 1-5. SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
If for any reason any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code, or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance, is declared unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Code.
1-2
SEC. 1-6. OFFICIAL CITY DATUM PLANE ESTABLISHED.
The official city datum plane, or plane of reference for all elevations in the City of Buffalo, is hereby fixed at a
horizontal plane six hundred and thirty five feet below the top of the copper plate on the government bench mark or
monument established by the United States Geological Survey, and which is situated in the Court House Square of
the City of Buffalo; which official city datum plane will then be at a distance of approximately four thousand feet above
the mean level of the sea. (R.O. 1955, §25-1.)
SEC. 1-7. ELEVATIONS WITH REFERENCE TO DATUM PLANE.
All official elevations hereafter established in the City of Buffalo shall be described with reference to their elevation
as compared to the official city datum plane as described in the preceding section, their elevations above the official
city datum plane being stated in feet and decimal parts of a foot. No grade or official elevation shall be established
other than by ordinance and in the manner described in this section. (R.O. 1955, § 25-2)
SEC. 1-8. CORPORATE SEAL.1
A seal, the impression of which shall be as follows: In the center a cut of the male buffalo, bearing upon the right
side thereof the word “Seal” and around the outer edge the words “City of” and “State of Wyoming,” such cut
expressing the name of the City of Buffalo shall be and the same is hereby adopted and declared to be the seal of the
City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, §2-1)
1. For state law as to power of town to have, use, etc., a common seal,
See W.S., 1977, §15-1-103.
SEC. 1-9. REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE.
In any case where any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the City of Buffalo shall require any act to
be done in a reasonable time, or reasonable notice to be given to any person, such reasonable time or notice shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt execution of such duty or compliance with such
notice. (R.O. 1955, §14-8)
SEC. 1-10. EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not
be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it be therein expressly so provided.
(R.O. 1955, §14-6)
1-3
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
Article I. Rules for Government of Council.
§ 2-1. Time and place of regular meetings.
§ 2-2. Special meetings.
§ 2-3. Presiding officer.
§ 2-4. Order of Business.
§ 2-5. Contents, procedure, etc., of papers presented.
§ 2-6. Voting of members.
§ 2-7. Mayor entitled to vote; quorum.
§ 2-8. “Ayes” or “noes” taken.
§ 2-9. Disposition of claims, etc., against city.
§ 2-10. Approval of bonds.
§ 2-11. Ordinances, resolutions and bylaws – Introduction; identification.
§ 2-12. Same – Style; publication.
§ 2-13. Same – Reading.
§ 2-14. Same – Execution and recordation.
Article II. Officers and Employees Generally.
§ 2-15. Appointment of officers.
§ 2-16. Term of elective officers.
§ 2-16.1. Filling Vacancies
§ 2-17. Appointive officers.
§ 2-17.1. Hearing procedure for appointed official.
§ 2-18. Council to fix salaries of employees.
§ 2-18.1. Indemnification and reimbursement.
Article III. City Attorney.
§ 2-19. Appointment; Term.
§ 2-20. Oath and bond.
§ 2-21. Duties generally.
§ 2-22. Compensation.
Article IV. City Clerk.
§ 2-23. Appointment; Term.
§ 2-24. Duties generally.
§ 2-25. Compensation; Devotion to duty.
§ 2-26. Bond.
Article V. City Treasurer.
§ 2-27. Duties.
§ 2-28. Compensation.
§ 2-29. Bond.
Article VI. City Marshal.
§ 2-30. Appointment; Term.
§ 2-31. Duties generally.
§ 2-32. Compensation.
§ 2-33. Deputy marshal.
2-1
ARTICLE I. RULES FOR GOVERNMENT OF COUNCIL
SEC. 2-1. TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.1
The stated meetings of the Mayor and Town Council shall be held at the Council Chambers at City Hall, Buffalo,
Wyoming, on the first and third Tuesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. (Ord. 1030, 6/85, R.O. 1344, 2/2011)
1. For state law as to regular meetings of town councils, see W.S. 1977, §15-1-105.
SEC. 2-2. SPECIAL MEETINGS.2
The Mayor and any two Councilmen, or a majority of the Council, shall have the power to call special meetings of
the Council, the object and purpose of which shall be submitted to the Council, in writing, and the call and object, as
well as the disposition thereof shall be made a matter of record upon the journal; provided, that no vote of the Council
shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless at such meeting there shall be present as large a
number of Councilmen as were present when such vote was taken.
Whenever a special meeting of the Council shall be called, each member of the Council, together with the Mayor,
shall be notified of such meeting, in writing, by the City Clerk, and the Mayor and Councilmen shall each accept
service of such notice by his signature endorsed thereon, except only in the event the Mayor or any member of the
Council shall not be available for his acceptance of service as provided in this section. In the event the Mayor or any
Councilman shall refuse to accept service of such special meeting, that fact shall be reported to the Council by the
City Clerk and noted upon the journal. In the case of any special meeting, a copy of the notice thereof, together with
all endorsements thereon, shall be entered upon the journal of the proceedings, and such entry shall be presumptive
evidence of the truth thereof. (R.O. 1955, §13-12, 13-13)
2. For state law as to special meetings of town Councils, see W.S. 1977, §15-1-105.
SEC. 2-3. PRESIDING OFFICER.
The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the Council to meet and shall immediately call the
members to order and may at the instance of any two members order the attendance of absentees. In the absence of
the Mayor, and where there shall be a quorum present, the Council shall elect from their number an acting Mayor,
who shall hold the chair until the return of the Mayor. (R.O. 1955, §13-2.)
SEC. 2-4. ORDER OF BUSINESS.
Section 2-4 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 951, §2. 6/81)
SEC. 2-5. CONTENTS, PROCEDURE, ETC., OF PAPERS PRESENTED.
All petitions, memorials, resolutions or other papers previous to their being handed to the City Clerk shall have a
brief statement of their contents endorsed upon them, together with the name of the member presenting the same.
No application shall be entertained unless the same is in writing. Every member presenting a petition or memorial
shall give a brief verbal statement of the contents thereof. If requested by a member, the same shall be read by the
Clerk previous to any further order being taken thereon. (R.O. 1955, §13-4)
SEC. 2-6. VOTING OF MEMBERS.
Every member present when a question is put shall vote, unless the Council shall, for special reasons, excuse him.
(R.O. 1955, §13-5)
SEC. 2-7. MAYOR ENTITLED TO VOTE; QUORUM.
The Mayor in all cases shall be entitled to a vote. The Mayor, together with any two members of the Council, or
any three members of the Council in the absence of the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. (R.O. 1955, §13-6)
2-2
SEC. 2-8. “AYES” AND “NOES” TAKEN.
The ayes and the noes shall be taken and recorded upon any question before the Council upon the call of any two
members and it shall not be in order for any member to explain the vote during the calling of the ayes and noes.
(R.O. 1955, §13-10)
SEC. 2-9. DISPOSITION OF CLAIMS, ETC., AGAINST CITY. 3
No account, claim or other demand against the City of Buffalo shall be allowed and directed paid unless the same
shall be examined and certified to be correct by the Council. (R.O. 1955, §13-9)
3. For state law as to claims against the town, see W.S. 1977, §15-2-205.
SEC. 2-10. APPROVAL OF BONDS.
All official bonds presented for approval shall be approved as to sufficiency by the Mayor and as to form by the
City Attorney, at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the Council. (R.O. 1955, §13-11)
SEC. 2-11. ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND BYLAWS 4
Every proposed ordinance, resolution or bylaw shall be introduced by the Mayor or one of the Councilmen, and for
the purpose of identification, may be given a number. (R.O. 1955, §13-15.)
4. As to effect of repeal of ordinances, see § 1-10 of this Code.
SEC. 2-12. SAME STYLE; PUBLICATION. 5
The style of all Ordinances shall be:
‘BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO, WYOMING:’
Every ordinance, unless in case of emergency, shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City. Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon proclamation of the Mayor, and as
soon thereafter as is practicable, they shall be published in the manner required of other ordinances.
(Ord. 822, §1. 12/77)
5. For similar state law, see W.S. 1977, §15-1-115, 15-1-116.
SEC. 2-13. SAME – READING.
Section 2-23 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1984, is hereby repealed. (R.O. 1955, §13-16)(R.O.
1280, § 13, 4/07)
SEC. 2-14. SAME – EXECUTION AND RECORDATION. 6
All ordinances, resolutions and bylaws of the City of Buffalo, after their introduction, reading and passage shall,
within a reasonable time thereafter, be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, and recorded in a book to
be kept for that purpose. On the passage of any ordinance, resolution or bylaw, the ayes and nays shall be taken and
entered on the journal. (R.O. 1955, §13-17)
6. For similar state law, see W.S. 1977, §15-1-106, 15-1-115, 15-1-116.
ARTICLE II. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY. 7
7. For state law as to officers and employees generally, see W.S. 1977, §15-2-102.
SEC. 2-15. APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS. 8
It shall be the duty of the Mayor at the first meeting of the Council in each municipal year of his election or as soon
thereafter as possible, to send the Council nominations for the several offices provided by this Code and other
ordinances of the City of Buffalo and the laws of the state. i The Council shall, at the first meeting, proceed to
consider the nominations sent to them by the Mayor, and to reject or confirm them, and notify the Mayor of their
action. In case of the rejection of any of the nominations, the Mayor shall, upon receiving notice of such rejection, at
once place new nominations before the Council and continue to do so until some person is confirmed for each of the
offices. (R.O. 1955, §6-5)
8. See W.S. 1977, §15-2-102.
2-3
SEC. 2-16. TERM OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
The term of office for the Mayor of the City of Buffalo shall be four (4) years. The term of office for City
Councilmen shall be four (4) years. (Ord. 908, §1. 10/78; R.O. 1264 § 1. 07/06)
SEC. 2-16.1. PROCEDURE FOR FILLING VACANCIES.
1. Any vacancy on the Buffalo City Council shall be filled by the City Council by appointment of a temporary
successor to serve until a successor for the remainder of the unexpired term is elected at the next general municipal
election and is qualified and takes office on the first Monday of the following January unless a vacancy in a four-year
term of office occurs less than forty days before a primary election, in which event the temporary successor appointed
shall serve until the first Monday in January following the second general election thereafter.
2. The City Council at a regular council meeting, or at a special council meeting called for the purpose thereof,
will declare the office of mayor or of a councilman vacant due to resignation, death or for conditions specified in
Wyoming Statute § 15-1-107 and § 22-18-101, or failure to meet residency requirements per Wyoming Statute § 22-
23-102, with the exception of Wyoming Statute §15-1-107(b) which shall not be considered as establishing a vacancy.
A vacancy shall exist in the office of mayor or councilman if during the term for which elected any mayor or
councilman fails to attend six (6) or more consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the council without an excused
absence. The City Council shall, by majority vote, determine whether any absence of a council member from a
regularly scheduled council meeting is excused or unexcused.
3. The Buffalo City Council shall determine by a majority vote whether and when a vacancy occurs in the office,
and who will fill the vacancy created.
SEC. 2-17. APPOINTIVE OFFICERS. 9
In addition to the officers of the City of Buffalo required to be appointed by law, there shall be a City Attorney, a
Police Judge, and such inspectors as may be required, all of which officers shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and
with the consent of the Council. Such officers shall hold their offices for the term of two years and until their
successors are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed as provided by law. (R.O. 1955, §5-3)
9. For state law as to power of Council over appointive officers, see W.S. 1977,
§15-1-103 (xxxv). See also, W.S. 1977, §15-1-107, 15-2-102.
SEC. 2-17.1. HEARING PROCEDURE FOR AN APPOINTED OFFICIAL WHEN REMOVED OR DISCHARGED
FROM OFFICE.
I. Purpose:
As authorized by §15-2-102, Wyoming Statutes Annotated, 1977 (Laws 1984, Ch. 34, §2), the purpose of this
grievance procedure is to provide an adequate and just means by which an appointed official may object to remove or
discharge from the appointed position by the Mayor and/or City Council.
II. Notification of Removal or Discharge:
Notification of removal or discharge of an appointed official must be in writing and presented to that appointed
official in person or by mail.
III. Hearing Procedure:
Any appointed official having a grievance regarding the removal or discharge of that official shall have a right
to process such objection in accordance with the following provision:
An appointed official may present his/her objection in writing to the City Council within five (5) days of
written notification of removal or discharge. The City Council shall convene a meeting to consider the
objection within fifteen (15) days of its receipt.
The appointed official shall be entitled to appear in person to present objections to the City Council, to
examine any evidence and to confront any witnesses whose testimony will be considered by the City Council.
The Mayor shall also have the right to be heard.
The City Council and Mayor shall then approve or disapprove the removal or discharge of the appointed
official by majority vote. The decision of the City Council and Mayor shall be final. (Ord. 1025, §1. 10/84)
SEC. 2-18. COUNCIL TO FIX SALARIES OF EMPLOYEES 10
The Council of the City of Buffalo shall have the power, from time to time, to fix, establish, change and raise or
lower the salary, wages, pay or other compensation of any, or all employees, of any title, rank or grade, who shall be
employed, retained or paid by the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, §5-7) 2-4
10. For state law authorizing the Council to fix compensation of officers and
employees, see W.S. 1977, §55-1-103 (xxxv), 15-2-103.
SEC. 2-18.1. INDEMNIFICATION AND REIMBURSEMENT.
1. Power to Indemnify – Third Party Actions:
The Mayor and City Council shall have power to indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to
be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming,) by reason of the
fact that the person is or was a public official, officer, employee or agent or is or was serving at the request of the City
as a public official, officer, employee or agent of any board or commission, or other agency of the City, against
expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines and amounts actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in
connection with the defense or settlement of such action, suit or proceeding if that person acted in good faith and in a
manner he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the City, and, with respect to
any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. The termination of
any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its
equivalent shall not of itself create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith and in a manner which he or
she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the City, and, with respect to any criminal
action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that the conduct was unlawful.
2. Determination of Entitlement to Indemnification:
Any indemnification under Section I above (unless ordered by a court) shall be made by the City only as
authorized in the specific case upon a determination that indemnification of the public official, officer, employee or
agent is proper in the circumstances because the person has met the applicable standard of conduct set forth in
Section I above. Such determination shall be made by the Mayor and City Council by a majority vote of a quorum
consisting of members who were not parties to such action, suit or proceeding; or if such a quorum is not obtainable
or, even if obtainable, a quorum of disinterested Council persons so directs, by independent legal counsel in a written
opinion.
3. Advancement of Expenses:
Expenses incurred in defending a civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding or the deductible portion of any
applicable insurance premium, may be paid by the City in advance of the final disposition of such action, suite or
proceeding as authorized in the manner provided in Section 2 above upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of
the public official, officer, employee or agent to repay such amount unless it shall ultimately be determined that the
person is entitled to be indemnified by the City as authorized herein.
4. Saying Clause:
The indemnification provided herein shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those
indemnified may be entitled under any agreement, vote of Mayor and City Council or otherwise, both as to action in
his or her official capacity and as to action in another capacity while holding such office, and shall continue as to a
person who has ceased to be a public official, officer, employee or agent and shall inure to the benefit of the heirs,
executors and administrators of such a person.
5. Insurance:
The Mayor and City Council shall have power to purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who
is or was a public official, officer, employee or agent of the City, or is or was serving at the request of the City as an
officer, employee or agent of a board, commission or other City agency against any liability asserted against that
person and incurred by him or her in any such capacity or arising out of his or her status as such, whether or not the
City would have the power to indemnify the person against such liability under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1034, 2/86)
ARTICLE III. CITY ATTORNEY.
SEC. 2-19. APPOINTMENT; TERM.
The City Attorney shall be appointed as provided in Sec. 2-15 and 2-17 and shall hold office for the term of one
year and until his successor is appointed and qualified. (R.O. 1955, §7-5)
2-5
SEC. 2-20. OATH AND BOND.
There shall be a City Attorney, who shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, subscribe the oath required
of other City officers, and shall give a bond to the City of Buffalo in the penal sum of five hundred dollars, with
sufficient sureties, to be approved by the Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office.
Such oath and bond shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. (R.O. 1955, §7-1)
SEC. 2-21. DUTIES GENERALLY.
A. The City Attorney shall, as part of his office, perform the following duties and he shall negotiate, with the City
Council, his compensation for the performance of these duties as provided for by Sec. 2-22.
1. He shall appear in the District Court on behalf of the City of Buffalo in all suits and proceedings which may
be pending or arise in the State wherein the City of Buffalo or the people thereof may be a party.
2. He shall prosecute or defend against all appeals or writs of error, which may be removed from the District
Court of the County wherein the City of Buffalo is located to the Supreme Court of the State, in all cases where the
City of Buffalo or the people thereof is a party.
B. The City Attorney shall, as part of his office, perform the following duties and he shall be compensated for
these duties by his annual salary and he shall receive no additional, negotiated compensation for the performance
thereof.
1. He shall appear in the Police Court of the City of Buffalo or in the District Court of the County in all
prosecutions for the violation of this Code or other ordinances of the City of Buffalo.
2. He shall, upon request of any elected official, give his opinion, in writing, upon all questions of law having
reference to the duties of such elected official which may be submitted, and shall file and preserve in his office and
with the City Clerk a copy of all such opinions. He shall, upon request, attend all meetings of the Mayor and City
Council, and advise them concerning procedural matters and questions of law arising at said meetings.
3. He shall examine the bonds offered by every City officer, as such City officer, before such bonds are
approved, and shall report, in writing, whether or not such bonds are executed as required by law, this Code or other
ordinances. (Ord. 934, §2. 9/79)
SEC. 2-22. COMPENSATION.
The City Attorney shall receive an annual salary in the amount as may be determined by the Council and in
addition the City Attorney shall receive an hourly rate to be negotiated between the Mayor, the City Council and the
City Attorney, and upon the initiation of each contested civil action. Upon completion of negotiations for said hourly
rate, the Mayor and City Council shall, by resolution, acknowledge said hourly rate. Whenever the City Attorney may
be called upon to render services for the City of Buffalo pursuant to law or the ordinances of the City of Buffalo, away
from the City of Buffalo, he shall receive his actual and necessary traveling expenses in attending to such services, in
addition to his salary as City Attorney and the negotiated hourly rate he shall receive for contested cases.
(Ord. 934, §1. 9/79)
ARTICLE IV. CITY CLERK
SEC. 2-23. APPOINTMENT; TERM.
There shall be a City Clerk, who shall be appointed as provided in Sec. 2-15, who shall hold office for the term of
two years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. (R.O. 1955, §8-1)
SEC. 2-24. DUTIES GENERALLY.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep the corporate seal, papers and books belonging to the City of Buffalo,
to attend the meetings of the Council and to keep a journal of all their proceedings; also, to keep the record of all
ordinances passed by the Council which journal and record, after the approval of the same, shall be signed by the
Mayor and attested by the City Clerk; to issue all licenses authorized by the Council, this Code or other ordinances of
the City of Buffalo upon payment of the required fee by the applicant; to attest all warrants, bonds and licenses issued
in pursuance to the orders and ordinances of the Council; to affix the corporate seal thereto; to keep an account, in a
suitable book, under an appropriate head, of all warrants drawn upon the treasury, and the amount thereof, to receive
2-6
and file applications for sewer permits and water licenses and sign the same under seal; to collect all the water
licenses and water rents and all fines and penalties arising under this Code or other ordinances of the City of Buffalo,
respecting the use of the City water and City water system, and shall turn over to the City Treasurer all money so
collected on the first day of each month, or more often, taking the treasurer’s receipt therefore. He shall likewise
perform such other duties as may, from time to time, be imposed upon him by the Council or such things as he may
be instructed to do by the Mayor. (R.O. 1955, §8-2)
SEC. 2-25. COMPENSATION; DEVOTION TO DUTY.
The City Clerk shall receive as full compensation for all duties an annual salary in an amount as may be
determined by the Council. The Clerk shall devote his entire time and attention to the duties of his office, to the
exclusion of any other business. (R.O. 1955, §8-5)
SEC. 2-25. BOND.
Before entering upon his duties as such officer, the City Clerk shall give bond to the City of Buffalo, in a sum
determined by the Mayor and Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office, both as City
Clerk and City Treasurer, which bond shall be approved by the Mayor. (Ord. 951, §3. 6/81)
ARTICLE V. CITY TREASURER.11
11. For state law as to treasurer’s accounts, etc., see W.S. 1977, §15-2-206.
As to publication of treasurer’s report, see W.S. 1977, §15-2-207.
SEC. 2-27. DUTIES.
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to receive all money derived for the benefit of the City of Buffalo from any
and every source, and disburse the same only on proper orders, signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk
and having affixed thereto the corporate seal. He shall keep an accurate and full account of all receipts and
expenditures in a book provided for that purpose. The Treasurer shall pay all orders drawn on the City Treasury in the
order of their presentation, and shall keep a register of all orders and drafts in a book provided for that purpose. All
orders, when presented for payment to the Treasurer, shall be numbered by him upon the back from one,
consecutively in the order of their presentation and corresponding to a number of the same kind in the record of the
same, kept by the Treasurer. When any warrant is presented for payment and is not paid for want of funds, the
Treasurer shall endorse, in addition to the registered number, the date of presentation across the back of each order
or warrant and the reason why not paid, and the holder shall be entitled to receive interest thereon from the date of
the endorsement until such time as such warrant or order is paid.
Provided, that the Council may at any time when there is money in the Treasury for the payment of such warrants
instruct the Treasurer to call such warrants in the number and order in which they should be paid according to their
date of presentation. Interest on all such warrants so called shall cease after one week from the date of their being so
called and the call for such warrants shall be made by the Treasurer by advertisement for one week in some
newspaper printed in the City of Buffalo and by posting a copy of such notice in the door of the building where the
Council shall hold its regular meetings. The City Treasurer shall write, print or stamp across the face of each warrant
or order the date of payment, preceded by the word “paid”, and affix his name as Treasurer thereof.
He shall at all times keep his books as Treasurer open for inspection of the Mayor and the members of the
Council, and shall furnish them when required with a full statement of all receipts, expenditures and disbursements
with such other information relative thereto as they may require, and perform such other duties as may be required of
him by the Council, the laws and ordinances of the City of Buffalo. All warrants and orders on the Treasurer shall
have specified therein the service or indebtedness, for what and the fund from which the same was drawn.
(R.O. 1955, §9-1)
SEC. 2-28. COMPENSATION.
The City Treasurer shall receive as compensation for his services as such Treasurer an annual salary to be
determined by the Council, and he shall receive no other or further compensation whatsoever, for his services.
(R.O. 1955, §9-2)
2-7
SEC. 2-29. BONDS.
The City Treasurer shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give bond to the City of Buffalo, a sum to be
determined by the Mayor and Council, for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. If the City Treasurer and
the City Clerk are the same person, only one bond will be required. (Ord. 951, §4. 6/81)
ARTICLE VI. CITY MARSHAL
SEC. 2-30. APPOINTMENT; TERM. 12
There shall be a City Marshal, who shall be appointed as provided in Sec. 2-15, who shall hold office for two years,
and until his successor is appointed and qualified. (R.O. 1955, §10-1)
12. For state law as to appointment of City Marshal, see W.S. 1977, §15-2-102.
As to creation of office, see W.S. 1977, §15-1-103.
SEC. 2-31. DUTIES GENERALLY.
The City Marshal shall possess the same powers and be subject to the same liabilities possessed and conferred
by statute upon peace officers, in executing the orders of the Council, and in enforcing this Code, other bylaws and
ordinances of the City of Buffalo; he shall be Chief of Police, and shall at all times have power to make and order
arrests with proper process, and for any offense against the ordinances of the City of Buffalo or the laws of the state,
and bring the offender to trial before the proper officer, to arrest in all cases provided by law. The City Marshal shall
further prepare and submit, at the beginning of his term of office, proposed rules and regulations governing law
enforcement employees. The rules and regulations shall be entitled the “Rules and Regulations of the Buffalo Police
Department”. These rules and regulations shall be reviewed by the Mayor and City Council and upon finalization,
shall be adopted by the Mayor and City Council and approved by the City Marshal.
(Ord. 1220, §1 - 2/03)
SEC. 2-32. COMPENSATION.
The City Marshall shall receive as full compensation for his services an annual salary to be determined by the
Council. (R.O. 1955, §106)
SEC. 2-33. DEPUTY MARSHAL.
The Council may, in its discretion, retain the services of a Deputy Marshal, whose duties shall be defined by the
Council from time to time. (R.O. 1955, §10-7)
2-8
i
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES1
1. For state law authorizing the town to regulate a license, tax and prohibit saloons,
see W.S. 1977, §15-1-103 (xiv). For detailed licensing and regulatory
authorizations, see W.S. 1977, § 12-2-101.
As to driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor, see Sec. 13-10 of this
Code. As to intoxication generally, see Sec. 16-23.
§ 3-1. Purpose and public policy of regulations.
§ 3-1.1. Definitions.
§ 3-2. Number of licenses in effect; existing licenses.
§ 3-3. Retail license fee.
§ 3-4. Revocation of licenses.
§ 3-5. Hours of sale; enforcement.
§ 3-6. Regulations concerning minors under 21 years of age.
§ 3-7. Sale, etc., to habitual drunkards.
§ 3-8. Definition of retail liquor licenses.
§ 3-9. Restrictions and limitations on sales under retail liquor licenses.
§ 3-10. Consumption and possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages upon city streets, sidewalks,
etc.
§ 3-11 Adoption of State Alcohol Beverage Laws.
§ 3-12 Standards in Association with the Sale and Possession of Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 3-13 Catering and Malt Beverage Permits.
§ 3-14 Right of Entry – Inspection.
§ 3-15 Duty to Maintain Order.
§ 3-16 Minors Warning Notice.
§ 3-17 Administrative Fee.
§ 3-18 Liquor License Revocation and Renewal.
SEC. 3-1. PURPOSE AND PUBLIC POLICY OF REGULATIONS.2
For the protection of the welfare, health and safety of the people of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, it is hereby
declared to be the public policy of the City of Buffalo that the retail sale of alcoholic and malt beverages shall be
regulated to the extent of prohibiting all sales thereof, except as hereinafter provided, and no retail sale of such
alcoholic or malt beverages may be consummated in the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, except in compliance with the
provisions hereof. It is further declared to be the purpose of this Chapter and the policy of the City of Buffalo,
Wyoming, to act in accordance with and comply with all State laws relating to alcoholic beverages and specifically
Title 12, Alcoholic Beverages, Wyoming Statutes, Annotated, 1977, as amended. (Ord. 923, §1, 6/79)
2. For similar state law see W.S. 1977, §12-1-101.
SEC. 3-1.1. DEFINITIONS.
a) As used in this Chapter:
i) “Alcoholic liquor” means any spirituous or fermented fluid, substance or compound other than malt beverage
intended for beverage purposes which contains more than one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume;
ii) “Building” means a roofed and walled structure built or set in place for permanent use;
iii) “Club” means any of the following organizations:
A) A post, charter, camp or other local unit composed only of veterans and its duly organized auxiliary,
chartered by the Congress of the United States for patriotic, fraternal or benevolent purposes and, as the owner,
lessee or occupant, operates an establishment for these purposes within the state;
3-1
B) A charter, lodge or other local unit of an American national fraternal organization and, as the owner,
lessee or occupant, operates an establishment for fraternal purposes within the state. As used in this subparagraph,
an American fraternal organization means an organization actively operating in not less than thirty-six (36) states or
having been in active continuous existence for not less than twenty (20) years, but does not mean a college fraternity;
C) A hall or building association of a local unit specified in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph,
of which all of the capital stock is owned by the local unit or its members, operating clubroom facilities for the local
unit;
D) A golf club having more than fifty (50) bona fide members and owning, maintaining or operating a
bona fide golf course together with a clubhouse;
E) A social club with more than one hundred (100) bona fide members who are residents of the county
in which it is located, owning, maintaining or operating club quarters, incorporated and operating solely as a non-profit
corporation under the laws of this state and qualified as a tax exempt organization under the Internal Revenue
Service Code and having been continuously operating for a period of not less than one (1) year. The club shall have
had during this one (1) year period a bona fide membership paying dues of at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
year as recorded by the secretary of the club, quarterly meetings and an actively engaged membership carrying out
the objects of the club. A social club shall, upon applying for a license, file with the licensing authority and the
commission, a true copy of its by-laws and shall further, upon applying for a renewal of its license, file with the
licensing authority and the commission a detailed statement of its activities during the preceding year which were
undertaken or furthered in pursuit of the objects of the club together with an itemized statement of amounts expended
for such activities. Club members, at the time of application for a limited retail liquor license pursuant to W.S. 1977,
§12-3-301, shall be in good standing by having paid at least one (1) full year in dues;
F) Club does not mean college fraternities or labor unions.
iv) “Council” means the City Council of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming;
v) “Commission” means the Wyoming Liquor Commission;
vi) “Drug store” means space in a building maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where
drugs and medicines are sold and prescriptions compounded and where a registered pharmacist is regularly
employed;
vii) “Intoxicating liquor”, “alcoholic liquor”, “alcoholic beverage” and “spirituous liquor” are construed as
synonymous in meaning and definition;
viii) “Licensee” means a person holding a:
A) Retail liquor license;
B) Limited retail liquor license;
C) Resort liquor license;
D) Malt beverage permit;
E) Restaurant liquor license;
F) Catering permit
G) Open Container Permit: or
H) Bar and Grill Liquor License.
(RO 1390 6/17; RO 1391 3/18)
ix) “Licensing authority” means the governing body of an incorporated city, town, or country in Wyoming with
the responsibility to issue, control and administer a particular license, or the commission;
x) “Malt beverage” means any fluid, substance or compound intended for beverage purposes manufactured
from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute therefore, containing more than one percent (1%) of alcohol by
volume;
xi) “Person” includes an individual person, partnership, corporation or association;
xii) “Resident” means a domiciled resident and citizen of Wyoming for a period not less than one (1) year who
has not claimed residency elsewhere for any purpose within a one (1) year period immediately preceding the date of
application for any license or permit authorized under this title; 3-2
xiii) “Restaurant” means space in a building maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where
individually priced meals are prepared and served primarily for on-premise consumption and where the primary
source of revenue from the operation is from the sale of food and not from the sale of alcoholic or malt beverages.
This means that the building shall have a dining room or rooms, a kitchen and the number and kinds of employees
necessary for the preparing, cooking and serving of meals in order to satisfy the licensing authority that the space is
intended for use as a full service restaurant. The service of only fry orders or such food and victuals, as sandwiches,
hamburgers or salads shall not be deemed a restaurant for the purpose of this section;
xiv) “Sell” or “sale” includes offering for sale, trafficking in, bartering, delivering or dispensing and pouring for
value, exchanging for goods, services or patronage or an exchange in any way other than purely gratuitously. Every
delivery of any alcoholic liquor or malt beverage made otherwise than by gift constitutes a sale;
xv) “This section” or “Chapter” refers to Chapter 3 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming. (Ord. 923, §2,
6/79)
SEC. 3-2. NUMBER OF LICENSES IN EFFECT; EXISTING LICENSES.3
The total number of liquor licenses in effect at any time in the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, shall be limited in
accordance with the laws of the State of Wyoming then in effect. (Ord. 923, § 3, 6/79)
3. For state law in connection with this section, see W.S. 1977, §12-2-101,
12-2-102 and 12-2-104.
SEC. 3-3. LICENSE FEES.
a) Fees for various liquor licenses, except retail liquor licenses, which may be issued by the City of Buffalo,
Wyoming, shall be as follows:
Type of License Annual Fee
Limited Retail Liquor License ………………………….. 300.00 annually
Resort Liquor License …………………………. . 3,000.00 annually
Restaurant Liquor License …………………………. 1,000.00 annually
Special Occasion Malt Beverage Permit ………….. 10.00 per permit
Catering Permit …………………………………….. 10.00 per permit
Open Container Permit ………………………………….. 10.00 per permit
Bar and Grill Liquor License ……………….………….. 1,500.00 annually
Retail Liquor License …………………………………. 1,500.00 annually
Every person holding a liquor license issued by the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, shall pay the license fee annually
and in advance for said license. (Ord. 1070, § 1, 1/89; RO 1390, 6/17; RO 1391 3/18)
SEC. 3-4. REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
a) Any violation of Chapter 3 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1980, as amended or any violation of
Title 12 of the Wyoming Statutes, 1977, as amended, by any licensee, employee or agent thereof, is sufficient cause
for suspension or revocation of the license of the licensee. (Ord. 923, § 4, 6/79)
b) In a proceeding for revocation of a liquor license and when a licensee is found guilty of violating any section of
Chapter 3 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1980, as amended, or Title 12 of Wyoming Statutes, 1977, as
amended, the City Council may, if it appears advisable to revoke the license, suspend the license for a period not to
exceed the balance of the term for which the license was issued, and the suspension shall not, of itself, disqualify the
license holder for renewal at the end of the license term. (Ord. 949, § 2, 5/81)
c) Revocation proceedings initiated by the City Council shall be in accordance with the Wyoming Administrative
Procedure Act. The administrative procedure shall be subject to judicial review under W.S. 1977, § 9-4-114 except
that the review shall not operate to stay a revocation order of the Commission during the pendency of the District
Court proceeding or during a later appeal to the Supreme Court. Should the license of a defendant expire during the
pendency of appeal in any of the courts of this State, no new or renewal license shall be granted by the licensing
authority to defendant pending the outcome of the appeal. In the event the license of a licensee is revoked all license
fees paid by the licensee shall be declared forfeited by the City Council and such action for revocation shall be taken
only when the violation or complaint against any licensee is brought before the Council by one of the members
thereof, or by the Chief of Police, or some other authorized peace officer of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, or upon
affidavit signed and sworn to by some responsible citizen of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 923, § 5, 6/79)
3-3
SEC. 3-5. HOURS OF SALE; ENFORCEMENT.
a) All persons holding a liquor license or permit issued by the City of Buffalo shall close the Licensed Building and
cease the sale of both alcoholic and malt beverages promptly at the hour of two (2:00) a.m. each day, and keep the
same closed until six (6:00) a.m., and the licensee shall clear the Licensed Building of all persons other than
employees no later than two-thirty (2:30) a.m., EXCEPT that such places may open the Licensed Building on Sunday
no earlier than ten (10:00) a.m. and shall close the Licensed Building and cease the sale of alcoholic and malt
beverages not later than twelve o’clock (12:00) a.m. (midnight, the next day), and the licensee shall clear the
Licensed Building of all persons other than employees no later than twelve-thirty (12:30) a.m. (Ord. 1150, § 1, 6/96;
RO 1390, 6/17)
b) All sales of alcoholic and malt beverages authorized by a restaurant liquor license shall cease at the time food
sales and services cease or at the hour specified in subparagraph (A) above if food sales and services extend beyond
the hours specified therein. (Ord. 923, § 6, 6/79; RO 1342, 10/10)
SEC. 3-6. REGULATIONS CONCERNING MINORS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
a) Except as provided otherwise by law, no licensee or agent, employee or server thereof shall permit any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years to enter or remain in the Licensed Building where alcoholic or malt beverages
are being dispensed in an establishment that is primarily intended for on-premise consumption of alcoholic and malt
beverages, unless the establishment operates a commercial kitchen or persons under the age of twenty-one (21) year
are accompanied by an adult and not later than 10:00 p.m. but not including seating at the bar itself. (Ord. 1150, § 2,
6/96; RO 1390, 6/17)
b) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, give or cause to be sold, furnished or given away any
alcoholic liquor or malt beverage to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, who is not his legal ward,
medical patient or member of his own immediate family. This subsection does not apply to sales by the commission
or a wholesaler to a licensee under State law. (Ord. 1065, 7/88)
c) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to have any alcoholic or malt
beverage in his possession or be drunk or under the influence of alcoholic liquor, malt beverages or a controlled
substance on any street or highway or in any public place. Possession of alcoholic or malt beverages shall be
defined as having consumed any portion thereof, or the present and immediate control and access to alcoholic or
malt beverages for the purpose of consumption. Present and immediate control and access shall be construed to
mean the ability to acquire possession from a source known to be available to and in the presence of the person.
This subsection does not apply to possession of alcoholic or malt beverages by a person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years:
i) When making a delivery of alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to his employment;
ii) Who is in the physical presence of his parent or legal guardian;
iii) When dispensing or serving alcoholic or malt beverages or otherwise working in a Licensed Building
pursuant to his employment, if the person was at least nineteen (19) years of age on the effective date of this act.
This paragraph does not apply to persons otherwise authorized to serve alcoholic or malt beverages under paragraph
(V) of this subsection; (RO 1390, 6/17)
iv) Who is a licensee under State law; or
v) When serving alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to his employment in a restaurant which holds a license
to serve alcoholic or malt beverages, if the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 1065, 7/88
d) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to attempt in any manner to
purchase alcoholic or malt beverages, by falsifying any identification or using any false identification in order to obtain
such alcoholic or malt beverages. (Ord. 1065, 7/88)
SEC. 3-7. SALE, ETC., TO HABITUAL DRUNKARDS.
Section 3-7 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 802, § 4, 12/73)
SEC. 3-8. DEFINITION OF RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSES.
Section 3-8 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 780, 1/73)
3-4
SEC. 3-9. RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON SALES UNDER RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSES.
Section 3-9 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 789, 1/73)
SEC. 3-10. CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON
CITY STREETS, SIDEWALKS, ETC.; PENALTY.
Section 3-10 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1000, 7/83; Ord 720, § 1 to 4, 9/70;
Ord 949. § 4, 5/81; RO 1342, 10/10)
SEC. 3-11. ADOPTION OF STATE ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LAWS.
Except as otherwise provided in this code or other City Ordinances the sale, possession, furnishing or use of
alcoholic and malt liquors in the City shall be in compliance with Wyoming Statute 1977, Title 12, as of this date, with
the exception of Chapters 2 and 3 of said Title and the same shall apply to the City. A copy of such laws and of any
subsequent laws and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, and the same are made
a part of this section by reference, as though incorporated herein at length. (Ord. 1341, 10/10)
SEC. 3-12. STANDARDS IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE SALE AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES.
A) Public Policy.
The public policy of the City of Buffalo requires that the use of alcoholic beverages be controlled in order to
reduce associated problems affecting the welfare of the community and public safety. The following
standards will be employed by the City Council to decide whether it is in the public interest to request that
the State Liquor Commission or the district Court revoke or suspend the liquor license of an establishment
which is a danger to the public welfare. The performance record of a licensed establishment and its
compliance with these standards will be considered in proceedings to renew liquor licenses as well as to
request that one be revoked or suspended.
B) Standards.
All establishments, by and through their agents, operating by virtue of a liquor license, shall meet the
following Standards:
1. Standards.
(a) Refuse to serve any patron who is obviously intoxicated, or is endangering people or property in the
licensed establishment.
(b) Order any patron to leave and depart who is endangering people or property in the licensed
establishment and notify the Buffalo Police Department by telephone immediately when an assault,
aggravated assault or assault and battery occurs in the establishment’s property. Licensees shall
cooperate fully in the Police Investigation of the incident.
(c) Refuse to sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor or malt beverage to any person under the age of 21
years.
(d) Refuse admittance to any person under the age of 21 years except as allowed by Section 3-6.
(e) Prohibit criminal activity on the Licensed Building as established by Local, State or Federal law.
(RO 1390, 6/17)
(f) Immediately notify the Buffalo Police Department of any attempts by a person under the age of 21
years to acquire alcoholic liquor or malt beverages in violation of this ordinance. Licensees shall,
when possible, retain the identification presented by any individual under the age of 21 years who
attempts to acquire alcoholic liquor or malt beverages.
(g) Post in a prominent location, a conspicuous notice to the public required in Section 3-16.
C) Public Responsibility.
1. No person shall consume or carry in open containers of alcoholic liquor or malt beverages, inside or
outside of any motor vehicles on any street, highway, alley or sidewalk, except within a commercial
limousine as described in Section 3-12(D), or in any restaurant, hotel dining room or any other public
place whatsoever within the City, except places where the sale or service of alcoholic liquor or malt
beverages is authorized by the Wyoming State Law or City Ordinance.
3-5
2. It is unlawful to remain in an establishment operated under a liquor license after a lawful request to
leave is made by an agent, employee, or owner of the establishment.
D. Limousine.
Alcoholic liquor or malt beverages may be consumed by adult passengers within commercial limousines. A
limousine is a passenger car pursuant to Wyoming Statute § 31-1-101, with a closed passenger
compartment seating three or more passengers which is separated from the driver’s seat with a partition
which may be of glass. No fee may be charged for any alcoholic liquor or malt beverage consumed in the
limousine. (Ord. 1341, 10/10)
SEC. 3-13. CATERING AND MALT BEVERAGE PERMITS.
Applications for permits authorized by either the Wyoming Statutes or the Code of the City of Buffalo, other
than open container permits requiring street closure, shall be made by completing a form available from the City
Clerk. On behalf of the governing body (licensing authority), the City Clerk is authorized to review and issue
temporary catering, malt beverage, and open container permits, and to request supporting documentation in
conjunction with all applications filed with the City Clerk for any type of license or permit identified in this Chapter.
Prior to issuance, review and approval of applications, including inspection of the proposed premises to be licensed or
permitted, will be conducted by various City Department representatives as determined by the City Clerk.
(Ord 1341, 10/10; RO 1391 3/18)
SEC. 3-14. RIGHT OF ENTRY – INSPECTION.
The holders of liquor licenses or permits issued by the City of Buffalo shall at all times permit the law
enforcement officials of the City of buffalo to inspect and examine the premises for which such liquor licenses are held
for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not compliance is being made with the terms of Chapter 3.
A refusal to permit entry or inspection pursuant to this Section will result in a hearing before the City
Council and may result in the revocation of the liquor license. (Ord. 1341, 10/10)
SEC. 33-15. DUTY TO MAINTAIN ORDER.
The Chief of Police or his designee may order any establishment operating with a City liquor license closed
until the following 6 A.M. when the Licensee or person in charge fails to maintain peace and order which creates an
emergency and immediate threat to the bodily security or property of any member of the general public within the
establishment. (Ord 1341, 10/10)
Sec. 3-16. MINORS WARNING NOTICE.
(A) Every Licensee, other than those operating under a license for a restaurant, bar and grill or package
store that does not dispense alcohol or malt beverages, shall display at all times in a prominent place at
each public entrance a printed card with a minimum height of 11 inches and a width of 17 inches, with each
letter to be a minimum of one-fourth inch in height, which shall read as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE
OF UP TO $750
IF YOU ARE UNDER 21 AND YOU
ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE, CONSUME, OR HAVE IN YOUR
POSSESSION ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR MALT BEVERAGE
OR
ENTER OR ATTEMPT TO ENTER LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT
WARNING TO ADULTS
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE
OF UP TO $750
IF YOU PURCHASE OR PROVIDE ALCOHOL OR MALT BEVERAGE FOR A
PERSON UNDER 21
3-6
(B) Every Licensee operating under a license for a restaurant, bar and grill or a package store that
does not dispense alcoholic or malt beverages shall display at all times in a prominent place at each
public entrance a printed card with a minimum height of 11 inches and width of 17 inches, with each
letter to be a minimum of one-fourth inch in height, which shall read as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE
OF UP TO $750
IF YOU ARE UNDER 21 AND YOU
ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE, CONSUME, OR HAVE IN
YOUR POSSESSION ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR MALT BEVERAGES
WARNING TO ADULTS
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE
OF UP TO $750
IF YOU PURCHASE OR PROVIDE ALCOHOL OR MALT BEVERAGE FOR A
PERSON UNDER 21
SEC. 3-17. ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
(A) Any licensed establishment in which violations of City, State or Federal laws occur requires
the expenditure of greater municipal resources to control and police than establishments which are
operated in accordance with the law. Those extra enforcement and other social costs include police,
judicial and prosecutor salaries, and victim impacts.
In addition to any other penalty, sanction or fee authorized by law, if a liquor license holder, or its
employees or agents, is convicted of a violation of any Section of Buffalo Municipal Code Chapter 3 that is applicable
to Licensees or their employees, the Licensee shall upon notice, pay to the City Clerk, an administrative fee. The
notice to pay shall be issued by the City Clerk upon notification of the relevant conviction. Said fee shall be paid
within ten days of the notice to pay, unless the licensee completes additional training and establishes preventative
measures according to Section C for first and second violations occurring within one year.
(B) 1. Upon first conviction of a violation of Standards in Section 3-12(B), the Licensee shall
pay to the City Clerk, an administrative fee in the amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
2. Upon second conviction of a violation of Standards in Section 3-12(B), arising within a
twelve (12) month period, the Licensee shall pay to the City Clerk, an administrative fee in the
amount of One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00). The Licensee shall also submit
a Plan of Operation, acceptable to the City, specifically addressing the conviction including
actions they will take to prevent further violations.
3. Upon a third or subsequent conviction of Standards in Section 3-12(B), arising within a
twenty four (24) month period, the Licensee shall pay to the City Clerk, an administrative fee
in the amount of Four Thousand Dollars ($4,000.00). The Licensee shall also submit a
revised plan of Operation, acceptable to the City, specifically addressing the conviction
including actions they will take to prevent further violations.
4. Convictions of violations of Category 1 or Category 2 standards which violations occur
before November 15, 2010, shall not apply after that date.
(C) 1. For first and second convictions of violations occurring within one year this fee shall
be waived if the Licensee takes training or preventive measures approved by the City.
2. For convictions of violations of Section 3-6(a) or Section 3-6(b), this fee will be waived
if the person who committed the violation attends an alcohol server training program as
approved by Wyoming Statute Section 12-2-402 (whether or not that person has previously
3-7
attended such training) if the person is still employed by the Licensee, and if the Licensee and
all employees authorized to serve alcoholic liquor or malt beverage have been to an alcohol
server training program within the previous two years.
3. The Licensee shall notify the City Clerk of their intent to substitute the training within
ten days of notification and submit proof of the training to the City Clerk within three months of
the notification or pay the administrative fee by that day. (Ord 1341, 10/10)
SEC. 3-18. LIQUOR LICENSE REVOCATION AND RENEWAL.
If any administrative fee is not paid, Plans of Operation are not submitted on time, or in case of gross
violations of this Chapter, the Licensee may be directed to appear before the City Council at a time set by Council
Resolution to review the evidence of violations of this chapter. The City Council shall receive evidence of the
convictions and charges pursuant to which the Administrative Fees have been assessed and their nonpayment and
the failure of the Licensee to submit appropriate Plans of Operation and may, on that record, apply the provision of
Section 3-4 regarding suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1341, 10/10)
3-8
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL1
Article I. In General.
§ 4-1. No Hogs or Pigs in the City Limits.
§ 4-1.1. No Roosters in the City Limits.
§ 4-2. Disposition of Dead Animals.
§ 4-3. Cruelty to Animals.
§ 4-3.1. Buffalo Animal Control Board. REPEALED
§ 4-3.2. Powers of Board. REPEALED
Article II. DOGS, CATS, RABBITS, LIVESTOCK AND FOWL, ETC
Division I. Generally
§ 4-4. Declared a Nuisance.
§ 4-4.1. Cats Running at Large. Renumbered 4-13.1.
§ 4-5. Duty to Impound; Fees. REPEALED
§ 4-6. Authority to Sell After Notice; Redemption. REPEALED
§ 4-7. Disposition of Excess Money After Sale. REPEALED
§ 4-8. Restraint by Person Other Than City Officer.
§ 4-9. Obstructing Police, Breaking Into Pound, etc.
§ 4-10. Definitions.
§ 4-11. Registration, Licensing and Vaccination Generally.
§ 4-12. Dog Tags and Collar.
§ 4-13. Running at Large – Prohibited.
§ 4-13.1. Cats Running at Large.
§ 4-14. Same – Fierce Dogs, Female Dogs in Heat and Intact Male Dogs.
§ 4-15. Impounding – Generally.
§ 4-16. Same – Notice to Owner; Redemption.
§ 4-17. Same – Destruction of Unclaimed or Infected Dogs and Cats.
§ 4-17.1. Rabid Dog or Cat or Dog or Cat Suspected of Having Rabies.
§ 4-17.2. Barking or Howling Dogs and Noisy Animals.
§ 4-17.3. Destructive or Dangerous Dogs.
§ 4-17.4. Animal Control Person.
§ 4-17.5. Enforcement of Article.
§ 4-17.6. Penalty for Violation of Article.
§ 4-17.7. Removal of Animal Feces.
§ 4-17.8. Wild Animals.
Division 2. Kennels.
§ 4-18. Certain Kennels, etc. – Declared a Nuisance.
§ 4-19. Same – Abatement.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL.
SEC. 4-1. HOGS OR PIGS IN CITY LIMITS DECLARED A NUISANCE.2
No person shall keep, maintain, or feed within the City of Buffalo any hogs or pigs whatsoever. (R.O. 1955, § 19-
13)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
4-1
SEC. 4-1.1. NO ROOSTERS IN THE CITY LIMITS.
No Person shall keep, maintain, or feed within the City of Buffalo any roosters whatsoever. (Ord 1367, 12/13)
SEC. 4-2. DISPOSITION OF DEAD ANIMALS.3
It shall be the duty of the owner or person having the charge of any animal which may die within the limits of the
City of Buffalo to remove or have removed the carcass thereof to the City dump grounds. Every person failing to
properly dispose of such carcass for more than twelve hours after death of such animal shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in Sec. 14-13, and should such owner or person in charge of such animal fail to remove the
same as herein provided, within a period of twelve hours from the death of the animal, the City of Buffalo may cause
the same to be removed and the cost of such removal shall be added to and made a part of any fine against such
owner or person in charge for failure to comply with the above provisions of the section. (R.O. 1955, § 61-4)(Ord
1366, 12/13).
3. For state law as to disposition, etc., of dead animals, see W.S. 1977, § 3-10-101.
As to dead animals being considered a nuisance, see Sec. 15-1 of this Code.
SEC. 4-3. CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.4
(a.) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to provide their animals with sufficient, good and wholesome food
and water that is not frozen and that is at least 6 feet away from the waste area, proper shelter and
protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and
treatment.
(b.) No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, tease, or otherwise abuse or molest and
animal or cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals.
For purposes of this ordinance, torture, torment or cruelty means every act omission or neglect whereby the willful
and malicious infliction of pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue when there is a reasonable
remedy or relief.
(c.) No person shall willfully kill, maim, disfigure, or administer poison or cause to be ingested, any foreign
object to any such animal, or expose any poisonous substance with the intent that it shall be taken by any
such animal except pests of public health importance.
(d.) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal at any location including but not limited to a
residence, St. Francis Animal Shelter or any public or private place.
If a person commits this violation they forfeit ownership of the animal and shall be responsible for all fees incurred
which includes but is not limited to St. Francis Animal Shelter fees, Veterinary fees and the surrender fee. Each
animal affected by this conduct may constitute a separate count for the purpose of penalties. (R.O. 1995, § 20-1)(Ord
1366, 12/13)
4. For state law as to cruelty of animals, see W.S. 1977, § 11-34-102.
5. For state la authorizing the Town to regulate, restrain and prohibit animals running at large and
impounding such animals, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xiii).
SEC. 4-3.1. THE BUFFALO ANIMAL CONTROL BOARD.
SECTION 4-3.1. OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO ORDINANCE 1980, IS HEREBY REPEALED. (R.O. 1240, § 1,
02/05)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-3.2. POWERS OF THE BOARD.
SECTION 4-3.2. OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO ORDINANCE 1980, IS HEREBY REPEALED. (Ord. 1177, § 2,
12/98)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
4-2
ARTICLE II. DOGS, CATS, RABBITS, LIVESTOCK AND FOWL, ETC.
Division 1. Generally
SEC. 4-4. DECLARED A NUISANCE.
All horses, mules, asses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats or poultry running at large within the limits of the City of
Buffalo are hereby declared to be nuisances. Any person being the owner or keeper of any such horses, mules,
asses, swine, sheep, goats or poultry, who shall allow the same to run at large, or to be found at large, within the
corporate limits, shall be deemed the author of a nuisance, and shall, upon conviction, be punished in Sec. 14-13.
(R.O. 1955, § 59-1)
SEC. 4-4.1. CATS RUNNING AT LARGE.
SECTION 4-4.1 OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO ORDINANCE 10/89 IS HEREBY RENUMBERED AS SECTION 4-
13.1. (Ord. 1080, 10/89)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-5. DUTY TO IMPOUND; FEES.
SECTION 4-5 OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO ORDINANCE 5/81, IS HEREBY REPEALED (Ord. 950, § 1,
5/81)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-6. AUTHORITY TO SELL AFTER NOTICE; REDEMPTION.
SECTION 4-6 OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO ORDINANCE 1955 IS HEREBY REPEALED. (R.O. 1955, § 59-
3)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-7. DISPOSITION OF EXCESS MONEY AFTER SALE.
SECTION 4-7 OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO ORDINANCE 1955 IS HEREBY REPEALED. (R.O. 1955, § 59-
4)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-8. RESTRAINT BY PERSON OTHER THAN CITY OFFICER.
It shall be lawful for any person to restrain and take up any such animals mentioned in this article found running at
large contrary to the provisions of this article, and to deliver, or cause such animals to be delivered, to the proper
officer, who shall receive the same and proceed in like manner as if the same had been taken up by himself. (R.O.
1955, § 59-6)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-9. OBSTRUCTING POLICE, BREAKING INTO POUND, ETC.
If any person shall hinder, delay or obstruct any officer in taking up any such animals as mentioned in this article,
or shall break open, or in any way aid or assist in breaking open any pen, pound or enclosure with intent to release
any animal therein confined, he shall, on conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Sec. 14-13. (R.O. 1955, §
59-5)
SEC. 4-10. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section: (Ord. 1366, 12/13)
Animal: Any non-human living creature, domestic or wild.
Animal Control Officer: A special municipal officer whose duties include, but are not limited to, enforcement of the
provisions of this code.
At Large: Off the premises of the owner and not under control of the owner or a member of his immediate family or
any other authorized person, either by means of a leash, cord, chain or similar means of restraint.
Cattery: A residence or other property where more than four cats are maintained: provided that, in addition, more
than four cats of the same litter may be maintained on the premises until the litter attains the age of six months. A
cattery not operated as a business is a Non Commercial Cattery. A business, which offers breeding, buying, selling,
boarding or training cats, regardless of the number of animals maintained, is defined as a Commercial Cattery and
may only be operated in a properly zoned district.
Dog: As used in this article without a qualifying word, it shall be deemed and held to include both sexes.
4-3
Hoarding: Keep a higher than usual number of animals as domestic pets without having the ability to properly house
or care for them. A hoarder is distinguished from and animal breeder, who would have a large number of animals as
the central component of his or her business. The distinguishing feature is that a hoarder does not provide the
animals with adequate food, water, sanitation, and veterinary care and is in denial about this inability to provide
adequate care. Hoarding is a form of animal cruelty.
Hogs: Any of various mammals of the family Suidae, which includes the domesticated pig weighing over 120
pounds.
Kennel: A residence or other property where more than four dogs, four cats or ten rabbits are maintained: provided
that, in addition, more than four dogs, four cats or ten rabbits of the same litter may be maintained on the premises
until the litter attains the age of six months. A kennel that is not operated as a business is a Non Commercial Kennel.
A business, which offers breeding, buying, selling, boarding or training dogs, cats or rabbits, regardless of the number
of animals maintained, is defined as a Commercial Kennel and may only be operated in a properly zoned district.
Livestock: Includes horses, cattle, llamas, sheep, burros, swine, yaks and goats.
Owner: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who shall keep or harbor any animal or permit the
same to habitually remain to be fed in or about his premises shall be considered and held to be the owner of such
animal within the meaning of this article. A person with custody or control of another person’s animals is considered
an owner for purposes of this chapter.
Person: An individual, partnership, company, corporation or other entity.
Pig: Any of several mammals of the family Suidae, having short legs, cloven hoofs, bristly hair, and a cartilaginous
snout. This is a younger domesticated swine weighing less than 120 pounds.
Rabbitry: Any place where more than ten rabbits are maintained; provided that, in addition, more than ten rabbits of
the same litter may be maintained on the premises until the litter attains the age of six months. A rabbitry that is not
operated as a business is a Non Commercial Rabbitry. A business, which offers breeding, buying, selling, boarding
or training rabbits, regardless of the number of animals maintained, is defined as a Commercial Rabbitry and may
only be operated in a properly zoned district.
Wild Animal or Exotic: Any non-domestic animal. (Ord. 715, § 2, 8/70)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-11. REGISTRATION, LICENSING AND VACCINATION GENERALLY.
a) All dogs kept harbored and maintained by their owners in the City of Buffalo shall be licensed and registered at
least once every two years. All dogs and cats shall be given the Rabies Vaccine at least once every two years. Dog
licenses shall be issued by the St. Francis Animal Shelter upon the payment of a license fee for each neutered male
dog and spayed female dog; and a higher fee for each unneutered male dog and unspayed female dog. It is unlawful
for any person to own a dog over 7 months old for which a current license has not been obtained. (Ord. 1254, § 12,
20/05) (Ord. 1366, 12/13)
b) The owner at such time that application is made for such license shall, upon the printed forms provided for
such purpose, state his name, address, the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned or kept by him and place
where the animal so registered is kept. The St. Francis Animal Shelter Staff shall give a metal tag as provided in Sec.
4-12. Such certificate shall not be transferable. (Ord. 997, 12/82)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
c) All such licenses shall be of the date it is issued and all shall expire two years from the date of issue and must
be renewed and new tags issued before such date. Any new licenses may be issued at any time of the year, but will
expire on the date herein provided. (Ord. 1231, § 2, 3/04)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
d) No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article unless the applicants therefore shall have first
exhibited to the St. Francis Animal Shelter Staff a certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian showing that such dog
has been inoculated against rabies. (Ord. 1231, § 3, 3/04)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
e) Any person or owner who shall be found violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine set by the Judge. (Ord. 1231, § 4, 3/04)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
4-4
SEC. 4-12. DOG TAGS AND COLLAR.
Upon the payment of a license fee the St. Francis Animal Shelter Staff shall issue to the owner a license certificate
and a metal tag for each dog so licensed. The tag will be stamped thereon the year for which it is issued and the
number corresponding with the number on the certificate. (Ord. 1231, § 5, 3/04)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the licensed tag must be affixed and shall
see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. Any person counterfeiting the aforesaid tags or placing any except
the authorized tag upon the collar of a dog shall be deemed of a misdemeanor.
In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the St. Francis Animal Shelter Staff upon
presentation of receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment for such duplicate
tags.
Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on the dog’s license
because of death to the dog or the owner’s leaving the City of Buffalo before the expiration of the license period or
any other reason. (Ord. 715, § 4, 8/70)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-13. RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
The owner of a dog shall confine such dog to his own premises and not permit such dog to run at large within the
limits of the City of Buffalo. Such dog, if taken from the premises of the owner, shall be kept under leash or other
means of physical restraint at all times. (Ord. 715, § 5, 8/70)
SEC. 4-13.1. CATS RUNNING AT LARGE.
It shall be unlawful for any cat to run at large within the limits of the City of Buffalo. Any person who is the owner
or keeper of a cat who shall allow the same to run at large or to be found at large, within the limits of the City of
Buffalo, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Sec. 4-17-6. (Ord.
1080, 10/89). (Ord. 1367 12/13).
SEC. 4-14. SAME – FIERCE DOGS, FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT AND INTACT MALE DOGS.
No dog of a fierce, dangerous or vicious propensity, and no female dog in heat or intact male dog, whether
licensed or not shall be allowed to run at large. If any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog so found at large cannot be
safely taken up and impounded in the opinion of the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer, such dog may be slain
by any Police Officer. Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner
that the female dog cannot have contact with another animal except for planned breeding. If unplanned breeding is
accomplished it will be the responsibility of the at large owner to pay all expenses incurred. (Ord. 1230, § 1,
1/04)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
6. For state law authorizing the town to regulate, restrain and prohibit animals
running at large, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xiii).
SEC. 4-15. IMPOUNDING – GENERALLY.
If any dog is found within the City of Buffalo without a tag as required by this article or if any dog or cat is found
running at large contrary to the provisions of this article it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or any Police
Officer to apprehend such dog or cat and to impound such dog or cat at the St. Francis Animal Shelter. The Animal
Control Officer or any Police Officer that is impounding the dog or cat shall make a complete registering, entering the
breed, color and sex of such dog or cat and whether the dog is licensed. If licensed, the St. Francis Animal Shelter
Staff shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. (Ord. 715, § 6, 8/70)(Ord.
1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-16. SAME – NOTICE TO OWNER; REDEMPTION.
A) No later than twenty-four hours after the impounding of any dog or cat the owner shall be notified, if known by
the St. Francis Animal Shelter Staff.
B) The owner of any impounded dog or cat may reclaim such dog or cat upon payment of a license fee for dogs
and obtaining a license, if a valid one does not exist, and the payment of all costs and charges incurred by the City of
Buffalo and the St. Francis Animal Shelter for impounding and maintenance of such dog or cat. The following
charges shall be paid to the City of Buffalo; as cost for impounding any dog or cat – these include but are not limited
to pick up fee; and a daily fee for the dog or cat, commencing with the day the dog or cat has first been impounded
and paying any Veterinary bills that have been incurred. There will be an additional daily fee for intact males and
females in heat. (Ord. 1198, 9/00)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
4-5
SEC. 4-17. SAME – DESTRUCTION OF UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED DOGS AND CATS.
A) It shall be the duty of the St. Francis Animal Shelter Staff to keep all unclaimed dogs and cats so impounded
for a period of five days following the day the dog or cat was first impounded. If, at the expiration of five days, such
dog or cat shall not have been redeemed, it may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in the discretion of the Animal
Control Officer or put up for adoption by the St. Francis Animal Shelter.
B) Any unlicensed dog required by law to be licensed, or any dog or cat which appears to be suffering from
rabies, mange or other infections or dangerous disease, shall not be released, but may be destroyed; provided that a
dog or cat suspected of rabies shall be held for at least 10 days at the St. Francis Animal Shelter before destruction,
or until such time as the diagnosis has been confirmed by a Veterinarian. (Ord. 1230, § 2, 01/04) (Ord. 1366, 12/13)
C) If any person shall request that the St. Francis Animal Shelter place its animal for adoption by surrendering the
dog or cat, said person shall pay to the St. Francis Animal Shelter the surrender fee for the service of placing such
dog or cat for adoption. (Ord. 997, 12/82)(Ord. 1333, 12/13)
SEC. 4-17.1. RABID DOG OR CAT OR DOG OR CAT SUSPECTED OF HAVING RABIES.
If a dog or cat is suspected of having rabies or if a dog or cat has bitten a person or another animal, such dog or
cat shall be placed under observation and quarantined at the St. Francis Animal Shelter for a period of 10 days, if
proof of the Rabies Vaccine cannot be verified by the Veterinarian. If after the end of the ten day period the animal
exhibits no symptoms of rabies, the animal may be returned to the owner if no legal action is pending. The animal will
be released after a Veterinarian has examined the animal and has given it a clean bill of health. The owner must pay
all accrued costs while the animal was in quarantine; this includes but not limited to daily fees while at the St. Francis
Animal Shelter, veterinary bills and any unforeseen costs before the animal is released to the owner.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog or cat that has rabies to allow such dog or cat to
be taken off his premises. Upon ascertaining a dog or cat is rabid such animal will be destroyed and disposed of at
the owner’s expense. (Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-17.2. BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS AND NOISY ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, while within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo, to be the owner, harborer
or keeper of any dog which barks or howls day or night for an extended length of time to the extent that the
neighborhood is bothered or harassed by the noise and commotion. No person shall own or keep any animal which
makes continual or repeated barking, screeching, yowling, howling, yelping, neighing, braying, mooing, crowing,
quacking, pawing, stamping, bleating or other noises in excessive, continuous or untimely fashion that otherwise
disturbs the peace of others. (Ord. 730, § 1, 10/70)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-17.3. DESTRUCTIVE OR DANGEROUS DOGS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, while within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo to be the owner, harborer,
or keeper of a destructive, vicious or dangerous dog. (Ord. 923, § 1, 8/79)
Any dog attacking any person in a vicious manner may be destroyed upon order of the Judge, and the owner or
custodian of the dog may be fined. Proof of the fact that the dog has bitten or attacked any person at any place
where a person is legally entitled to be is evidence that the dog is vicious within the meaning of this section. (Ord.
932, § 2, 8/79)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
For the purposes of this section, an attack on any person shall be defined as any vicious and aggressive behavior
of any dog which reasonably puts said person in fear of his safety or which restricts said person’s freedom of
movement in any place where he is legally entitled. A Police Officer or Animal Control Officer may take custody of
any dangerous or vicious animal and confine such an animal until the court has entered a verdict and determined the
appropriate disposition of the animal. If the Police Officer or Animal Control Officer takes custody of the animal the
animal shall be confined at the St. Francis Animal Shelter. The animal owner or custodian, or both, shall be liable for
the costs of such confinement. No animal shall be found to be dangerous or vicious if the threat, injury or damage
was sustained by a person who was committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal’s
owner or custodian, or was provoking, tormenting or physically abusing the animal, or who can be shown to have
repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog that was engaged in
the performance of its duties at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog.
Any animal determined to be vicious by the judge will be euthanized at the expense of the owner or custodian. (Ord.
932, § 3, 8/79) (Ord. 1366, 12/13)
4-6
SEC. 4-17.4. ANIMAL CONTROL PERSON.
The City of Buffalo shall select and authorize an Animal Control Officer, also known as a dog catcher, and this
individual is hereby charged with the duty of impounding all dogs and cats running at large in violation of the
provisions of this article. It is the duty of the Animal Control Officer when a notice is given to him that an animal has
bitten a person, to notify the owner and verify with the Veterinarian that the animal is current on its Rabies Vaccine.
(Ord. 1230, § 3, 1/04)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-17.5. ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.
In the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, any Police Officer or Animal Control Officer is
authorized to enter onto the private property, exclusive of buildings, to take possession of a licensed or unlicensed
dog or cat when in fresh or hot pursuit of such dog or cat at the time the dog or cat goes upon private property. (Ord.
1230, § 4, 1/04)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-17.6. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
Any owner found violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished according to the general penalty provisions under the Ordinance of the City of
Buffalo. For the purposes of this section, second and subsequent violations shall be considered to accrue for a
period of one year from the date of the first violation. The owner, after notification of a fourth violation or any violation
thereafter must appear before Municipal Court. (Ord. 926, § 2, 8/79)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
SEC. 4-17.7. REMOVAL OF ANIMAL FECES.
(a.) It is the responsibility of owners and property occupants to keep their property free of animal feces so as not
to present an offensive odor perceptible from outside the owner’s property or potential danger to public
health. The owner or custodian of every animal shall immediately retrieve and remove all feces deposited
by his or her animal while off the owner’s property, including City parks and public areas. This section shall
apply to parades permitted by the City of Buffalo or animal drawn carriages or vehicles licensed or permitted
by the City of Buffalo.
(b.) It is unlawful for any person in control of, causing or permitting any dog or cat to be on any property, public
or private, not owned or possessed by such person to fail to remove feces left by such dog or cat to a
proper receptacle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the ownership or use of any properly
identified service dog which aids persons who are totally or partially blind or deaf or have physical or
sensory disabilities. (Ord. 1367, 12/13).
SEC. 7-17.8. WILD ANIMALS.
It is unlawful to own any wild animal except small cage-birds, aquatic, amphibian or non-poisonous reptilian
animals or small rodents such as hamster, guinea pigs, or gerbils. (Ord 1367, 12/13).
Division II. Kennels.
SEC. 4-18. CERTAIN KENNELS, ETC. – DECLARED A NUISANCE.7
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, keep or conduct any dog kennel, cattery or rabbitry or
place or premises for the purpose of breeding animals for sale to the public, to give away, or for private enjoyment
within the City of Buffalo, or to keep, maintain or harbor within the City of Buffalo animals so as to be offensive or an
annoyance to any person. Any such dog kennel, cattery, or rabbitry or place or premises for breeding dogs, cats, or
rabbits is hereby defined and declared to be a nuisance, and any person who shall keep such kennels or place or
premises for breeding animals, or who shall harbor a large number of animals within the City of Buffalo, so as to be a
nuisance under the provisions of this section shall be deemed the author of such nuisance, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in Sec. 14-3. St. Francis Animal Shelter is exempt from the barking ordinance
from 8 am – 8 pm. (R.O. 1955, § 58-1)(Ord. 1366, 12/13)
7. As to nuisances generally, see Chapter 15 of this Code.
SEC. 4-19. SAME – ABATEMENT.
If any person shall have been convicted and punished in accordance with the provisions of the preceding section
and still fails, refuses or neglects to abate such nuisance, within a reasonable time thereafter, the same may be
abated in the manner prescribed by Chapter 15. (R.O. 1955, § 58-2)
4-7
CHAPTER 4A
BICYCLES. 1
1. For state law as to bicycles, see W.S. 1977, § 31-5-701.
As to riding bicycles on sidewalks, see § 13-33 of this Code. As to riding
bicycles more than two abreast, see § 13-34. As to riding bicycles recklessly,
see § 13-35.
§ 4A-1. License plate – Required.
§ 4A-2. Same – Application; Term.
§ 4A-3. Same – Conditions for issuance.
§ 4A-4. Same – Fee.
§ 4A-5. Same – Records to be kept.
§ 4A-6. Same – Attachment to bicycle; unauthorized removal prohibited.
§ 4A-7. Same – Transfer.
§ 4A-8. Same – Rental agencies to comply with licensing regulations.
§ 4A-9. Same – Penalties for violation; liability of parent or guardian.
SEC. 4A-1. LICENSE PLATE – REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to operate bicycles on any street unless such bicycle has a license plate attached to it as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 659, § 1, 3/65)
SEC. 4A-2. SAME – APPLICATION; TERM.
Application for a license shall be made for the first year not later than December 15, 1965, and the license shall be
valid from the first day of January of each year to the thirty-first day of December next succeeding. After the year
1965, application for a license shall be made not more than thirty days before the date of expiration of the license for
that current year. (Ord. 659, § 3, 3/65)
SEC. 4A-3. SAME – CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.
The Chief of Police or other authorized person of the City shall issue bicycle license plates to the bona fide owners
of bicycles upon the payment of the license fee and upon a satisfactory determination that the bicycle is properly
equipped to meet the minimum standards of safety as prescribed by the laws of the state, Section 31-5-706,
Wyoming Statutes, 1977. (Ord. 659, § 2, 3/65)
SEC. 4A-4. SAME – FEE.
A license fee of fifty cents per year shall be paid to the City for the licensing of bicycles, and a receipt shall be
issued to the licensee which shall serve as the registration certificate of such bicycle. (Ord. 659, § 3, 3/65)
SEC. 4A-5. SAME – RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
The Chief of Police or other delegated authority shall keep permanent records of such licensing in the City Hall,
which shall show to whom the license was issued, full identification and description of the bicycle licensed and such
other information as may be required to assist in the promotion of bicycle safety and the location of stolen or missing
bicycles. (Ord. 659, § 3, 3/65)
SEC. 4A-6. SAME – ATTACHMENT TO BICYCLE; UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
A license plate will be firmly fixed to the rear of the bicycle in a position as closely perpendicular to the ground as
possible and in such a manner that it can easily be read.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a license from a bicycle for any reason whatsoever except for
transfer or dismantlement of the bicycle. (Ord. 659, § 4, 3/65)
SEC. 4A-7. SAME – TRANSFER.
Upon sale of or other transfer of the bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license plate from the bicycle and, upon
proper application, have it assigned to the transferee of the bicycle or reissued to the licensee for such other bicycle
he may own. In the event such license plate shall not be transferred or reissued as herein provided, it shall be
surrendered to the City, and all records pertaining to such licensee shall thereupon be canceled as to that licensee.
No additional fee shall be required for the transfer for reissuance of a license plate. (Ord. 659, § 4, 3/65)
4A-1
SEC. 4A-8. SAME – RENTAL AGENCIES TO COMPLY WITH LICENSING REGULATIONS.
Any person engaged in the business of renting or offering for rent the use of bicycles shall be required to comply
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 659, § 5, 3/65)
SEC. 4A-9. SAME – PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION; LIABILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
Any person convicted of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by suspension of the privilege of
operating a bicycle upon the streets of the City, and operating a bicycle upon suspension of such privilege shall be
denied to the operator for a period of not less than five days nor more than thirty days and by a fine of not more than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or both.
Upon suspension of the privilege of operating a bicycle, the license plate shall be detached from the bicycle and
shall remain in the custody of the police department until the licensee’s privilege shall be restored.
In the event a minor child shall be found guilty of any violation of this chapter, his parent or parents with whom he
resides or guardian shall be deemed to have aided and abetted such minor child in the commission of such violation,
and a fine may be assessed against such parent or guardian upon conviction. (Ord. 659, § 6, 3/65)
4A-2
CHAPTER 5
BUILDINGS1
1. For state law authorizing the town to prescribe the thickness, strength and manner
of constructing buildings, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xxv).
(Ord. 905, 10/78) Revised April 2007 (Ord. 1284, 07/07)
ADOPTION OF CODES
§ 5.1.1 Administration of Adopted International and Uniform Codes.
§ 5.1.2 Adoption of the 2012 International Building Code.
§ 5.1.3 Adoption of the 2012 International Residential Code.
§ 5.1.4 Adoption of 2012 International Plumbing Code.
§ 5.1.5 Adoption of 2012 International Mechanical Code.
§ 5.1.6 Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code.
§ 5.1.7 Adoption of International Existing Building Code.
§ 5.1.8 Adoption of Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
§ 5.1.9 City Specific Codes.
§ 5.1.10 Fence Code
§ 5.1.11 Solar Rights
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
§ 5.2.1 License required; contractor defined; exceptions.
§ 5.2.2 License defined; authority; issuance of licenses, etc.
§ 5.2.3 Licensee's responsibility.
§ 5.2.4 Duties and responsibilities of the contractor.
§ 5.2.5 Classification of Licenses.
§ 5.2.6 License Fees.
§ 5.2.8 License Renewal.
§ 5.2.9 Validity Of License.
§ 5.2.10 Suspension of a Class A, B, C, or D Contractor License.
(A) BUILDING CONTRACTOR LICENSES
§ 5.2.11 Licenses, Building Contractor Generally.
§ 5.2.12 Licenses, Application.
§ 5.2.13 Licenses, Contractor Bonding, Insurance and Workers Comp. Insurance.
§ 5.2.14 Licenses, Licenses, Fee Schedule.
(B) ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
§ 5.2.15 Registration, Electrical Contractor Generally.
(C) PLUMBING LICENSES
§ 5.2.19 Licenses, Plumbing Generally.
§ 5.2.20 Licenses, Plumbing Contractors.
§ 5.2.22 Licenses, Plumbing Examinations.
§ 5.2.23 Licenses, Fee Schedule.
(D) MECHANICAL/ HVAC LICENSES
§ 5.2.24 Licenses, Mechanical/ HVAC Generally.
§ 5.2.25 Licenses, Mechanical/ HVAC Examinations.
§ 5.2.26 Licenses, Mechanical/ HVAC Fee Schedule.
(E) TREE TRIMMER LICENSE
§ 5.2.27 Licenses, Tree Trimmer Generally.
§ 5.2.28 Licenses, Tree Trimmer Qualifications.
§ 5.2.29 Licenses, Tree Trimmer Fee Schedule.
PERMIT FEES AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 5.3.1 Work exempt from permit requirements and exceptions.
§ 5.3.2 Building Permit Fees. 5-1
ADOPTION OF CODES
§ 5.1.1 Administration of Adopted International and Uniform Codes.
A. Building Official.
The building official for the City of Buffalo shall be hired and directed under the supervision of the head of the planning
department. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of the codes which have been
adopted by sections 5.1.2 through 5.1.11 of the Buffalo City Codes, which may be referred to collectively as the Adopted
Construction Codes. The building official for the City shall be the Chief Building Inspector who shall administer the Building
Division, which is the code enforcement agency for the Adopted Construction Codes.
The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of the Adopted Construction Codes and to adopt and
enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, rules and
regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code. Special interpretations shall be documented on the
Building Permit on which the special interpretation was made.
The building official shall make a monthly report to the city council.
B. Board of Appeals.
In order to hear and decide appeals from orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official, relative to the
application and interpretation of the Adopted Construction Codes, the City Council shall be the Board of Appeals for the Adopted
Construction Codes.
C. Copies of Adopted Construction Codes.
At least one (1) copy of each of the aforesaid Adopted Construction Codes and amendments shall be filed in the office of City
Clerk to be made available for public use and inspection.
D. Fees.
The fees for any work under the Adopted Construction Codes are as established through a resolution by the City Council.
E. Fee refunds.
The building official shall authorize the refund of the full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or
collected to the extent of the error.
The building official shall not authorize the refund of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee
not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.
F. Violation penalties.
Persons who shall violate a provision of any of the Adopted Construction Codes or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under provisions of
any of the Adopted Construction Codes, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $200. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
G. Stop Work orders.
Upon notice from the code official, work that is being done contrary to the provisions of any of the Adopted Construction
Codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the condition under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping
the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to the penalties set forth in Section 5.1.1 F.
§ 5.1.2 Adoption of the 2012 International Building Code.
A. The City shall, by resolution, adopt the International Building Code, including relevant appendices, as copyrighted by the
International Code Council. Said document shall be adopted as the Building Code for the incorporated areas of the City of
Buffalo, Wyoming, providing for the regulation and the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, use height and area of all buildings and structures within this City and each and all such
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the currently adopted International Building Code. (R.O. 1359 11/12)
§ 5.1.3 Adoption of the 2012 International Residential Code.
A. The City shall, by resolution , adopt the International Residential Code, including relevant appendices, as copyrighted by the
International Code Council. Said document is hereby adopted as the Residential Building Code for the incorporated areas of the
City of Buffalo, Wyoming, providing for the regulation of the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height and area of the buildings and structures within this City and each and all such
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the currently adopted International Residential Code. (R.O. 1359 11/12)
5-2
§ 5.1.4 Adoption of 2012 International Plumbing Code.
A. The City shall, by resolution, adopt the International Plumbing Code, including relevant appendices, as copyrighted by the
International Code Council. Said document is hereby adopted as the plumbing code for the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, for
regulating the installation, maintenance, and repair of plumbing, drainage systems, water systems, and each and all such
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the currently adopted International Plumbing Code.(R.O. 1359 11/12)
§ 5.1.5 Adoption of 2012 International Mechanical Code.
A. The City shall, by resolution, adopt the International Mechanical Code, including relevant appendices, as copyrighted by the
International Code Council, Inc. Said document is hereby adopted as the International Mechanical Code for the incorporated
areas of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming providing for the regulating, installation and maintenance fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas
utilization equipment and related accessories, and each and all such regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the currently
adopted International Mechanical Code. (R.O. 1359 11/12)
§ 5.1.6 Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code.
A. The City shall, by resolution, adopt the International Fuel Gas Code, including relevant appendices, as copyrighted by the
International Code Council, Inc. Said document is hereby adopted as the International Fuel Gas Code for the incorporated areas
of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, providing for the regulating, installation and maintenance of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas
utilization equipment and related accessories, and each and all such regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the currently
adopted International Fuel Gas Code. (R.O. 1359 11/12)
§ 5.1.7 Adoption of International Existing Building Code.
A. The City shall, by resolution, adopt the International Existing Building Code, including relevant appendices, as published by
the International Code Council. It is adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, for regulating and
governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, a
herein provided except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended of the currently adopted International
Existing Building Code. (R.O. 1359 11/12)
§ 5.1.8 Adoption of Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
A. That a certain document, one (1) copy of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Buffalo, being marked
and designated as the Uniform Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, as published by the International
Conference of Building Officials, be and is hereby adopted as the Abatement of Dangerous Building Code of the City of Buffalo,
in the State of Wyoming for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit
for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Abatement of Dangerous Building Code on file in the office of the City of Buffalo are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section
5.1.10 B of this ordinance. B. The following amendments to the Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and
appendixes as adopted by the preceding paragraph of this section, are hereby made and incorporated in the Uniform Code For The
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
(1) Section 205.1 General of the Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:
205.1 General. The Board of Examiners of the City of Buffalo shall be the Board of Appeals for this Code. Appeals to the board
shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 501 of this code.
(2) Section 301 BUILDING CODE of the Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as
follows:
BUILDING CODE is the International Building Code or the International Residential Code, promulgated by the International
Code Council, as adopted in Section 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 of the Buffalo City Code.
(3) Section 301 HOUSING CODE, of the Uniform Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings is repealed.
§ 5.1.9 City Specific Codes
A. CONNECTIONS TO CITY WATER OR SEWER
Connections to the city water or sewer system may be made only by licensed plumbing contractors. No connection to
the city water or sewer systems or building water or sewer service lines may be covered until it is inspected by the City.
B. GUTTER NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED.
The gutter or waterway of any street, avenue or alley shall not at any time be obstructed by any contractor or other person
under this chapter so as to prevent the free passage of water along the same, and if the gutter shall be shaded or covered so that ice
accumulates therein, the ice shall be cut out and the water allowed to pass at all times.
5-3
C. DEBRIS TO BE REMOVED.
All debris and rubbish arising from any building, alteration or repairs, or other work, shall be removed by the person to whom
the permit is granted.
D. REFLECTIVE BARRICADES AT CONSTRUCTION SITE.
Adequate reflective barricades shall be maintained from sunset to sunrise at both ends of every obstruction upon any street,
avenue or alley, 25 feet from each side of and open trench or obstruction.
E. USE OF SIDEWALK AND STREET LIMITED. 2
Building permits shall not permit the use of any street or sidewalk, or any part thereof, other than immediately in front of the
lot upon which the building is to be erected, altered or repaired, and then only to the extent as may be directed by the inspector.
No person shall use or occupy any portion of the street, alley or sidewalk for building purposes or for depositing any building
material thereon, until after receiving a building permit.
2. For further provisions as to obstructing sidewalks, see § 20-7 of this Code.
F. MOVING BUILDINGS.
The moving of any building within the City of Buffalo shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter. The price to be
charged for a permit authorizing the erection or placing upon any lot or land of any building moved from any other location shall
be the same as for a new building of like value.
G. TREE TRIMMERS DUTY TO CLEAN UP AND REMOVE DEBRIS.
All tree cutters or trimmers, whether engaged in such trade or business for compensation or other consideration or not, shall
immediately, upon the completion of such work, attend to cleaning up, clearing away and proper removal and disposal of all
stumps, tree trunks, branches, logs, chips, leaves and twigs from the property where such work is conducted and from all streets,
sidewalks and alleys which may be littered as a result of such work.
§ 5.1.10 Fence Code
A. DEFINITIONS.
Fence – This shall mean any structure of wood, metal, masonry, plastic, or other synthetic material used and erected on real
estate for the purpose of enclosing or separating any portion of the real estate from adjoining land whether or not such fence is
located on the boundary line of the property on which it is to be erected.
This does not include fences erected and used as enclosures wholly within the confines of the property for the purpose of
segregating an animal runway or similar enclosure.
B. FENCE REQUIREMENTS
(1)No Fence shall be erected, moved or altered until a permit application has been submitted to and approved by the City Building
Inspector.
Each application must include a plot plan drawn to scale showing property lines, where the proposed fence will be located on
said property and the type(s) of material(s) to be used and including the type of fence proposed (privacy, chain link, picket, ect).
The proposed fence shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
A permit fee of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) will be collected at the time of permit insurance. (R.O. 1374 12/14)
(2) Fences may not be constructed within the right-of-way of any dedicated street or alley unless a permit is first obtained from
the Building Inspector. Fences constructed within such rights-of-way are subject to being relocated or removed by the City and
other franchised utilities at the expense of the property owner.
Further, the right of the City and franchised utilities to locate, relocate, maintain and improve, replace and expand utility lines and
equipment, and the right to ingress and egress for such purposes shall be deemed to supersede and have precedence over any
consent or permit that may be granted within the such rights-of-way or within a dedicated utility easement.
Any fence, hedge, wall or other improvement erected within such areas, even with the consent of the City, shall be at the sole risk
of the owner and such improvements may be removed, damaged or destroyed by the City or other franchised utilities.
(3) No permit for a fence may be granted if it violates the following provisions:
a) The height of fences or walls located within rear yards, including the rear yards of through lots, and within required side
yards is restricted to six (6) feet in height. The height of fences or walls within required front yards and side yards adjacent to a
street are restricted to six (6) feet in height provided however, in order to provide clear visibility at street intersections, no fence,
5-4
wall, bush, sign, hedge, or any other structure shall be permitted within the triangular area at any street intersection corner formed
by the intersection street curb lines and a diagonal line joining said curb lines at points which are thirty (30) feet distant, measured
along said curb lines from their projected point of intersection.
b) No fence, wall, bush or hedge shall be erected between a fire hydrant and an adjacent street, nor within three (3) feet of any
fire hydrant. No fence, wall, bush or hedge shall be erected within five (5) feet of any constructed or proposed curb line. No
single strand or barbwire shall be used. Fences, wall, bushes, trees, hedges, or any other structure erected within the public rightof-
way are subject to removal at any time if required. Signs are not allowed in public rights-of-way unless approved by the City.
Electric fences are not allowed under any conditions.
c) To provide clear visibility at street intersections, no persons shall maintain any tree limb or branch less than eight (8) feet in
height or allow any tree trunk within thirty (30) foot triangular area at
any street intersection corner as described in (a) above.
d) The existing installation of a fence, wall, or location of a tree, hedge, bush or other structure existing on the effective date
of this ordinance, unless determined to create a hazard or nuisance, may be continued although such use does not conform with
the provision of this ordinance. Any fence, wall, or tree, hedge, bush, or other structure demolished, removed, or moved shall be
reinstalled or replanted only in conformance to the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The property owner(s) is responsible for the correction of any hazard situation adjacent to or on their property. If thi s
correction is not made by the property owner(s) after notification of the need for correction by the City, the City may take such
corrective action as is necessary and bill the owner(s) plus 25%.
C. ENORCEMENT
In the event of a violation the Building Inspector will notify the owner of the property and the occupant of
said violation. The notice shall specify the violation and the time within which corrective action must be completed which shall
be no longer than 30 days after the notice is served in person or by regular mail.
D. PENALTY
Any person or corporation violating this section or any permit granted hereunder shall be fined not more than One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) per day for each violation.
E. GRANDFATHER CLAUSE
Any fence, wall or other structure existing prior to April 2004, unless determined to create a hazard and/or nuisance, may be
continued although such structure does not conform with the provisions of § 5.1.10 B. Any fence, wall or other structure
demolished, removed or moved shall be reinstalled only in conformance to the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 5.1.11 SOLAR RIGHTS
A. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City by encouraging
the use of solar energy systems. It is the intent of this Ordinance to provide a means of protection for the use of solar collectors
without causing undue hardships on the rights of adjacent property owners.
B. In General and Definitions.
1. “City” shall mean the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
2. “Solar Collector” – One (1) of the following which is capable of collecting, storing or transmitting at least twenty-five
thousand (25,000) BTU’s on a clear winter solstice day:
a) A wall, clerestory window or skylight designed to transmit solar energy into a structure for heating purposes;
b) A greenhouse attached to another structure and designed to provide part or all of the heating load for the structure to
which it is attached;
c) A trombe wall, drum wall or other wall or roof structural element designed to collect and transmit solar energy into a
structure;
d) A photovoltaic collector designed to convert solar energy into electric energy;
e) A plate-type collector designed to use solar energy to heat air, water or other fluids for use in hot water or space heating
or for other applications;
5-5
f) A massive structural element designed to collect solar energy and transmit it to internal spaces for heating; or
g) Other devices or combination of devices that rely upon sunshine as an energy source.
3. “Solar Permit” – A permit granted by the City of Buffalo for a solar right.
4. “Solar Right” – A property right to an unobstructed line-of-sight path from a solar collector to the sun which permits
radiation from the sun to impinge directly on the solar collector. The extent of the solar right shall be described by that
illumination provided by the path of the sun on the winter solstice day which is put to a beneficial use or otherwise limited by City
Ordinance of State law.
5. “Winter Solstice Day” – The solstice on or about December 21st which marks the beginning of winter in the northern
hemisphere and is the time when the sun reaches its southernmost point.
6. “Potentially Affected Owner” – The applicant or the owner of the fee simple title or the contract purchaser of any real
property which lies within three hundred feet (300’) of the solar collector, not including the width of any intervening stree t or
alley.
C. Solar Permit Required.
1. A solar permit must be issued before a solar right may be established under this Ordinance.
2. A solar permit shall be granted for any proposed or existing solar collector, which complies with the requirements of this
Ordinance and other City Ordinances and State law.
3. Solar rights under applications filed subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance shall vest on the date the solar
permit is issued, which date shall also be the priority date of the solar right. The solar collector shall be put to beneficial use
within two (2) years of that time, except additional time may be granted by the City Building Inspector for good cause shown.
4. Users of solar collectors, which existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, shall apply for permits within five (5)
years after said effective date. The priority date for these solar rights shall be the date the solar permit is issued.
D. Restrictions on Solar Rights.
1. Solar collectors shall be located on the solar user’s property so as not to unreasonably or unnecessarily restrict the uses of
neighboring property. Unreasonable or unnecessary restriction shall include, but not be limited to, any restriction, which would
prohibit the uses allowed by City Code.
2. No solar right attaches to a solar collector or a portion of a solar collector, which would be shaded by a hypothetical nonlight
transmitting, ten-foot (10’) high wall located on the property line on a winter solstice day.
3. The solar right to radiation of the sun before 9:00 a.m. or after 3:00 p.m. Mountain Standard Time is de minimus and may
be infringed without compensation to the owner of the solar collector.
4. A solar right which is not applied to a beneficial use for a period of five (5) years or more shall be deemed abandoned and
without priority.
5. The priority of new construction with regard to interference in solar rights shall vest as of the date of application for a
building permit for such new construction.
E. Application and Administration.
1. Any person desiring to obtain a solar right shall first make application to the City Building Inspector for a solar access
permit. A permit application for a solar right shall consist of the following materials:
a) The original and two copies of a completed solar permit application on forms provided by the City;
b) A review fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00) made payable to the City of Buffalo;
c) The names and mailing addresses of all potentially affected owners;
5-6
d) The original and two copies of a site plan prepared by a licensed surveyor, drawn to scale, showing at least the
following detail;
-Title block containing owner’s name, legal and common address(es) of the site and use of the structure(s);
-North arrow, scale and date of preparation of the plan;
-Names of all adjacent streets;
-Dimensions of property;
-Dimensions, heights and location of all structures on the site and on the property immediately adjacent or abutting to the si te
where the solar collector is to be located or is located;
-Location, height and type (common name) of all trees, bushes and shrubs on site and on immediately adjacent property, and the
estimated height at full growth of such vegetation;
-Location and heights of all walls and fences on the site and on the property line with abutting property;
-Design, construction and orientation of solar collector and its height above ground level;
-For existing solar collectors, the first date the solar collector was beneficially used;
-Such topographical information and engineering calculations as may be necessary in the City Building Inspector’s discretion to
document the solar right;
-Signature block for City Building Inspector’s approval; and
-Signature block for Engineer’s certificate.
2. Upon filing of a permit application, the City Building Inspector or his designated representative shall review the
application and site plan and any comments received thereon, inspect the site of the proposed or existing solar collector, and shall
cause the applicant to make necessary corrections and additions to the permit application and site plan. Within ninety (90) days of
the filing, the City Building Inspector shall grant or deny the application.
3. If the application is granted, the applicant shall give notice by certified mail to the potentially affected property owners
within twenty (20) days of the granting of the application. In the notice, the applicant shall advise such property owners:
a) That applicant was granted a solar permit;
b) Of the right to inspect the application, site plan and related documents at the City Clerk’s Office; and
c) Of the right to appeal the decision of the City Building Inspector and the procedure to obtain a hearing thereon before
the City’s Board of Adjustment.
4. The City Building Inspector shall grant a solar permit for any solar collector, which complies with the provisions of this
Ordinance and other applicable provisions of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, and State law. The issuance shall be
indicated by the City Building Inspector’s written approval and signature on the completed permit application and site plan.
5. Potentially affected property owners may appeal the issuance or denial of a permit by filing with the City Building
Inspector a written request for a hearing within ten (10) days following the date of mailing of the notice by the applicant, and
paying an appeal fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00). The City Board of Adjustment shall, upon receipt of a written appeal, hold a
hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of receiving the appeal and shall cause service of notice of the date, time and
location of such hearing to be made by certified mail upon the permit applicant, the City Building Inspector and the potentially
affected property owners, and shall give at least two (2) public notices thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Upon the hearing, any person may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney. A majority of the City Board of Adjustment ma y
affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the City Building Inspector. The solar access permit shall be issued, rescinded or
modified as necessary to comply with the decision of the Board.
6. The approved permit application and site plan shall be recorded by the applicant in the Johnson County Clerk’s Office
within fifteen (15) days after the issuance is confirmed. The applicant shall be responsible for recording the permit application
and site plan. Upon issuance of a permit, one copy of the approved permit application and site plan shall be returned to the
applicant, and one copy shall remain on file in the City Building Inspector’s Office.
F. Prior Existing Uses.
1. The lawful location of structures in existence prior to the time of beneficial use of an existing solar energy collection
system or in existence at the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued even though the location does not conform to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
2. The solar applicant takes the permit subject to the natural growth of all vegetation which exists at the time of filing the
application. 5-7
3. Such structure or vegetation which has been damaged by fire or a calamity, may be restored to its original condition,
provided the work is commenced within one year of the calamity. In addition, normal and routine maintenance of structures may
be carried on.
4. Whenever the use of such a damaged structure or vegetation has been discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the
structure or vegetation shall not thereafter be re-established, unless such future use shall be in conformance with provisions of this
Ordinance.
G. Variances.
Any person desiring to erect any solar collector or other structure, or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth
of any new vegetation, or otherwise use his/her property, not in conformance with this Ordinance, may apply for a variance from
the City Board of Adjustment. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the variance hearing and give public notice thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City, as well as seven (7) days advance written notice sent by certified mail to potentially
affected owners. The notices shall contain the name of the applicant, the description of the property involved, a statement of the
nature of the requested variance and the time and place of the hearing. Failure to mail a notice to every potentially affected owner
shall not affect the validity of any hearing or determination of the Board. A variance shall not be granted by the Board unless,
following a hearing, it finds:
1. That the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in substantial and unavoidable hardships;
2. That all possible measures have been, and will be, taken to minimize interference with solar or other property rights; and
3. That the variance granted is the minimum adjustment that will accomplish this purpose.
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
§ 5.2.1 License required; contractor defined; exceptions.
1. License required.
No contractor shall perform any work as a contractor within the city without first having obtained a license as provided herein.
No permits shall be issued for work to be done by a contractor who does not have a valid and subsisting license as required in this
article.
2. Contractor defined.
A contractor, within the meaning of this article, is a person, firm, partnership, company, corporation, agency, association, or
other organization, or any combination thereof;
a. Who undertakes with or for another within the City to build, construct, alter, repair, add to, demolish, or move any building or
structure or any portion thereof, for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, or other compensation or any combination thereof.
b. Who builds, constructs, alters, adds to, moves or demolishes any building or structure either on his own or other property for
the purpose of resale or rental except residence buildings and buildings or structures accessory thereto intended for his own
personal use and occupancy. A person constructing his own home without the aid of a licensed contractor may secure a permit on
only one residence in any two year period and the construction of more than one residence by said person in any two (2) year
period shall be presumed to have been for resale.
3. Exception.
The following shall not be deemed to be contractors as the term is used in this article:
a. Owners making repairs, alterations, additions, or improvements to their residence or business, including building accessory
thereto which do not involve the structural elements of the building.
Owner is hereby defined as any person, firm, corporation, or agent having a legal or equitable interest in the property. For the
purpose of this section, the term owner may extend to a tenant, lessee, employee(s) of the actual owner, in regards to repairs,
alterations, additions, or improvements of said business or residence with written authorization of the actual owner to perform
work for which a permit is issued. For purposes of this section, the term employee shall not include anyone employed solely to
perform the work for which a permit is issued.
b. A homeowner who constructs his own residence or building accessory thereto which is intended for his own personal use;
however, this will be permitted only once in a two (2) year period or such will come within the said definitions.
5-8
c. The Building Official shall maintain an approved listing of work which may be performed by owners of commercial buildings
without the aid of a licensed contractor. Such approval will be granted from time to time by the Board of Examiners. Other types
of work may be approved by the Building Official upon application, provided the applicant has experience or knowledge which
qualifies him to do the work. Denial by the Building Official of the application of an owner of a commercial building to perform
work other than that which has been approved by the formal action of the Board of Examiners may be appealed to the Board.
§ 5.2.2 License defined; authority; issuance of licenses, etc.
1. Definition.
A license is issued to the owner of a sole proprietorship or to an individual with the correct credentials as a Master of Record for a
partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity to perform work according to the particular license Contractor
Classification.
2. Authority.
The building official of the City of Buffalo shall review applications for licenses and accomplish the provisions and objectives of
this article.
3. Issuance of licenses.
The determination of eligibility for license or other matters pertaining thereto shall be by the building official. Applications for the
contractor’s license shall be on such forms and all applicants shall furnish such information as the building official may prescribe.
4. The building official may disqualify an applicant if:
a. The application is incomplete, inaccurate, or contains misleading or false information, or;
b. The applicant has performed work without a license after receipt of notice from the City that a license is required.
The building official shall maintain a register reflecting the name of each contractor licensed by the City of Buffalo.
§ 5.2.3 Licensee's responsibility.
1. General.
All licensees shall be responsible for work requiring a permit under the provisions of this article, and without limitation, to the
items as herein listed:
a. To present his license card when requested by the Building Official or his authorized representatives;
b. To obtain a permit when the same is required;
c. To faithfully construct, without substantial departure from or disregard of drawings and specifications when such drawings and
specifications have been filed and approved by the department and permit issued for same, unless such changes are approved by
the department;
d. To complete all work authorized on the permit issued under the authority of the adopted construction codes unless good cause
is proved;
e. To obtain inspection services when the same are required by the adopted construction codes;
f. To pay any fee assessed under authority of the adopted construction codes;
g. To build in compliance with the adopted construction codes;
h. To contact One Call of Wyoming before doing any excavation in compliance with Wyoming Statutes § 37-12-301 through 304;
i. To immediately notify the owner of an underground facility if it is contacted or damaged in the course of excavation in
compliance with Wyoming Statutes §37-12-301 through 304.
2. Safety measures,.
All federal and state laws and municipal ordinances dealing with measures for the safety of workmen and of the public shall be
observed in addition to any requirements contained within this article.
§ 5.2.4 Duties and responsibilities of the contractor.
Any contractor licensed hereunder shall be responsible for all work included in his contract whether or not such work is done
by him directly or by a subcontractor. He shall be responsible for funds or property received by him for prosecution or
completion of a specific purpose. He shall also see that all applicable permits are obtained by subcontractors under this contract.
5-9
§ 5.2.5 Classification of Licenses.
There shall be various classes of licenses and the holder of each license shall be authorized to do the following:
1. Class A: General Contractor
This license shall entitle the holder thereof to contract for the construction, alteration or repair of any type or size of structure
permitted by the building codes of the City with the exception of any Class D Category that requires the applicant to be tested.\
2. Class B: Residential Contractor
This license shall entitle the holder thereof to contract for the construction, alteration, additions or repair of one and two family
residential structures and accessory buildings. This license entitles a contractor to perform Class C category work with the
exception of any Class D category that requires the applicant to be tested.
3. Class C Subcontractor
This license shall entitle the holder thereof to perform the work described in this section. Work for which a Class C license is
required is defined as follows: Blacktop, Concrete, Doors, Drywall, Excavation, Fire Suppression, Framing, Handyman Services,
Home Repair Services, Roofing, Siding, Sprinkler Systems, Tape and Texture, Windows and Woodstoves. Miscellaneous – This
category is for contractors who perform any type of work on any building, structure or site that are not included within categories
Class A, Class B, Class C and Class D. The Building Official may create and/or delete Class C License categories as the need
arises.
4. Class D Specialty Contractor
This class includes plumbing, mechanical/HVAC and gas pipe fitting.
5. Tree Trimmer
Any person who trims, cuts or removes trees, branches of trees, bushes or shrubbery, engaging such services for compensation or
other consideration, is hereby declared to be a tree trimmer.
§ 5.2.6 License Fees.
1. The annual license fees applicable to those herein enumerated shall be as determined by the building official with final approval
by the City Council.
2. License fees shall not be prorated for any portion of the year.
3. License fees are not refundable.
§ 5.2.8 License Renewal.
1. Licenses shall be renewed annually with a thirty (30) day grace period following the renewal date. Any work performed after
expiration and prior to obtaining such license shall be a violation of this article.
2. After the effective date of this ordinance, no license shall be renewed unless the applicant submits proof that he has passed the
required WAM or State of Wyoming tests for Class D licenses.
3. A licensee that fails to reapply for a license at the one year anniversary date of the license shall surrender his license and the
same shall be deemed to be null and void.
§ 5.2.9 Validity of License.
1. A Master of Record shall be designated as the license holder for every business entity. A Master of Record shall pass the
Required license test for the qualification for the Contractor Classification.
2. A business entity which changes its name or Master of Record shall be considered to operate without a license until the change
is reported to the City. Changes shall be reported by the business entity and/or the Master of Record to the City within thirty (30)
days of any changes.
3. A business entity which changes its form to create a new legal entity requires a designation of a Master of Record for the new
entity. An example would include the incorporation of a sole proprietorship or the creation of a partnership or limited liability
company. One of the owners of the new entity such as a stockholder or director of a corporation or a manager of a limited liability
company may qualify as Master of Record. The license may be transferred to the extent that a new fee shall not be charged.
§ 5.2.10 Suspension of a Class A, B, C, D or Tree Trimmer Contractor License.
All licensees shall be responsible for work requiring a permit under the provisions of this article.
1. The board may suspend a Contractor license when one or more the following are committed by any Class A, B, C, D or Tree
Trimmer Licensed Contractor in the City of Buffalo:
a. Failure to obtain the proper permit prior to performing work;
5-10
b. Failure to faithfully construct, without substantial departure from or disregard of drawings and specifications when such
drawings and specifications have been filed and approved by the department and permit issued for same, unless such changes are
approved by the department;
c. Failure to complete all work authorized on the permit issued under the authority of any City ordinance or any adopted building
code unless good cause is proved;
d. Failure to obtain inspection services when the same are required by any City ordinance or any adopted building code;
e. Failure to pay any fee assessed under any City ordinance or any adopted building code;
f. Failure to build in compliance with all applicable codes
g. Failure to contact One-Call of Wyoming before doing any excavation in compliance with Wyoming Statutes § 37-12-301
through 304.
h. Failure to immediately notify the owner of an underground facility if it is contacted or damaged in the course of excavation in
compliance with Wyoming Statutes § 37-12-301 through 304.
i. Failure to obtain a current license, surety bond, and insurance prior to contracting.
j. Failure to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy prior to occupancy by an owner (defined in Section 5.2.1(c) ) of a building or
structure.
k. Knowingly combining or conspiring with a person, firm, or corporation by permitting one's license to be used by such person,
firm or corporation, except as provided for in § 5.2.1(c).
l. By acting as agent, partner, associate, or in any other capacity, with persons, firms or corporations to evade the provisions of
this article;
m. Knowingly violating any provisions of this article.
n. A Contractor’s license shall be suspended at least ten (10) days for failure to comply with § 5.2.3-(1)-(h) B.C.C., if
underground facilities owned by the City of Buffalo are damaged in the course of the excavation.
o. A Contractor's license shall be suspended at least five (5) days for failure to comply with §5.2.3-(1)-(i) B.C.C., if underground
facilities owned by the City of Buffalo are damaged in the course of the excavation.
2. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article by doing business within the city as a Contractor, as defined herein,
without a license, or after a license has been suspended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than Two Hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(A) BUILDING CONTRACTOR LICENSES
§ 5.2.11 Licenses, Building Contractor Generally.
Class A, B, and C Contractors Licenses are issued for the term of one (1) year by the building official in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this code. A Building Contractor’s license may be issued to any Contractor defined in § 5.2.5 (a) (b) (c)
B.C.C
SEC. 5.2.12 Licenses, Application
To obtain a license the applicant shall submit to the building official a written and verified application for the type of license
sought along with all the required insurance, bond and letters.
SEC. 5.2.13 Licenses, Contractor Bonding, Insurance and Workers Comp. Insurance.
Class A, B, C , D and Tree Trimmer contractors must file with the building official and maintain during the term of the license:
1. License and Permit Bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), payable to the City of Buffalo all or part of which
may be forfeited for damage to City property; and
2. A certificate of insurance showing that the licensee has in force public liability insurance as follows:
License Per Occurrence Total Aggregate
Class A General Contractor - $1,000,000 $2,000,000
Class B Residential Contractor $ 500,000 $1,000,000 5-11
Class C Subcontractor $ 300,000 $ 600,000
Class D Specialty Contractor $ 500,000 $1,000,000
Tree Trimmer $ 300,000 $ 600,000
3. All contractors having employees shall provide current verification of good standing from Wyoming Workers Compensation
and Unemployment Insurance Divisions. Sole Proprietors or partners in a business partnership are not required to have workers
compensation insurance and need to fill out and
sign a waiver letter supplied by the City of Buffalo.
§ 5.2.14 Licenses, Fee Schedule.
The following annual fees are payable upon issuance of the type of license indicated:
Class A General Contractor $100.00
Class B Residential Contractor $ 75.00
Class C Subcontractor $ 50.00
Class D Specialty Contractor $ 75.00
Tree Trimmer $ 75.00
(B) ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
§ 5.2.15 Registration, Electrical Contractor Generally.
Electrical contractors are required to register a copy of their State of Wyoming Electrical Contractors License with the City Clerk.
(C) PLUMBING LICENSES
§ 5.2.19 Licenses, Plumbing Generally.
The Class D Plumbing Contractors License is issued for the term of one year by the building official in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this Code. Contractor's licenses may be issued individually or to any Contractor defined in § 5.2.5 (d)
B.C.C.
§ 5.2.20 Licenses, Plumbing Contractors.
1. A plumbing contractor must either be licensed as a Master Plumber himself or have a Master Plumber in his employ. Plumbing
contractors shall have at least one Master Plumber or Journeyman Plumber supervising every three Apprentice Plumbers.
a. No person shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering plumbing unless the plumbing work performed in the
course of such business, is under the direct supervision of a licensed master plumber.
b. The Master Plumber of a business must be a full time employee of that business.
c. The Master Plumber of a particular plumbing contractor shall be able to respond to any job site where the plumbing contractor
is employed within 48 hours.
§ 5.2.22 Licenses, Plumbing Examinations.
The Master Plumber must have either passed the WAM Master Plumber test, the City of Buffalo Master Plumber test, or have
ICC certification as a Master Plumber to obtain a Master Plumbers license. Plumbers who have passed WAM or ICC Master
Plumber with Gas or the WAM or ICC Master Gas Pipefitter’s exam may install gas piping inside buildings.
a. The owner or a full-time employee in a supervisory position shall take the examination.
b. Master of record shall have documented experience of one year as a journeyman and four years as an apprentice.
The tested representative shall be the qualifying individual for not more than one (1) contractor or company at any given time. If
the tested representative for the company resigns, a company will have sixty (60) days to provide the City with a new tested
representative. WAM and ICC administered examinations are graded by WAM or ICC’s designated individual. This requirement
will be waived for plumbing contractors that have been licensed in the City of Buffalo for 4 consecutive years prior to the passage
of this ordinance or to plumbing contractors that were previously grandfathered in from previous ordinance changes.
§ 5.2.23 Licenses, Plumbing Fee Schedule.
The following fees are payable upon issuance of the type of license indicated: Plumbing Contractor $75.00
(D) MECHANICAL/ HVAC LICENSES
§ 5.2.24 Licenses, Mechanical/ HVAC Generally.
The Class D Mechanical Contractors License is issued for the term of one year by the building official in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this Code. Contractor’s licenses may be issued to any Contractor defined in § 5.2.5 (d) B.C.C.
5-12
§ 5.2.25 Licenses, Mechanical/ HVAC Examinations.
The master of record must have passed the WAM Standard Master Mechanical exam or be ICC certified as a Standard Master
Mechanical. Mechanical contractors who have passed the WAM or ICC Master Gas Pipefitter’s exam may install gas piping
inside buildings.
a. The owner or a full-time employee in a supervisory position shall take the examination.
b. Master of record shall have documented experience of one year as a journeyman and four years as an apprentice.
The tested representative shall be the qualifying individual for not more than one (1) contractor or company at any given time. If
the tested representative for the company resigns, a company will have sixty (60) days to provide the City with a new tested
representative. WAM and ICC administered examinations are graded by WAM or ICC’s designated individual. This requirement
will be waived for Mechanical HVAC contractors that have been licensed in the City of Buffalo for 4 consecutive years as a
Mechanical HVAC contractor prior to the passage of this ordinance.
§ 5.2.26 Licenses, Mechanical/ HVAC Fee Schedule
The following annual fees are payable upon issuance of the type of license indicated: Mechanical Contractor $75.00
(E) TREE TRIMMER LICENSE
§ 5.2.27 Licenses, Tree Trimmer Generally.
The Tree Trimmer License is issued for the term of one year by the building official in compliance with the applicable
provisions of this Code. Contractor’s licenses may be issued to any Contractor defined in § 5.2.5 (e) B.C.C.
§ 5.2.28 Licenses, Tree Trimmer Qualifications.
1. No person shall engage in the business or trade of tree trimming in the City of Buffalo, without first making written application
to the Council, under oath, showing thereby that the applicant has or can fulfill the following requirements:
a. Has at least one year of training or experience as a tree cutter as defined in § 5.2.5 (e) B.C.C.
b. Is in sound physical condition and health for such trade or business and will provide that all employees, directly employed as
tree cutters, be of sound physical condition and health and be not suffering from any infirmity, deformity, amputation of any limb,
partial or total deafness or blindness.
c. Shall notify all public utility companies maintaining overhead power or telephone lines in the City of Buffalo prior to the actual
work of tree cutting, and request that immediate arrangements be made for the temporary removal of such lines, payment for the
temporary removal thereof where such removal is deemed necessary by such public utility company and damage where the same
occurs to such overhead power or telephone lines.
d. Has proper and safe equipment and machinery, well-tested and inspected, for such trade or business, which equipment and
machinery shall be inventoried, listed and described in the application. (Ord. 570, § 2)
§ 5.2.29 Licenses, Tree Trimmer Fee Schedule.
The following annual fees are payable upon issuance of the type of license indicated:
Tree Trimmer $75.00
PERMIT FEES AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 5.3.1 Work exempt from permit requirements and exceptions.
1. Any construction, alteration, addition or repair, the valuation of which is one thousand dollars or less is exempt from a permit,
but must be constructed or installed in accordance with the technical codes adopted by the city.
2. Gas piping, water heaters, replacement or new installations of water or sewer service piping, and any fuel burning appliances
require a permit regardless of the valuation.
3. On new building construction, separate plumbing and mechanical permits are not needed, they are included in the computed
square footage permit fee.
4. Construction, removal, alterations and improvements of residential non-bearing interior partitions.
§ 5.3.2 Building Permit Fees.
Building permit fee’s will be established by the building official and approved through a resolution by the city council.
5-13
CHAPTER 5A
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
Chapter 5A of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1984, is hereby repealed. See Chapter 5 Buildings. (Ord.
971, 11/81) (R.O. 1286, 07/07)
5A-1
CHAPTER 6
CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, MENAGERIES AND CONCESSIONS1
1. For state law authorizing the town to license circuses, carnivals, etc., see W.S.
1977, § 33-6-104. See also, W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103.
§ 6-1. License for circuses, carnivals, menageries, etc.
§ 6-2. Licenses for merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, etc.
§ 6-3. Licenses for shooting gallery, doll rack, concessions, etc.
SEC. 6-1. LICENSE FOR CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, MENAGERIES, ETC.
No person shall operate or conduct within the City of Buffalo, any circus, carnival, menagerie, caravan, exhibition
of monsters or freaks of nature, or any other entertainment of a similar kind, for which money or any other reward is in
any manner demanded or received, without having first obtained the written consent of the Mayor, and thereafter a
license from the City Clerk. The fee for the license required by this section shall be Twelve Dollars ($12.00) for each
twenty-four hours, or fraction thereof, which fee shall be payable in advance. The license shall set forth the purpose
for which it is granted, and the time it is to continue. (R.O. 1955, § 48-1)
SEC. 6-2. LICENSES FOR MERRY-GO-ROUNDS, FERRIS WHEELS, ETC.
No person shall operate or conduct within the City of Buffalo any merry-go-round, Ferris wheel or any similar
device without a license for that purpose. The license shall set forth the purpose for which it is granted, and the time
it is to continue. Applications for such license shall be made to the City Clerk, who shall collect in advance from the
applicant the sum of Five Dollars ($5.00) for each twenty-four hours’ operation, or fraction thereof. (R.O. 1955, § 48-
2)
SEC. 6-3. LICENSES FOR SHOOTING GALLERY, DOLL RACK, CONCESSIONS, ETC.
No person shall operate or conduct within the City of Buffalo, any doll rack, shooting gallery, panorama, diorama,
booth for tricks of legerdemain, or any kind of a concession of whatever name or nature, without first obtaining a
license for that purpose from the City Clerk. The fees for such license shall be Five Dollars ($5.00) for each day or
night’s operation, Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for each week, Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for each month and One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each quarter. The fees shall be payable in advance. Each license issued shall set
forth the purpose for which it is granted, and the time it is to continue. (R.O. 1955, § 48-3)
6-1
CHAPTER 7
ELECTRICITY.
Chapter 7 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1984, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 822, 09/74) (R.O. 1287,
07/07)
7-1
7-7
CHAPTER 8
FIRE DEPARTMENT1
1. For state law authorizing the town to establish and support a fire department, to
make rules and regulations governing the department, etc., see W.S. 1977, § 15-
1-103.
As to parking vehicles near fire hydrants, see § 13-18 of this Code. For
regulations generally concerning fire hydrants, see § 27-21.
§ 8-1. Fire chief – Appointment; term; oath of office; vacancy.
§ 8-2. Same – Powers and duties generally.
§ 8-3. Assistant chief and additional personnel.
§ 8-4. Compensation; care of equipment.
§ 8-5. Duty of department to attend, etc., fires.
§ 8-6. Discharge of firemen.
§ 8-7. Interference with fire department; Police power of chief and assistants.
§ 8-8. Duty of persons present at fires.
§ 8-9. Fire alarms – Generally.
§ 8-10. Same – False alarms.
§ 8-11. Removal, etc., of buildings, etc.
§ 8-12. Riding on fire apparatus.
§ 8-13 . Injuring, removing, etc., fire department equipment.
§ 8-14. Key lock box system.
SEC. 8-1. FIRE CHIEF – APPOINTMENT; TERM; OATH OF OFFICE; VACANCY.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor by and with the consent of the Council to appoint a chief of the fire department
from among the residents of the City of Buffalo, who shall perform the duties of his office without pay, except as
hereinafter provided. The Fire Chief shall hold office for the term of two years or until his successor is duly appointed
and qualified. He shall take the same oath of office as shall be subscribed to by other officers of the City of Buffalo.
In case of vacancy in office by reason of his resignation, death or removal therefrom for any cause, the office shall be
filled in the manner prescribed by the ordinances of the City of Buffalo for filling vacancies in other offices.
(R.O. 1955, § 71-2)
SEC. 8-2. SAME – POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
The Fire Chief shall be a member of the fire department and shall have charge thereof. He shall have control and
command of all property belonging to the department. He shall superintend and direct the acts and doings of the
firemen and shall prescribe such rules and regulations for their government as may be necessary, subject to the
approval of the Council. He shall see that the provisions of this Code and any other ordinances of the City of Buffalo
with reference to the fire department are faithfully observed. He shall be in command at all fires and shall have
control over all officers and men of the department and all other persons who may be present at such fires. He shall
take all proper measures for the extinguishment of fires, the protection of lives and property and the preservation of
law and order. It shall further be his duty to report in January of each year to the Council, giving an account of all
machines, apparatus, tools and appliances in the possession of the fire department and make such suggestions and
recommendations as he shall deem proper. (Ord. 960, § 1, 7/81)
8-1
SEC. 8-3. ASSISTANT CHIEF AND ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL.
The Fire Chief, immediately after receiving his appointment and taking the oath of office, shall recommend to the
council one person as assistant, to be known as the Assistant Fire Chief of the fire department, who shall be
appointed in the same manner as the Fire Chief for the term of two years, or until his successor is duly appointed and
qualified, and who shall subscribe to the same oath of office as the Fire Chief, and whose vacancy in office may be
filled in the same manner as that of the Fire Chief or other officers of the City of Buffalo. The Mayor, by and with the
approval of the Council, shall also employ such additional firemen as he may deem necessary. The Fire Chief,
Assistant Fire Chief and additional firemen regularly appointed shall constitute the fire department of the City of
Buffalo.
(R.O. 1955, § 71-3)
SEC. 8-4. COMPENSATION; CARE OF EQUIPMENT.
The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief and each regularly appointed fireman shall receive as full compensation for
the performance of their various duties the sum of Five Dollars ($5.00) each per meeting attended, and Seven Dollars
and Fifty Cents ($7.50) each per fire attended, which sum shall be paid to them in regular warrants of the City of
Buffalo. Such compensation shall include not only the attendance at fires, but also the proper care of the fire
equipment of the City of Buffalo. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, or Assistant Fire Chief, to see that all
equipment, including the fire truck, chemical tanks, smoke masks, fire hose and fire nozzles are properly cared for
and put away in readiness for immediate use. (Ord. 960, § 2, 7/81)
SEC. 8-5. DUTY OF DEPARTMENT TO ATTEND, ETC., FIRE.
It shall be the duty of the fire company to attend with the fire apparatus belonging to the City of Buffalo every fire
or alarm of fire and report to the Chief of the fire department or other officer in command, and not to leave the
premises until ordered to depart by the Chief or other officer in command. (R.O. 1955, § 71-8)
SEC. 8-6. DISCHARGE OF FIREMEN.
The Fire Chief shall have power to discharge any member of the fire department for failure to attend fires or to
properly perform his duties at any fire; provided, however, that such fireman shall have the right to appeal to the
Council within ten (10) days after his discharge by the Fire Chief to determine whether or not the decision of the Fire
Chief should be upheld. (R.O. 1955, § 71-6)
SEC. 8-7. INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT; POLICE POWER OF CHIEF AND ASSISTANTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the officers of the City of Buffalo at any fire, or to give any
orders or interfere with the giving of any orders of the Chief of the fire department or his assistants, or upon being
warned to abstain from any course of conduct that the Chief or his assistants shall deem improper, to persist in his
conduct or disobedience.
For the purposes of the provisions of this section, the Chief of the fire department and his assistants are
constituted special policemen and shall have full power to arrest the offender against the provision of this section with
or without warrant and to call upon any citizen bystanders to act as policemen for the purpose of making such arrest
and continuing the party so offending in custody until after the fire shall be over. (R.O. 1955, § 20-8)
SEC. 8-8. DUTY OF PERSONS PRESENT AT FIRES.
Every person who shall be present during a fire shall be subject and obedient to the orders of the Chief of the fire
department and his assistant in extinguishing the fire and in removing and protecting the property. It shall be unlawful
for any person to refuse or neglect to obey such orders. (R.O. 1955, § 71-5)
SEC. 8-9. FIRE ALARMS – GENERALLY.
It shall be the duty of the Council to provide any method it shall deem proper and expedient to call out the firemen
of the City of Buffalo to attend fires. (Ord. 960, § 3, 7/81)
8-2
SEC. 8-10. SAME – FALSE ALARMS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully give or make any false alarm of fire. (R.O. 1955, § 20-7)
SEC. 8-11. REMOVAL, ETC., OF BUILDINGS, ETC.
The Fire Chief or other officer in command during the progress of any fire, whenever in his judgment it becomes
necessary to check or control such fire, may order any fence, building or structure of any kind to be torn down or
removed. The Chief or other officer in command at a fire may also cause any building or structure to be blown up for
the purpose of checking or extinguishing a fire.
SEC. 8-12. RIDING ON FIRE APPARATUS.
No person other than members of the fire department shall ride upon any fire apparatus when the same is going to
or returning from any fire in the City of Buffalo, except persons authorized or requested to attend and assist at such
fires by the Chief, or other officer of the department. (R.O. 1955, § 71-10)
SEC. 8-13. INJURING, REMOVING, ETC., FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT. 2
No person shall at any time cut any hose or willfully break or injure any apparatus belonging to the City of Buffalo
or used by or in charge of the fire department. Nor shall any person break in any door of any building used by the fire
department or take or carry away or remove any of the property of the City of Buffalo used by the fire department or
belonging to the department, without permission from the proper authorities to do so. (R.O. 1955, § 71-11)
2. As to injuring, destroying, etc., property belonging to the City of Buffalo, see § 16-
21 of this Code.
SEC. 8-14. KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM.
a. The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or
such other location required by the fire chief, effective May 15, 2007.
(1) ALL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS.
Commercial and industrial building shall mean buildings where any industry, trade or
business is carried on or where any process or operation, directly or indirectly related
to any industry, trade or business, is carried on and where any person is employed by
another for direct or indirect gain or profit.
(2) Multi-family residential structures comprised of four (4) or more units in which access
to the building or common areas or mechanical or electrical rooms within the building
is denied through locked doors.
(3) Any building or facility containing a quantity of hazardous materials.
(4) Governmental structures.
(5) Nursing care facilities.
(6) Educational facilities.
(7) All places of assembly.
b. All newly constructed structures subject to this ordinance shall have key lock box installed and
operational prior to obtaining a final inspection and certificate of occupancy from the Building
Inspector. Existing buildings will be allowed to purchase lock boxes as they wish.
c. The fire chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the
town and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system. Lock
boxes can only be ordered through the Fire Chief.
d. The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall at all times, keep
keys in the lock box that will allow for access to the following:
8-3
(1) Keys to locked points of egress, whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings;
(2) Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms;
(3) Keys to locked electrical rooms;
(4) Key to elevator controls;
(5) Keys to the other areas as directed by the City of Buffalo Fire Department.
e. The fire chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box
system and location thereof.
8-4
CHAPTER 9
FIRE PREVENTION. 1
1. For state law as to authority of the town in connection with fire prevention, see
W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103.
As to parking regulations concerning vehicles designed to carry explosives, etc.,
see § 13-17 of this Code. For regulations concerning fireworks, see § 16-12, 16-
13. As to fire protection in connection with trailer courts, see § 24-21.
§ 9-1. Fire wardens – Designation.
§ 9-2. Same – Duties generally.
§ 9-3. Construction of chimneys.
§ 9-4. Stovepipes.
§ 9-5. Protection of stoves.
§ 9-6. Methods of conducting fire or smoke from buildings.
§ 9-7. Storage of gunpowder.
§ 9-8. Lighted candles, etc., in certain places.
§ 9-9. Fires in streets, etc.
§ 9-10. Combustibles not to be thrown or swept into streets.
§ 9-11. Combustibles to be enclosed.
(This Chapter repealed by Ord. 961, § 1, 7/81)
SEC. 9-1. FIRE WARDENS – DESIGNATION.
Section 9-1 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-2. SAME – DUTIES GENERALLY.
Section 9-2 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-3. CONSTRUCTION OF CHIMNEYS.
Section 9-3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-4. STOVEPIPES.
Section 9-4 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-5. PROTECTION OF STOVES.
Section 9-5 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-6. METHODS OF CONDUCTING FIRE OR SMOKE FROM BUILDINGS.
Section 9-6 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC, 9-7. STORAGE OF GUNPOWDER.
Section 9-7 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-8. LIGHTED CANDLES, ETC., IN CERTAIN PLACES.
Section 9-8 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-9. FIRES IN STREETS, ETC.
Section 9-9 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-10. COMBUSTIBLES NOT TO BE THROWN OR SWEPT INTO STREETS.
Section 9-10 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 9-11. COMBUSTIBLES TO BE ENCLOSED.
Section 9-11 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
9-1
CHAPTER 10
GARBAGE, TRASH AND OTHER WASTE MATTER. 1
1. For state law as to garbage, refuse, disposal, see W.S. 1977, § 35-10-101.
As to garbage and refuse disposal in connection with trailer courts, see § 24-17
of this Code.
Article I. In General.
§ 10-1. Sanitary landfill – Establishment. Repealed.
§ 10-1.1. Same – Dumping restrictions.
§ 10-1.2. Same – Landfill operator. Repealed.
§ 10-1.3. Same – Disposal restrictions fixed by regulations. Repealed
§ 10-1.4. Definitions.
§ 10-1.5. Garbage collection.
§ 10-1.6. Collection supervised by City Sanitary Inspector.
§ 10-1.7. Precollection practices – Residential.
§ 10-1.8. Collection practice.
§ 10-1.9. Interfering with Sanitary Inspector.
§ 10-1.10. Burning prohibited.
§ 10-1.11. Penalty.
§ 10-1.12. Sevarability.
§ 10-2. Same – Unlawful to dump garbage, etc., except at city dump.
§ 10-3. Dumping, etc., waste matter, etc., in public places.
§ 10-4. Accumulation on private premises.
§ 10-5. Burning rubbish or waste.
§ 10-6. Disposition of ashes, etc.
Article II. Scavengers.
§ 10-7. Title.
§ 10-8. License – Required; Fee; Term; Transferability.
§ 10-9. Same – Application; License not required for certain residents.
§ 10-10. Equipment; Manner of discharging duties; Penalty.
§ 10-11. Time and fees for collecting garbage; Payment of fees.
§ 10-12. Collection and removal of waste material generally.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL.
SEC. 10-1. SANITARY LANDFILL – ESTABLISHMENT.
This Section is hereby repealed in its entirety. (Ord. 1088, 1/91; R.O. 1326, 4, 7/09)
SEC. 10-1.1. SAME – DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit refuse, debris or solid waste material in any
residential or commercial container not owned by such person or without the permission of such person firm or
corporation which owns the residential or commercial container. (Ord. 1088, 1/91; R.O. 1327 4, 21/09)
SEC. 10-1.2. SAME – LANDFILL OPERATOR.
This Section is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1088, § 1, 1/91; R.O. 1328 4, 7/09)
SEC. 10-1.3. SAME – DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS FIXED BY REGULATIONS.
This Section is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1088, § 1, 1/91; R.O. 1329 4, 7/09)
10-1
SEC. 10-1.4. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
1) Ashes: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible materials.
2) City: The City of Buffalo.
3) Collector: Either the City or a person holding a contract issued or granted by the City authorizing such person
to operate, conduct and maintain a municipal garbage and refuse collection and disposal system upon, on and over
streets, alleys and public ways of the City.
4) Garbage: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
5) Owner and Occupant: Every person as herein defined in possession, charge, custody or control of any
premises where garbage, refuse and rubbish is created or accumulated.
6) Person: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
7) Premises: Land and all buildings and structures thereon including, but not excluding by enumeration, single or
multi-family dwellings, rooming houses, apartment houses, hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes, hotels and
motels, restaurants, drive-in establishments, schools (academic, trade or industrial, and kindergarten) and any other
place of habitation, office, shop or establishment or place of conducting a business, trade or occupation.
8) Refuse: All putresciole and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, small dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes.
9) Rubbish: Nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and non-combustible
waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
(Ord. 855, § 2, 6/75)
SEC. 10-1.5. GARBAGE COLLECTION.
The Municipal Refuse Collection and Disposal Service of the City shall, by such means as the City Council deems
appropriate, collect and dispose of all garbage, rubbish, refuse, paper, glass, tin cans, crockery, ashes, and other
debris accumulated in the City. (Ord. 855, § 3, 6/75)
SEC. 10-1.6. COLLECTION SUPERVISED BY CITY SANITARY INSPECTOR.
All refuse accumulated in the City shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the City, or a person holding a
contract issued or granted by the City, or a person holding a valid permit issued by the City under the supervision of
the City Sanitary Inspector. The Sanitary Inspector shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days
of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection conveyance
and disposal as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice, provided that such
regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. (Ord. 855, § 4, 6/75)
SEC. 10-1.7. PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES – RESIDENTIAL.
All garbage, paper, rubbish, trash, trimmings, glass, tin cans, grass clippings, leaves and other debris of like
matter except ashes shall be placed and maintained in containers with lids of at least twenty (20) gallon capacity and
not to exceed thirty-two (32) gallon capacity, and not to exceed seventy (70) pounds in net weight. If disposable (nonreturnable)
plastic bags are used, they shall be manufactured from polyethylene or ethylene copolymer resin, with the
gauge of not less than 1.5 mils. All ashes shall be placed in plastic bags separate from all other garbage, refuse or
rubbish and sealed to prevent exposure to the elements or other combustible materials. All regulation disposable
plastic bags shall be stored, except on the day of collection, in an animal-proof container or area approved by the
Sanitary Inspector for the City. (Ord. 1098, § 1, 4/92; R.O. 1322 § 4, 7/09) At his/her discretion, the Sanitary
Inspector may require any resident of the City of Buffalo to provide a regulation container for storing disposable
plastic bags on the day of collection. (Ord. 1322 § 4, 7/09)
10-2
1) Preparation of Refuse.
a) Garbage: All wet garbage before being placed in garbage cans for collection shall have drained from it all
free liquids and shall be wrapped in paper.
b) Rubbish: All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection.
c) Trimmings and Clippings: Tree trimming, hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to a length not to
exceed five feet (5’) and securely tied in bundles of not more than seventy pounds (70 lbs.) in weight before being
deposited for collection.
d) All ashes shall be cold and noncombustible before being deposited for collection. (Ord. 1098, § 1, 4/92)
e) Needles from syringes must be placed in a puncture proof metal or plastic container to keep the needles
containerized and to reduce the risk of injury to collection personnel. (Ord. 1317, 11, 18/2008)
2) Refuse Containers.
a) Residential – Duty to Provide and Maintain in Sanitary Condition: Refuse containers shall be provided by
the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be regulation plastic bags or
regulation containers with covers and side handles. The refuse container shall have the premises address clearly
labeled on the container. Refuse containers shall be maintained in good condition. Any container that does not
conform to the provisions of this section or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper
or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice. The Sanitary Inspector
shall have the authority to refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith.(R.O. 1325 § 4, 7/09)
b) Commercial Containers: Commercial containers shall be of a size and type prescribed by the Sanitary
Inspector. All commercial containers shall be placed on a hard surface pad with dimensions no smaller than 8’x8’,
and with a two foot clearance free from obstruction around the entire refuse container. The hard surface pad can be
comprised of asphalt, cement, wood, or other suitable material and be no more than 4” above ground level.
The commercial container shall be easily accessible from the corresponding road or alley. The approach to
the commercial container shall be on an equivalent plane with the hard surface pad from a minimum of 40’ to the front
of the pad. The owner shall be responsible for keeping the hard surface pad clean at all times. The piling of rubbish
on top or around the refuse container is strictly prohibited. Construction materials including but not limited to wood,
wood pallets, and metal should not be placed in the refuse containers.
In the event the owner elects to enclose the commercial container, the enclosure shall have a minimum
gate of 12’ to accommodate the refuse truck. Owner shall be responsible fro maintaining the commercial containers
in good condition at all times, including but not limited to repairing lids, lifting ears, broken welds, corroded bottoms
and wheels.
Any commercial container owner can petition the Sanitary Inspector, in writing, to waive any of the
commercial container requirements described in this section.(R.O. 1323 § 4, 7/09)
3) Storing of Refuse.
a) Public Places: No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any
private property whether owned by such person or not, within the City except it be in proper containers for collection
or under express approval granted by the Sanitary Inspector. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any
stream or other body of water.
b) Unauthorized Accumulation: Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within ten (10) days after
the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
c) Scattering of Refuse: No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the City any refuse in such a
manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon the street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other
public place, or into any occupied premises within the City.
4) Point of Collection.
a) Residential: Refuse containers or regulation plastic bags shall be placed for collection on a platform above the
ground but not to exceed eighteen inches (18”) above the ground, and not within the right-of-way of a street or alley.
In all residential areas where there is a serviceable alley, refuse containers shall be placed on the property being
10-3
serviced adjacent to said alley. In all residential areas not serviced by an alley, said containers shall be housed in
accordance with this section except for the day of collection when it shall be placed next to the street in front of such
residence not later than 7:00 a.m. shall be removed therefrom not later than twelve (12) hours thereafter.
b) Commercial: At such place or places as the Sanitary Inspector shall designate.
c) The collector will not be required to enter commercial establishments. (Ord. 855, § 5, 6/75)
SEC. 10-1.8. COLLECTION PRACTICE.
1) Frequency of Collection.
a) Residential: Refuse accumulated in residential areas shall be collected at least once each week.
b) Commercial: Refuse in commercial areas shall be collected daily or at such times as the Sanitary
Inspector may determine. In making such determination, the Sanitary Inspector shall take into consideration all
conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and to prevent fires, etc.
2) Limitation on Quantity when Properly Containerized.
a) Residential: There shall be no limitation on garbage picked up in residential areas.
b) Commercial: There shall be no limitation on garbage picked up in commercial areas.
3) Special Refuse Problems.
a) Contagious Disease Refuse: The removal of wearing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places
where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under the supervision and
direction of the Sanitary Inspector. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection.
b) Inflammable or Explosive Refuse: Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in
containers for regular collection, but shall be disposed of as directed by the Sanitary Inspector at the expense of the
owner or possessor thereof.
4) Collection by Commercial Establishment, Persons or Mercantile Establishments Residing Beyond the City
Limits.
a) Requirements for Vehicles: All vehicles used to transport garbage or refuse over the City Streets shall
provide an adequate cover to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse being blown or dropped.
b) Disposal: This paragraph is hereby repealed in its entirety. (Ord. 1324 § 4, 7/09)
c) Rules and Regulations: The Sanitary Inspector shall have authority to make such other reasonable
regulations concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over City streets by
outside commercial establishment or persons obtaining a permit to use the City dump as he shall find necessary.
5) Refuse Property of City: Ownership of refuse material set out for collection shall be vested in the City when
placed on the collection vehicle. (Ord. 855, § 6, 6/75; R.O. 1324 § 4, 7/09)
6) Fees – Golden Age or Disabled: Each one family residential unit or one family trailer requiring a service
container not exceeding a 32-gallon capacity, may apply for a Golden Age or Disabled service rate of $13.60
monthly providing one or more of the occupants residing therein has reached the age of 65 years old or is
disabled. If additional containers are necessary to accommodate such service, the rate schedule for
commercial can pickup shall apply. The occupants of a one family residential unit or a one family trailer
applying for a Golden Age or Disabled service rate shall apply to the City Clerk or Sanitary Inspector for the
special rate. The applicant shall verify under oath the birthdate of the occupant who is over the age of 65
years or provide a physician’s confirmation of disability and who resides in such a unit. (Ord. 1247, § 2, 06/05;
R.O. 1298 1,2/08; R.O. 1306 8,19/08)
10-4
7) Fees – Residential: Each one family residential unit, each kitchen unit in an apartment building, and each
trailer shall be charged a fee.
Container Fee
32-gallon $20.00 monthly
64-gallon $25.95 monthly
96-gallon $29.95 monthly
If additional 32-gallon containers or regulation plastic bags are necessary to accommodate such service as
determined by the Sanitary Inspector, the rate schedule for commercial can pickup shall apply. Lawn and
garden refuse properly placed within City designated containers, leased from the City, shall be hauled at no
additional fee. All residential accounts shall be in the name of the owner of the unit, and not in the name of a
tenant, and the owner shall be responsible for payment of such fees. (Ord 1247, § 2, 06/05; R.O. 1298
1,2/08; R.O. 1306 8/19/08; R.O. 1393 5/18)
8) Commercial Fees.
a) RATE SCHEDULE FOR 64-GALLON COMMERCIAL CAN PICKUP MONTHLY
No. of Containers Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5 6
1…………..…. 25.95 50.90 75.85 100.80 125.75 150.70
2…………..…. 29.95 58.90 87.85 116.80 145.75 174.70
3……..………. 33.95 66.90 99.85 132.80 165.75 198.70
4………..……. 37.95 74.90 111.85 148.80 185.75 222.70
5……………... 41.45 81.90 122.35 162.80 203.25 243.70
6……..………. 44.45 87.90 131.35 174.80 218.25 261.70
7………..……. 47.45 93.90 140.35 186.80 233.25 279.70
(Ord. 1247, § 3, 06/05; R.O. 1298 1 2/08; R.O. 1306 8,19/08; R.O. 1393 5/18)
Garbage cans in commercial areas shall be of the type designated by the Sanitary Inspector and shall not exceed
64-gallon capacity. Plastic bags may also be used provided they comply with the type, size and kind specified by the
Sanitary Inspector. (Ord. 1078, § 1, 10/89; R.O. 1393 5/18)
b) RATE SCHEDULE FOR 96-GALLON COMMERCIAL CAN PICKUP MONTHLY
No. of Containers Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5 6
1…………..…. 29.95 58.90 87.85 116.80 145.75 174.70
2…………..…. 42.50 84.00 125.50 167.00 208.50 250.00
3……..………. 55.00 109.00 163.00 217.00 271.00 325.00
4………..……. 67.50 134.00 200.50 267.00 333.50 400.00
5……………... 80.00 159.00 238.00 317.00 396.00 475.00
6……..………. 92.50 184.00 275.50 367.00 458.50 550.00
7………..……. 105.00 209.00 313.00 417.00 521.00 625.00
(Ord. 1393 5/18)
10-5
9) Fees – Commercial Containers.
a) RATE SCHEDULE FOR 2-CUBIC YARD MONTHLY
No. of Containers Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5 6
1………… 45.85 90.70 135.55 180.40 225.25 270.10
2………… 62.35 123.70 185.05 246.40 307.75 369.10
3………… 80.85 160.70 240.55 320.40 400.25 480.10
4………… 94.35 187.70 281.05 374.40 467.75 561.10
5………… 111.35 221.70 332.05 442.40 552.75 663.10
6………… 120.85 240.70 360.55 480.40 600.25 720.10
(Ord. 1247, § 4, 06/05; R.O. 1298 1 2/08; R.O. 1306 8,19/08; R.O. 1393 5/18)
b) RATE SCHEDULE FOR 3-CUBIC YARD MONTHLY
No. of Containers Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5 6
1………… 54.90 108.80 162.70 216.60 270.50 324.40
2………… 75.40 149.80 224.20 298.60 373.00 447.40
3………… 98.40 195.80 293.20 390.60 488.00 585.40
4………… 115.40 229.80 344.20 458.60 573.00 687.40
5………… 136.90 272.80 408.70 544.60 680.50 816.40
6………… 148.90 296.80 444.70 592.60 740.50 888.40
(Ord. 1247, § 4, 06/05; R.O. 1298 1, 2/08; R.O. 1306 8, 19/08; R.O. 1393 5/18)
c) RATE SCHEDULE FOR 4-CUBIC YARD MONTHLY
No. of Containers Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5 6
1………… 62.35 123.70 185.05 246.40 307.75 369.10
2………… 82.85 164.70 246.55 328.40 410.25 492.10
3………… 103.35 205.70 308.05 410.40 512.75 615.10
4………… 123.85 246.70 369.55 492.40 615.25 738.10
5………… 144.35 287.70 431.05 574.40 717.75 861.10
6………… 164.85 328.70 492.55 656.40 820.25 984.10
(Ord 1393 5/18)
d) RATE SCHEDULE FOR 6-CUBIC YARD MONTHLY
No. of Containers Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5 6
1………… 75.40 149.80 224.20 298.60 373.00 447.40
2………… 100.40 199.80 299.20 398.60 498.00 597.40
3………… 125.40 249.80 374.20 498.60 623.00 747.40
4………… 150.40 299.80 449.20 598.60 748.00 897.40
5………… 175.40 349.80 524.20 698.60 873.00 1,047.40
6………… 200.40 399.80 599.20 798.60 998.00 1,197.40
(Ord 1393 5/18)
10-6
e) RATE SCHEDULE FOR 8-CUBIC YARD MONTHLY
No. of Containers Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5 6
1………… 94.35 187.70 281.05 374.40 467.75 561.10
2………… 127.35 253.70 380.05 506.40 632.75 759.10
3………… 160.35 319.70 479.05 638.40 797.75 957.10
4………… 193.35 385.70 578.05 770.40 962.75 1,155.10
5………… 226.35 451.70 677.05 902.40 1,127.75 1,353.10
6………… 259.35 517.70 776.05 1,034.40 1,292.75 1,551.10
(Ord 1393 5/18)
c) Section 10-1.9(c) of the Buffalo City Code, 2004, is hereby repealed.
d) The scheduled rates are all based on pickup Monday through Friday. Saturday pickup fees are in addition
to the regular monthly charge and are based on only one pickup. (Ord 1393 5/18)
e) All commercial pickups other than by commercial cans, 2-cubic yard containers or 3-cubic yard containers
more than twenty-five feet (25’) from the designated place for garbage pickup shall be charged and paid by the
owner or occupant to the Collector at the rate of $1.00 per minute for the average monthly time Collector takes to
make such pickups. (Ord. 966, § 1, 8/81)
10) Billing: All fees charged for collecting, hauling and disposing of garbage in the City of Buffalo shall be billed
by the City of Buffalo. Each residential, apartment and trailer shall be billed based on the number of kitchen units
therein. Delinquent residential fees of rental units shall be charged to, and collected from, the owner of said
premises. Business and commercial – industrial accounts shall be charged based on service requirements
determined by the Sanitary Inspector and billed to the owner of the building. Delinquent commercial fees of rental
units shall be charged to, and collected from, the owner of said premises. Owners of any rental unit shall have the
service fees billed directly to them. Monthly fees shall be billed for any account unless service has been turned off as
per Section 27-26, Special Rates of the Code of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 1078, 10/89)
11) Special Disposal Fee. This paragraph is repealed in its entirety. (R.O. 1324 § 4, 7/09)
12) Disposal Requirements: This paragraph is hereby repealed in its entirety. (Ord. 1113, § 7/93; R.O. 1324 § 4,
7./09
13) Additional Fee for Nonresidents: This paragraph is hereby repealed in its entirety.. (Ord. 1115, § 1, 10/93; R.O.
1324 § 4, 7/09)
SEC. 10-1.9. INTERFERING WITH SANITARY INSPECTOR.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the Sanitary Inspector during the performance of his
duties under this chapter. (Ord. 855, § 8, 6/75)
SEC. 10-1.10. BURNING PROHIBITED.
Open burning of substance of any kind within the City is hereby prohibited, except by special permit issued by the
City in accordance with State regulations. (Ord. 855, § 8, 6/75)
SEC. 10-1.11. PENALTY.
Any violation of this Chapter shall be subject to the General Penalties as described in Section 14-13 of the Code
of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 844, § 10, 6/75; R.O. 1330 4, 21/09)
SEC. 10-1.12. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, phrase, or clause of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this chapter are
declared to be severable. (Ord. 855, § 12, 6/75)
SEC. 10-2. SAME – UNLAWFUL TO DUMP GARBAGE, ETC., EXCEPT AT CITY DUMP.
10-7
Section 10-2 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-3. DUMPING, ETC., WASTE MATTER, ETC., IN PUBLIC PLACES.
Section 10-3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-4. ACCUMULATION ON PRIVATE PREMISES.
Section 10-4 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-5. BURNING RUBBISH OR WASTE.
Section 10-5 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-6. DISPOSITION OF ASHES, ETC.
Section 10-6 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
ARTICLE II. SCAVANGERS.
SEC. 10-7. TITLE.
Section 10-7 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-8. LICENSE – REQUIRED; FEE; TERM; TRANSFERABILITY.
Section 10-8 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-9. SAME – APPLICATION; LICENSE NOT REQUIRED OF CERTAIN RESIDENTS.
Section 10-9 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-10. EQUIPMENT; MANNER OF DISCHARGING DUTIES; PENALTY.
Section 10-10 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-11. TIME AND FEES FOR COLLECTING GARBAGE; PAYMENT OF FEES.
Section 10-11 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
SEC. 10-12. COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF WASTE MATERIAL GENERALLY.
Section 10-12 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 855, § 9, 6/75)
10-8
CHAPTER 11
GAS
Chapter 11 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1984, is hereby repealed. See Chapter 5 Buildings. (Ord.
253, 8/30) (R.O. 1288, 07/07)
11-1
CHAPTER 12
GASOLINE DISTRIBUTORS AT AIRPORT
§ 12-1. Permit – Required.
§ 12-2. Same – Prerequisites generally to issuance; Bond.
§ 12-3. Records to be kept; Monthly report.
§ 12-4. Safety precautions.
(This Chapter repealed by Ordinance 1047, § 1, 12/86)
SEC. 12-1. PERMIT – REQUIRED.
Section 12-1 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 12-2. SAME – PREREQUISITES GENERALLY TO ISSUANCE; BOND.
Section 12-2 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 12-3. RECORDS TO BE KEPT; MONTHLY REPORT.
Section 12-3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 12-4. SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
Section 12-4 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed.
12-1
CHAPTER 13
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 1
1. For state law as to powers, etc., of local authorities concerning traffic on
highways, see W.S. 1977, § 31-5-110, § 31-5-111.
Article I. In General.
§ 13-1. Adoption of state law – Generally.
§ 13-2. Same – Exceptions.
§ 13-3. Authority and duty of police and fire department officials.
§ 13-4. Obedience to police and fire department officials.
§ 13-5. Speed limits generally.
§ 13-6. Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted.
§ 13-7. Play streets.
§ 13-8. Establishment and designation of crosswalks and safety zones.
§ 13-9. Traffic lanes.
§ 13-10. Operating a vehicle with expired or improper registration.
§ 13-10.1. Operating a vehicle with no motor vehicle liability policy.
§ 13-11. Designation of through streets; exception.
§ 13-12. Restricted turns.
§ 13-13. Entering intersections or marked crosswalk.
§ 13-14. Unlawful to tamper with, deface, mark or injure vehicle; throwing stones etc, at vehicles.
§ 13-14.1. Careless driving.
§ 13-14.2. One-way traffic on certain streets.
§ 13-14.3. Operation of golf carts on certain streets.
Article II. Parking Generally.
§ 13-15. General provisions.
§ 13-15.1. Temporary no parking zones.
§ 13-15.2 Street Parking for Snow Removal.
§ 13-15.3. Manner of parking; diagonal and parallel parking defined.
§ 13-15.4. Hampering snow removal and street cleaning.
§ 13-16. Limited parking zones established; effective hours; signs, violations and penalties.
§ 13-16.1 Expired or Improper License Plates or Registration
§ 13-16.2 Street Parking and Street Storage
§ 13-17. Restricted parking of petroleum or explosive trucks, etc.
§ 13-17.1 Parking of Large Trucks and Semi-Trailers
§ 13-18. Parking near fire hydrants.
§ 13-18.1. Designated parking space for handicapped.
§ 13-18.2. Obstruction of handicapped parking spaces.
§ 13-18.3. Requirement of handicapped parking.
§ 13-18.4. Handicapped parking penalties.
Article III. Parking Meters.
§ 13-19. Definitions.
§ 13-20. Zones established; description.
§ 13-21. Zones established; time.
§ 13-22. Contracts for purchase; payment from receipts.
§ 13-23. Violations.
§ 13-24. Duties of police in case of violation; right of violating operator.
§ 13-25. Penalty.
§ 13-26. Time allowed for coin deposited; overtime parking.
§ 13-27. Unlawful to tamper with, injure, deface or destroy meter.
13-1
§ 13-28. Unlawful to deposit slugs or other substitutes for U.S. coins.
§ 13-29. Purpose of parking fees.
§ 13-30. Collections; parking meter fund.
§ 13-31. Duties of police in case of violations; right of violating operator.
§ 13-32. Penalty generally.
Article IV. Bicycles.
§ 13-33. Unlawful to ride bicycle on sidewalks.
§ 13-34. Riding more than two abreast.
§ 13-35. Speed limit; reckless driving.
Article V. Motorcycles.
§ 13-36. Definitions.
§ 13-37. Operation of motorcycles, motor driven cycles, and mopeds.
§ 13-38. Same – Required distance from other motorcycles.
§ 13-39. Same – Protective helmet or other equipment required.
§ 13-40. Penalty for violation of article.
Article VI. Snow Machines.
§ 13-41. Operation of motorized snow machines.
§ 13-42. Penalty for violation of article.
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
SEC. 13-1. ADOPTION OF STATE LAW – GENERALLY.
Sections 31-5-101 through 31-5-1402 of the Wyoming Statutes, 1977, being the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on
Highways, except such sections or parts thereof, as are expected therefrom by Sec. 13-2, are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as a part of this Code as fully as if completely set out herein, all in accordance with
and under the authority of Section 15-1-120 of the Wyoming Statutes, 1977. One copy of such state law is on file in
the office of the City Clerk and is available for public examination. (Ord. 1211, § 1, 3/02)
SEC. 13-2. SAME – EXCEPTIONS.
The following sections, or parts thereof, of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways are specifically exempt
and deleted from such Act as adopted by Sec. 13-1 of this Code:
a) Sections 31-5-109 through 31-5-111.
b) Sections 31-5-113 and 31-5-114.
c) Sections 31-5-119 and 31-5-120.
d) Sections 31-5-227 and 31-5-233
e) Sections 31-5-301 through 31-5-303.
f) Sections 31-5-501 and 31-5-502.
g) Section 31-5-513.
h) Sections 31-5-934 through 31-5-939.
i) Sections 31-5-1001 through 31-5-1101.
j) Sections 31-5-1107 through 31-5-1201. (Ord. 981, § 1, 2/82)
SEC. 13-3. AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
a) It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of
Police to enforce all traffic laws of the City of Buffalo and of the state, applicable to traffic in the City of Buffalo.
b) Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized
to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or state traffic laws.
13-2
c) Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the Police in directing traffic
thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 541, § 2, 12/55)
SEC. 13-4. OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS. 2
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a Police Officer or Fire
Department official. (Ord. 541, 12/55)
2. For state law as to obedience to police, see W.S. 1997, § 31-5-105.
SEC. 13-5. SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY.
a) No person shall drive a vehicle on a street in the City of Buffalo at a speed greater than what is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions, having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing.
b) Except when special hazards exist that require a lower speed for compliance of subsection (A) of this section,
the limits specified in this subsection or established hereinafter authorized shall be the maximum lawful speeds and
no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess of such maximum limits.
1) Twenty miles per hour when passing a school building or the grounds thereof, or a school crossing during
the school recess or when children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours; providing, that the
presence of such school ground or building thereof or school crossing is indicated plainly by signs or signals
conforming to the provisions thereof.
2) Twenty miles per hour in any City street, alley or other portion of the urban area of the City of Buffalo
except Fort Street, Main Street and U.S. Highway 16, which shall be thirty miles per hour unless otherwise
designated.
3) Twenty miles per hour within the business district as designated such. (Ord. 719, 7/70)
SEC. 13-6. USE OF SKATEBOARDS, SLEDS, TOBOGGANS, ROLLER SKATES, SKIS, COASTERS, AND
OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES.
1) Definitions: As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
a) Skate: A metallic runner with a frame shaped to fit the sole of a shoe or permanently affixed thereto and
used for gliding on snow or ice.
b) Roller Skate: A skate with wheels rather than a runner.
c) Skateboard: A device propelled by human power or by mechanical power by a motor with a cylinder
capacity not exceeding fifty (50) cubic centimeters displacement and producing no more than two (2) brake
horsepower, upon which a person may stand and ride, consisting of a board or other flat surface with roller skate
wheels or other wheels of similar size and dimensions affixed to the underside thereof for locomotion.
(Ord. 1239, 10/04)
d) Sled: A vehicle on runners used for sliding on snow or ice.
e) Toboggan: A flat-bottomed board or other material bound one to each foot and used for sliding on snow or
ice.
f) Ski: One of a pair or strips of wood or other material bound one to each foot and used for sliding on snow or
ice.
g) Coaster: A device propelled by human power or by mechanical power by a motor with a cylinder capacity
not exceeding fifty (50) cubic centimeters displacement and producing no more than two (2) brake horsepower,
which a person may stand on and ride, similar to a skateboard, except with handlebars for steering.(Ord. 1239, 10/04)
2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard, skate, sled, toboggan, roller skates, skis, coaster or
any like vehicles, upon any roadway or alley of the City or upon any sidewalk of the City located along Main Street
between the intersection of Main Street and Bennett Street and Main Street and Fort Street. This section shall not
apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by Sec. 13-7.
3) It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, coasters, sleds, toboggans, or
any similar device to go upon any property, during or after business hours, located in the City, that is posted as a no
access area. (Ord. 1249, 7/05)
13-3
SEC. 13-7. PLAY STREETS.
The Chief of the Police Department shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to
place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized
signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street, or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area,
and then any such drive shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. (Ord. 541,
12/55)
SEC. 13-8. ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES.
The Chief of the Police Department is hereby authorized:
a) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he may deem necessary.
b) To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians. (Ord. 541, 12/55)
SEC. 13-9. TRAFFIC LANES. 4
a) The Chief of the Police Department is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or
highway where regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
b) Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse
to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (Ord. 541, § 15, 12/55)
3. For state law as to driving in roadways laned for traffic, see W.S. 1977, § 31-5-
209.
SEC. 13-10. OPERATING A VEHICLE WITH EXPIRED OR IMPROPER REGISTRATION. 5
a) No person shall knowingly operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated upon any highway or
other publicly maintained roadway any vehicle:
1) Unless a valid certificate of title, certificate of registration and license plates or temporary permits have
been issued for the vehicle except as otherwise provided by this act;
2) Unless valid license plates or permits issued for the vehicle are displayed on the vehicle as provided by
this act except as otherwise provided by this act;
3) With license plates, validation stickers or license permits altered, mutilated or obscure so as to prevent the
license plate number from being easily read;
b) No person shall alter or mutilate any valid license plate, sticker or permit.
c) No person shall sell or transfer his interest in a vehicle for which a certificate of title is required unless he has
obtained a certificate and assigns his interest on the title except as otherwise provided by this act.
d) No person shall operate a vehicle in any manner with an expired or improper registration, permit, decal or
any other department approved registration up any highway or other publicly maintained roadway. (Ord 1355,
4/2012)
SEC. 13-10.1. OPERATING A VEHICLE WITH NO MOTOR VEHICLE LIABILTY POLICY.
No owner of a motor vehicle required to be registered or which is required to be registered within a period of time,
shall operate or permit the operation of his motor vehicle without having in full force and effect a motor vehicle liability
policy in amounts provided by W.S. §41-9-405(b) or a bond in amounts provided by W.S. §31-9-102(a)(xi).
(Ord. 1354 4/2012)
13-4
SEC. 13-11. DESIGNATION OF THROUGH STREETS; EXCEPTION.
Unless otherwise provided by location of appropriate traffic control signs as may be determined by the Chief of
Police at intersections contrary to designated through streets, all streets and parts of streets in the City of Buffalo
generally designated as avenues which run north and south, and East Bennett Street, East Parmalee Street, East
Gatchell Street, Keays Street and East Brock Street are hereby declared through streets in the City of Buffalo. (Ord.
792, § 1, 6/73)
SEC. 13-12. RESTRICTED TURNS.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make a right, left or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event, the same shall be plainly
indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of any such sign.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street,
unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. (Ord. 541, § 23, 12/55)
SEC. 13-13. ENTERING INTERSECTIONS OR MARKED CROSSWALK.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 541, §22,12/55)
SEC. 13-14. UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH, DEFACE, MARK OR INJURE VEHICLE; THROWING STONES,
ETC., AT VEHICLES. 6
It shall be unlawful for any person not the owner or operator thereof, to tamper, meddle or interfere with any
automobile, motorcycle or similar vehicle, or to start or attempt to start the engine while the same is standing still, or
to puncture or otherwise mutilate the tires, or to scratch, mark or otherwise deface the body or apparatus thereof, or
to take or remove from such automobile, or other motor vehicle any part or portions of the machine, equipment or
other portion thereof, or to throw, cast or hurl any stones, rock, glass or other missiles at any automobile or occupant
thereof. (R.O. 1955, § 31-21)
6. As to throwing missiles generally, see § 16-33 of this Code.
SEC. 13-14.1. CARELESS DRIVING.
Careless driving shall be defined as that manner of operating a vehicle to be so heedless and incautious as to
evidence a lack of care for the probably or foreseeable consequence of such driving.
Any person convicted of careless driving upon any street, roadway, alley, private way, public or private parking lot,
area or elsewhere in the City shall be fined in accordance with the general penalties under the ordinances of the City.
(Ord. 696, § 1, 2, 10/68)
SEC. 13-14.2. ONE-WAY TRAFFIC ON CERTAIN STREETS.
That portion of East Fetterman Avenue between Main Street and Lobban Avenue on the north side of Clear Creek
is hereby designated a one-way street, to be used by traffic moving in an easterly direction. (Ord. 880, 5/77)
That portion of West Fetterman Avenue north of Clear Creek between Adams Avenue and Burritt Avenue shall be,
and is hereby, designated a one-way street for vehicular traffic moving in westerly direction only, between the dates of
Sept. 1 and May 31 of the following year. From June 1 to Aug. 31 of each year such street may be designated for
two-way traffic by order of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 956, § 1, 7/81)
Anyone who shall be convicted of operating a motor vehicle moving the wrong way on the hereinabove designated
one-way streets shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as the law provides. (Ord. 956, § 1, 7/81)
SEC. 13-14.3. OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
a) For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and terms have the definitions ascribed to them in this
section:
13-5
Golf cart shall mean a motorized cart for carrying golfers and their equipment over a golf course.
Authorized street shall mean a public street designated by the City Council as being one upon which a person
may operate a golf cart.
b) A person shall not operate a golf cart on any public street within the City unless:
1) He is duly licensed to operate a motor vehicle upon public streets;
2) He is operating the golf cart on an authorized street for the purpose of traveling to and from a golf course,
or between portions of a golf course; and,
3) The time of operation is between sunrise and sunset.
c) A person operating a golf cart on an authorized street shall:
1) Comply with all laws governing the operation of a motor vehicle, except for those laws requiring certain
safety equipment specific to motor vehicles, including, by way of example and without limitation, those which require
equipment such as headlights, taillights and safety belts.
2) Not operate a golf cart on an authorized street in violation of the provisions of W.S. 31-5-233, relating to
driving while under the influence. For the purposes of this paragraph, a golf cart shall be deemed to be a vehicle.
Subject to the restrictions of paragraphs (A), (B) and (C) of this ordinance, a person who is duly licensed to operate a
motor vehicle upon public streets may operate a registered golf cart on any street within the City of Buffalo, except
Main Street, Fort Street and East Hart Street for the purpose of traveling to and from a golf course, or between
portions of a golf course. (Ord. 1159, § 1, 5/97)
ARTICLE II. PARKING GENERALLY. 7
7. For state law authorizing the town to regulate parking, see W.S. 1977, § 31-5-110.
SEC. 13-15. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
In addition to any specific regulations adopted below, it shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle or trailer within
the City limits of Buffalo:
a) At any place, time or manner prohibited by the Chief or Police or his designee;
b) On a sidewalk;
c) On a parkway, without a properly displayed permit;
d) In front of public or private driveway or garage entrance on a street or in an alley;
e) Any boat or trailer of any size must be parked in front of the owner’s lot or property;
f) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
g) On a crosswalk; within an intersection;
h) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk or an intersection, unless otherwise permitted by the City
engineer;
i) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal
located at the side of a roadway;
j) Within twenty (20) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
k) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
l) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
13-6
m) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of the curb of a street (double
parked);
n) In any underpass within the City;
o) At any place where official regulatory signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking, except as set
forth on and in compliance with said regulatory sign;
p) Adjacent to any portion of an official painted yellow curbline, except where regulated by, and in
conformance with, a regulatory sign;
q) In any manner that is not parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement, and with the outside wheels of the vehicle more than eighteen (18) inches
from the curb or edge of the roadway, except where marked for diagonal parking, where the
vehicle must be parked with the outside front wheel of the vehicle within six (6) inches of the
curb or edge of the roadway;
r) In a manner that allows less than ten (10) feet of width of the roadway for free movement of
vehicular traffic;
s) In a manner that allows less than fifteen (15) feet of the width of the alley for free movement and
unobstructed access to public utilities and refuse containers;
t) Upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale, washing,
greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
u) Upon any private property, without permission of the owner of said private property;
v) In a permanent reserved space of any kind, without proper permits and proper display of said
permits;
w) In a handicapped parking space without valid and properly displayed handicapped parking
permits, tags or license plates;
x) In a marked bus stop; and in a publicly owned parking lot in violation of posted limits, restrictions
or permit requirements;
y) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, erase, deface, obliterate or render unusable for the
purpose of enforcement of this chapter or the provisions outlined any chalk mark, marker, or
other indicator placed on a vehicle or any portion thereof by an authorized representative of the
Ctiy for the purpose of measuring the passage of time or the movement of a vehicle stopped,
standing or parking on any street, or in any parking lot or structure, or portion thereof. (Ord 1355,
4/2012)
SEC. 13-15.1. TEMPORARY NO PARKING ZONES.
The Chief of Police shall be authorized to designate any portion of a public street as temporarily closed to parking
by placing appropriate “no parking” signs at such locations, all determined by the Chief of Police, in his discretion, to
be in the best interests of the public health, welfare and safety. (Ord. 1124, 6/94)
SEC. 13-15.2 STREET PARKING FOR SNOW REMOVAL.
SNOW REMOVAL CONDITIONS
(A) When, in the opinion of the City of Buffalo Public Works Director and the Mayor of the City of Buffalo, the
actual or expected precipitation of snow will create hazardous or dangerous roadway conditions for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the Mayor shall have the authority to declare a snow removal emergency.
(B) A snow removal emergency shall be declared by the Mayor of the City of Buffalo by issuing a media
release to the local radio stations and new media.
(C) The snow removal condition shall continue in full force and effect until the Mayor declares it to be over by
issuing a media release to the local radio stations and news media.
13-7
PARKING RESTRICTIONS DURING SNOW REMOVAL PERIODS
Parking is prohibited from November 1st through April 30th on the following City streets between the hours
10:00 pm to 6:00 am:
Fort Street, Main Street, Fetterman Street, North DeSmet Street, Hart Street, Hogerson Street, South
Burritt Street, Sesame Street and Lobban Avenue between Benteen and Bennet Streets.
These restrictions will remain in force until the snow removal condition has been declared over or the snow has
been removed from curb to curb for the entire length of the street.
REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
The City of Buffalo Police Department is authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a City street to the
nearest garage or place of safety, including another place on the street if a person should fail to remove his registered
vehicle from any street or alley within the City after a 12 hour period after the declaration of a snow removal
emergency.(Ord. 1312 / 12, 2/2008)
SEC. 13-15.3. MANNER OF PARKING; DIAGONAL AND PARALLEL PARKING DEFINED.
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle or trailer upon the streets of Buffalo, Wyoming, in any manner except
parallel with the curb or edge of the street and headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement. The right side
wheels shall be parallel with and within eighteen inches of the curb or edge of the street. In no case shall a vehicle be
parked in such a manner so as to encroach upon the regularly traveled portion of the street.
The following exceptions shall be allowed to the above paragraphs:
a) Parking with the left side wheels parallel to the left curb or the left edge of the street shall be permitted on
one-way streets.
b) Diagonal parking shall be permitted in areas, which meet the following requirements:
1) Approval of the area as a diagonal parking zone by a majority of the City Council, and
2) Appropriately painted spaces or stalls or a sign or set of signs that delineate the area as diagonal
parking zone.
In the event that there shall be designated spaces or stalls for parking within the City and such spaces are marked
off and designated by stripes at or near the curb with a conspicuous color of paint ordinarily used for this purpose,
then all vehicles shall be parked within these spaces. If signs are used, all vehicles shall park within the boundaries
set by those signs and according to the instructions on the signs. (Ord. 999, 7/83: R.O. 1319, 1/09)
There shall be no parking of vehicles within twenty feet (20) of any corner at the intersection of two or more
streets, nor shall there by any parking of vehicles so as to obstruct vision at intersections, protrude into traffic lanes,
or cause any undue safety hazards.
Within the meaning of this section, angle or diagonal parking shall be considered parking the vehicle in such a
manner that the right front angle is not less than sixty degrees (60°) and not greater than ninety degrees (90°) to the
curb.
There shall be no parking of motor vehicles over a storm sewer drain, which has been painted to designate it as an
area where a motor vehicle may not lawfully park. The pain used to indicate said drain will be of a conspicuous color
ordinarily used to designate such illegal parking areas. (Ord. 1021, §1, 9/84) (Ord. 1354, 4/2012)
SEC/ 13-15.4. HAMPERING SNOW REMOVAL AND STREET CLEANING.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a vehicle to allow, cause or permit the vehicle to be parked upon
any street in such a manner or at such a time as to hamper or make impossible snow removal or cleaning on said
street. Winter storage of vehicles or trailers or any similar vehicle or any kind is prohibited and will be removed at
owner’s expense. (Ord. 1354, 4/2012)
SEC. 13-16. LIMITED PARKING ZONES ESTABLISHED; EFFECTIVE HOURS; SIGNS; VIOLATIONS AND
PENALTIES.
A. The City Council may, by resolution, establish areas within the City as limited parking zones and designate
the limits for parking of vehicles therein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to allow to remain parked any vehicle in a limited parking zone for
a continuous period of more than the time permitted therefore during effective hours.
13-8
C. It shall be the duty of the City of Buffalo to post and maintain appropriate signs to notify the public that areas
are limited parking zones, and of the effective hours thereof.
D. Every person convicted under the provisions of this section shall be punished according to the general
penalties section of the Code.
E. It shall be the duty of the Chief of police to enforce this section and to keep adequate records to determine the
number of violations committed in each calendar year by the registered owner of any vehicle.
F. Any vehicle found to be in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance and the police
department is hereby authorized to remove, such vehicle, or cause the same to be removed, at the cost and
expense of the violator. The police department shall have the power and is hereby authorized to remove the
vehicle by either private or governmental equipment as it may deem advisable. The operator shall be fully
responsible for any and all costs of towing and storage. (Ord. 999, 7/83; R.O. 1320 – 1/09)
G. Any violation of this chapter which continues for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more shall constitute a
new and separate distinct violation.
H. Conviction of abuse or violation of the terms of the various parking permits shall result in revocation of the
permit, and the holder of said permit shall be subject to other penalties or remedies. The City of Buffalo may
charge a daily permit fee for special parking permits during term of issuance.
I. It shall constitute notice to every person charged with violating this chapter, if the Chief of Police or his/her
designee affixes to or deposits in a motor vehicle or trailer, found to be parked in violation of this chapter, a
parking ticket indicating thereon that the motor vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter, the street address
or location where such violation occurred, the date upon which the same occurred, the license number of such
motor vehicle, and notice of time and date the owner of such motor vehicle is to appear at the municipal court
of the City to answer to such charge of violation, and the bond amount for the violation. The owner of any
motor vehicle who fails to appear at the municipal court at the time fixed in any such notice, shall be formally
charged, by complaint and warrant, with violation of this chapter.
J. In the event that any person receiving any ticket or notice of violation does not desire to appear before the
Municipal Court to answer such a charge, he may post a cash bond in the amount of the fine for the violation
with the Municipal Court. Such bonds shall be forfeited unless such person shall appear before the Municipal
Judge at the time fixed in such notice, and upon forfeiture of such bonds, no further action shall be taken
against such violator.
K. The fact that a motor vehicle which is parked in violation of this chapter is registered in the name of a person
shall be prima facie evidence that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such parking.
L. In addition to any other penalties or remedies enumerated in this chapter, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee may tow, impound and/or immobilize any vehicle that has accumulated five or more unpaid or
unadjudicated notices of violation that are thirty or more days past due. For handicapped parking violations,
the threshold shall be one or more notices of violations that are thirty (30) or more days past due.
M. The Chief of Police or his or her designee may tow any vehicle that is parked on the street in the downtown
business district during the hours of 2:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m., seven (7) days a week, if it is necessary for
said vehicle to be moved to allow city crews to sweep and clean city streets, and perform snow removal and
other activities without the interference of parked cars.
N. The Chief of Police or his or her designee may tow any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter at any time,
if said vehicle is obstructing traffic flow, street or utility work, access to public or private property, or in any way
jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of the public. (Ord 1355, 4/2012)
SEC. 13-16.1 EXPIRED OR IMPROPER LICENSE PLATES OR REGISTRATION
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle on any street, alley, parking area or other
property operated by the City of Buffalo without first having displayed current and proper vehicle license plates and
registration thereon provided by Wyoming Statute §31-2-201 et seq. (Ord. 1313, § 12, 2/2008)
SEC. 13-16.2 STREET PARKING AND STREET STORAGE
A. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
1. “Block Face” means a portion of a street or highway between two intersections, including all on-street
parking along both sides of the street or highway within such boundaries.
2. “Operator” means every individual who operates a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent,
employee or permittee of the owner, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
3. “Parked” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise that
temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers, or
loading or unloading merchandise, or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals, or any
involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the
vehicle.
13-9
4. “Street” means any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane path or other public place located
in the City and established for the use of vehicles.
5. “Vehicle” means any device in, upon and by which any person or property is, or may be transported
or drawn upon a highway or street.
B. It shall be unlawful for any operator to permit a vehicle to remain parked for a continuous period of more than
seventy-two (72) hours on any city street. It shall not constitute a violation of this section if said vehicle is
legally parked abutting within the boundaries of the vehicle owners’ property except during snow removal
months, then permitting a vehicle to remain parked for a continuous period of more then seventy-two (72)
hours is prohibited from November 1st through April 30th.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, cause or allow to be stored any motor home, trailer or any similar
vehicle on any city street for a period exceeding seventy-two (72) hours unless a temporary permit is
obtained from the City of Buffalo, the Chief of Police or his assignee. The City of Buffalo may charge
a daily permit fee during the issuance of such temporary permit. Moving such a vehicle from one
location to another shall not exclude a violation of this section nor toll the seventy-two (72) hour limit if both
locations are on a city street. (Ord 1355, 4/2012)
When notice has been duly issued, by placing it prominently upon the vehicle where it may be readily detected,
to remove such vehicle or trailer and if there is a failure to do so within 24 hours thereafter, such vehicle shall
be deemed a nuisance and subject to removal by the City Police and impounded in a place of safe keeping.
All costs for towing and storage shall be the responsibility of the vehicle owner and shall be paid in full before
such vehicle is released to the owner/operator. (Ord. 1310 § 12, 16/2008)
SEC. 13-17. RESTRICTED PARKING OF PETROLEUM OR EXPLOSIVE TRUCKS, ETC. 8
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether residing in or away from the City of Buffalo, to park on or adjacent to
any street, avenue, thoroughfare or alley in the City of Buffalo, any truck, transport, trailer or any vehicle whatsoever,
whether motor-propelled or otherwise, and whether loaded or empty, used in conveyance or transportation of
petroleum, butane, propane, octane, ligroin, gasoline or powder, trinitrotoluene, commonly called TNT, dynamite or
any other combustible, explosive of inflammable fluid or compound of any kind or character, except while making
deliveries in the regular course of business or trade, or in the event of a breakdown or other unavoidable emergency;
provided, that while making deliveries as foresaid, or in the event of a breakdown or unavoidable emergency, such
vehicle shall at all times be attended by a responsible person in charge, and shall not take longer than is reasonably
necessary in making such deliveries, or fixing the breakdown, or overcoming an unavoidable emergency.
13-8
Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit any truck, transport, trailer or other vehicle from parking unattended
within the City of Buffalo at some safe place specially designated by the Chief of Police for a period not longer than
twenty-four hours, where explosion or fire caused by such parked vehicle can do no harm to persons or property
within the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, § 31-37, 31-38)
8. For State law authorizing the town to regulate, restrain or prohibit the
transportation of inflammables and explosives, see W.S. 1977, 15-1-103 (xxvi)
SEC. 13-17.1 PARKING OF LARGE TRUCKS AND SEMI-TRAILERS.
A. The Following definitions shall apply to this section:
1. “Semi-trailer” means every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying
persons or property, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that
some part of its weight and that of its load resets upon, or is carried by, another
vehicle;
2. “Truck tractor” means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and does specifically include, but is not limited to, tractors used to pull
mobile home, semi-trailers and road tractors;
3. “Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is, or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or street.
13-10
B. Subject to the temporary exemption provided in Subsection C below, no operator shall park
any commercial vehicle which is longer than 20 feet in length, or wider than 8 feet in width, or
any truck tractor or semi-trailer, upon any street or alley in the City of Buffalo excepting in those
areas designated as business or industrial according to Chapter 29 of the Code of the Town of
the City of Buffalo, except when such commercial vehicles, truck tractors or semi-trailers are in
the process of loading or unloading at the site of origin or delivery shipments.
C. This Ordinance shall not apply to active construction sites within residential areas described by
Chapter 29 of the Code of the Town of the City of Buffalo, so long as the operator secures a
parking permit from the City of Buffalo authorizing parking of a commercial vehicle, semi-trailer,
or truck tractor on a street or alley within the residential zones described in Chapter 29. Parking
permits shall be available at City Hall, 46 North Main Street, Buffalo, Wyoming, during regular
business hours. (Ord. 1311/ 12, 2/2008)
SEC. 13-18. PARKING NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within fifteen (15) feet in any direction from any fire hydrant
within the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, § 31-18)
SEC. 13-18.1. DESIGNATED PARKING SPACE FOR HANDICAPPED.
No person shall park, load, unload, or stand in any parking space designated for handicapped persons on public
or private property unless that person is handicapped or unless the handicapped person is a passenger in the vehicle
and unless the vehicle has a Wyoming portable-type handicap logo displayed on the dashboard on the side nearest
to the roadside or suspended from the rearview mirror inside the vehicle. The City is authorized to honor handicap
stickers issued by other agencies, which have the same or similar qualifications by the Wyoming Department of
Revenue. (Ord. 1100, § 1, 7/92)
SEC. 13-18.2. OBSTRUCTION OF HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
At no time shall handicapped spaces on public or private property be used for storage of snow, trash, shopping
carts, construction materials, or otherwise obstructed except when provisions have been made of additional, equally
accessible, temporary handicapped parking spaces at least equal in number to the obstructed spaces. (Ord. 1100,
§ 2, 7/92)
SEC. 13-18.3. REQUIREMENT OF HANDICAPPED PARKING.
A) If parking spaces are provided for visitors or customers, except for private residences, handicapped only
spaces shall be provided in the following ratio:
I) 10-50 spaces: 1 handicapped space
II) 51-100 spaces: 2 handicapped spaces
III) Greater than 100 spaces: 2 + 1% of total spaces over 100 handicapped spaces
B) All fractions in the ratios designated in subsection (A) shall be rounded up.
C) All designated parking spaces shall be marked with a sign mounted on a substantial post or standard
permanently fixed to or imbedded into the parking surface with the international symbol of accessibility, and the words
“Handicapped Parking Only” or “Reserved Parking Only.”
D) All designated handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12’) by twenty feet (20’) in size
except for those in parallel parking areas of the City streets, the size of which shall be determined by the Police Chief.
E) All designated handicapped parking spaces shall be those parking spaces located nearest the main entrance
of the building(s) served by the parking area.
F) In the event that a designated handicapped space is regularly occupied by (an) employee(s) in a parking area
used by the public, additional designated handicapped spaces shall be provided in a number equal to the number of
spaces occupied by employee(s). (Ord. 1100, § 4, 3/92)(R.O. 1355, 4/2012)
SEC. 13-18.4. HANDICAPPED PARKING PENALTIES.
Any person found guilty of violating Sections 13-18.1 through 13-18.3 of the Code of the City of Buffalo shall be
fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 1100, § 4, 7/92)
13-11
ARTICLE III. PARKING METERS.
SEC. 13-19. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings, respectively, ascribed to
them by this section:
Two Hour Parking Zone: A certain and marked off section of the street where a vehicle may be parked for not
more than two hours.
Street: Every way set apart for public travel, except alleyways and footpaths.
Vehicle: Any device by which any person or property may be transported upon a public highway, except those
operated upon rails and permanent tracks. (R.O. 1955, § 31-40)
SEC. 13-20. ZONES ESTABLISHED; DESCRIPTION.
Two hour parking zones as defined in section 13-19 are hereby created on the following streets of the City of
Buffalo; both sides of Main Street between the point where Bennett Street intersects Main Street south of the U.S.
Post Office; thence north to Benteen Street opposite the Hersey Apartments. Also, on both sides of Angus Street
from its intersection with Main Street; thence west to the first alley running north and south. Also, along Fetterman
Street, on both banks of Clear Creek, from the intersection of such street with Main Street; thence east of the first
alley running north and south, and from time to time hereafter as traffic conditions require on such streets and
avenues and other streets and avenues, or such other locations as selected by resolution of the Council for the
location of such zones. (R.O. 1955, § 31-41) (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-21. ZONES ESTABLISHED; TIME.
Two hour parking zones as defined in Section 13-19 will be in effect only between the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 5:30
p.m. Two hour parking zones shall not be in effect on Sundays and Holidays. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-22. CONTRACTS FOR PURCHASE; PAYMENT FROM RECEIPTS.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to carry out the terms of any contracts heretofore or hereafter entered into by the
Council for the purchase, leasing, acquiring, installation, operation, maintenance, supervision, regulation and use of
the parking meters provided for in this article, whether for trial period or otherwise. The payment for such parking
meters and installation shall be provided for solely from the receipts, funds and revenues obtained from the operation
of the parking meters without in any manner obligating the City of Buffalo to pay for the same from any other source.
(R.O. 1955, § 31-43)
SEC. 13-23. VIOLATIONS.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this ordinance for any operator or owner of a vehicle to allow, cause, or
permit the vehicle to park in a two hour parking zone for a period longer than two hours. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-24. DUTIES OF POLICE IN CASE OF VIOLATION; RIGHT OF VIOLATING OPERATOR.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the City of Buffalo, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the
Chief of Police, to report:
a) Location of the vehicle in violation of Section 13-23.
b) The state license number of such vehicle.
c) The time such vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
d) Any other facts, or knowledge, which are necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances
attending such violation.
Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such
vehicle has been parked in violation of any provisions of this article and instructing such owner or operator to report to
the police station of the City of Buffalo in regard to such violation. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-25. PENALTY.
a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of Section 13-23 shall, upon conviction thereof by the
Municipal Court, be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00).
b) A subsequent violation of Section 13-23 that occurs not more than twenty-four hours after the first violation
shall subject the owner or operator of the vehicle to a fine of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 999, 7/83)
13-12
SEC. 13-26. TIME ALLOWED FOR COIN DEPOSITED; OVERTIME PARKING.
Section 13-26 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-27. UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH, INJURE, DEFACE OR DESTROY METER.
Section 13-27 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-28. UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT SLUGS OR OTHER SUBSTITUTES FOR U.S. COINS.
Section 13-28 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-29. PURPOSE OF PARKING FEES.
Section 13-29 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-30. COLLECTORS; PARKING METER FUND.
Section 13-30 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-31. DUTIES OF POLICE IN CASE OF VIOLATIONS; RIGHT OF VIOLATING OPERATOR.
Section 13-31 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
SEC. 13-32. PENALTY GENERALLY.
Section 13-32 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 999, 7/83)
ARTICLE IV. BICYCLES. 1
1. For state law as to bicycles, see W.S. 1977, § 31-5-701.
SEC. 13-33. UNLAWFUL TO RIDE BICYCLE ON SIDEWALKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon any of the sidewalks within the corporate limits of the City
of Buffalo, except at proper sidewalk crossings. (R.O. 1955, § 31-1)
SEC. 13-34. RIDING MORE THAN TWO ABREAST.
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the City of Buffalo abreast of
more than one other person riding or propelling a bicycle. (R.O. 1955, § 13-7)
SEC. 13-35. SPEED LIMIT; RECKLESS DRIVING.
No bicycle shall be riding faster than is reasonable and proper, but every bicycle shall be operated with
reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and any person upon the sidewalks, streets and other public highways
of the City. (R.O. 1955, § 31-4)
ARTICLE V. MOTORCYCLES.
SEC. 13-36. DEFINITIONS.
Motorcycle: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider designed to travel on not more
than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor and completely self-propelled vehicles, and
excluding golf carts. (Ord. 1010, 9/83)
SEC. 13-37. OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES, AND MOPEDS.
a) A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall
not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry
more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for
two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.
b) A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward.
c) No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle or other article, which prevents him
from keeping both hands on the handlebars, or obstructs his vision, or interferes with the safe operation of the
motorcycle.
d) No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride in a position that will interfere with the safe
operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator.
e) All motorcycles are entitled to full use of a lane and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to
deprive any motorcycle of the full use of a lane. This subsection shall not apply to motorcycles operated two (2)
abreast in a single lane. 13-13
f) The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass any vehicle except a single motorcycle in the same
lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken.
g) No person shall operate a motorcycle between the lanes of traffic, or between adjacent lines or rows of
vehicles.
h) Paragraphs (F) and (G) shall not apply to police officers in the performance of their official duties.
i) Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two (2) abreast in a single lane.
j) No person riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself or the motorcycle to any other moving vehicle on a
roadway.
k) Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests
for the passenger.
l) No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars more than fifteen inches (15”) in height above that
portion of the seat occupied by the operator.
m) No minor shall operate or ride, nor shall the operator permit a minor to ride, upon a motorcycle unless he is
wearing protective headgear securely fastened on his head, and of a type which complies with standards established
by the Wyoming Highway Commission. This subsection shall not apply to persons riding within an enclosed cab nor
to persons operating or riding a moped. This subsection shall only apply to motorcycles used on public highways,
streets and thoroughfares.
n) Any person operating a motorcycle or pedestrian vehicle shall have the headlamps of the motorcycle or
pedestrian vehicle activated at all times, including daylight hours.
o) Operators of motorcycles operating in an officially authorized parade shall be exempt from subsections (E)
through (M). (Ord. 1010, 9/83)
SEC. 13-38. SAME – REQUIRED DISTANCE FROM OTHER MOTORCYCLES.
Section 13-38 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1010, 9/83)
SEC. 13-39. SAME – PROTECTIVE HELMET OR OTHER EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
Section 13-39 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1010, 9/83)
13-12
SEC. 13-40. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
Any person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 678, § 5)
SEC. 13-41. OPERATION OF MOTORIZED SNOW MACHINES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snow machine or snowmobile on any public street, alley, sidewalk
or other municipal property within the municipal limits of the Town of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, except in the
following situations:
a) When loading or unloading a snowmobile onto or from a trailer or other means of conveyance.
b) During an emergency situation, to be determined by the Mayor or his duly authorized representative. (Ord.
1016, 1/84)
SEC. 13-42. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1016, 1/84)
13-14

CHAPTER 14
MUNICIPAL COURT
Article I. Police Justice.
§ 14-1. Appointment; Compensation; Term; Duties.
§ 14-2. Qualifications; Records to be kept; Oath and bond.
§ 14-3. Alternate justice.
§ 14-4. Disposition of costs and fines.
§ 14-4.1. Adoption of Criminal Procedure.
Article II. Procedure and Commencing Actions.
§ 14-5. Complaint.
§ 14-6. Form of warrant.
§ 14-7. Docketing case; Issuance of warrant or summons.
§ 14-8. Bail.
§ 14-9. Judgment on bail bond.
§ 14-10. Detention of accused pending delay in trial.
§ 14-11. Judgment on default.
§ 14-12. Payment of costs by prosecuting witness.
§ 14-13. General penalty; continuing violations.
§ 14-13A.1 Penalties for violation of municipal ordinances.
§ 14-13A.2 Contempt of court.
§ 14-14. Confinement in lieu of payment of fine.
ARTICLE I. POLICE JUSTICE.
SEC. 14-1. APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION; TERM; DUTIES. 1
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice of the City Council, a Police Justice at a regular salary to be determined
by the Mayor and Council, provided, however, that this salary shall not be diminished during the term of office. The
Police Justice shall perform the duties incident to such office and such duties as may be provided and defined by the
laws of the State of Wyoming. The Police Justice shall hold office until removed by the Mayor and Council. The
Police Justice shall be considered as an employee of the City of Buffalo for all purposes, and subject to all
appropriate rules and regulations of employees thereof; provided that nothing herein shall be construed to mean that
the Police Justice shall be amenable to the instructions of the Mayor and Council in rendering a decision or
disposition of any case properly before him. (Ord. 980, § 1, 3/82)
1. For state law as to appointment and qualifications of Police Justices, see W.S.
1977, § 5-6-103. As to term of office and compensation, see W.S. 1977, § 5-6-104.
SEC. 14-2. QUALIFICATIONS; RECORDS TO BE KEPT; OATH AND BOND. 2
The duly appointed Police Justice shall be a qualified elector and resident of the City of Buffalo, who shall hold
court in a room designated by the Mayor and Council for that purpose. He shall keep all dockets, papers, records and
other documents relating to his office in a place of safekeeping. Such Police Justice shall, before entering upon his
duties as Police Justice, take or subscribe to such oath of office as the Mayor and Council may prescribe and which
may be consistent with the constitution and laws of the state, and shall then give a bond in a sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the faithful performance of his duties. (Ord. 980, § 2, 3/82)
2. For state law as to qualifications, see W.S. 1977, § 5-6-103. As to bond, see W.S.
1977, § 5-6-105.
14-1
SEC. 14-3. ALTERNATE JUSTICE.
The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to appoint any alternate or temporary Police Justice to serve
during the absence, illness, disability or vacancy of the regularly appointed Police Justice, who shall hold the same
qualifications and perform such duties as may be required of the regularly appointed Police Justice; and, the alternate
or temporary Police Justice shall receive a salary to be determined by Mayor and Council. (Ord. 980, § 3, 3/82)
SEC. 14-4. DISPOSITION OF COSTS AND FINES. 3
The Police Justice, upon determination of cases properly before him, in which fines and costs are properly
assessable, shall immediately pay over or cause the parties chargeable to pay over to the City Clerk-Treasurer all
fines and costs or other money lawfully received by him or by others under his direction or authority by lawful process
issued from the Municipal Court; provided, that the Court shall assess Court Costs in an amount not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00) in each case for which Court costs are properly assessable; and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
properly account for such money to the Mayor and Council at the regular meeting thereof next succeeding the month
of such collections. (Ord. 797)
SEC. 14-4.1. ADOPTION OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE.
The procedure for proceedings relating to trial of offenses against the Ordinances of the City of Buffalo shall be
governed by the Wyoming Rules of Criminal Procedure for Justice Courts then in effect and if there is any conflict
between procedures established by Ordinance and the Wyoming Rules of Criminal Procedures for Justice Courts, the
Wyoming Rules of Criminal Procedures for Justice Courts shall apply. (Ord. 980, § 4, 3/82
3. For state law as to costs and fines, see W.S. 1977, §§ 5-6-108, 5-6-106.
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURE AND COMMENCING ACTIONS. 4
4. For state law generally as to procedure in Municipal Courts, see W.S. 1977, § 5-6-
106.
SEC. 14-5. COMPLAINT.
Section 14-5 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 980, § 5, 3/82)
SEC. 14-6. FORM OF WARRANT.
Section 14-6 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 980, § 6, 3/82)
SEC. 14-7. DOCKETING CASE; ISSUANCE OF WARRANT OR SUMMONS.
Section 14-7 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 980, § 7, 3/82)
SEC. 14-8. BAIL.
Section 14-8 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 980, § 8, 3/82)
SEC. 14-9. JUDGMENT ON BAIL BOND.
If the defendant fails to appear according to the conditions of any bond executed pursuant to Wyoming Rules of
Criminal Procedure for Justice Courts the Police Justice may enter judgment against him and his securities for the
amount of such bond. Upon entering such judgment, it shall be the duty of the Police Justice to issue process on
behalf of the City of Buffalo against the parties liable on such bond requiring them to appear before him on a day to
be mentioned therein, and show cause, if any they have, why judgment should not be confirmed against them and
execution issued upon such judgment, and any judgment entered up as aforesaid may be set aside by the Police
Justice if the defendant shall personally appear before the Police Justice at the time mentioned in the process and
show cause for setting aside the judgment by affidavit of some creditable person; and it shall be lawful for the sureties
on such bond to appear before the Police Justice at the time aforesaid and make the same defense that is allowed for
the nonappearance of the principal under the laws of this state in similar cases before the Justice of the Peace. (Ord.
980, § 9, 3/82)
14-2
SEC. 14-10. DETENTION OF ACCUSED PENDING DELAY IN TRIAL.
Section 14-10 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 980, § 10, 3/82)
SEC. 14-11. JUDGMENT ON DEFAULT.
When a defendant duly summoned fails to appear at the time the suit is set for trial, the Police Justice shall hear
and examine the testimony offered on the part of the City of Buffalo and shall render judgment by default for such an
amount under the ordinances as the Police Justice may deem best. (R.O. 1955, § 16-9)
SEC. 14-12. PAYMENT OF COSTS BY PROSECUTING WITNESS.
In all prosecutions for fines or penalties when the defendant shall be acquitted, the informer or prosecutor may, in
the discretion of the Police Justice, be adjudged to pay the costs, if it appears to the satisfaction of the Police Justice
that the prosecution was instituted vexatiously, maliciously or without probable cause, and judgment shall be so
rendered and execution issued therefore. (R.O. 1955, § 16-11)
SEC, 14-13. GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS. 5
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance, rule or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the City of
Buffalo under authority vested in him or it by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or
the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is
provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or any such ordinance, rule or regulation shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day any violation of this Code or of any such ordinance, rule or regulation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 980, § 11, 3/82; RO. 1303 06/08)
5. For state law establishing the maximum punishment for violation of ordinances,
see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xi).
SEC. 14-13A.1. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES.
Probation, community service or assessments may be imposed for any municipal ordinance conviction provided
that the terms of probation, community service or assessment are directly related to an element or circumstance for
that conviction, or for the terms or conditions for paying fines, costs, fees or restitution. A period of probation not to
exceed one (1) year may be ordered in all sentences, consistent with this ordinance. (Ord. 1337 11, 3/2009)
SEC. 14-13A.2. CONTEMPT OF COURT.
The Municipal Judge shall have the power to punish for contempt in the same manner and to the same extent as
the district court. (Ord. 1337 11, 3/2009)
SEC. 14-14. CONFINEMENT IN LIEU OF PAYMENT OF FINE.
Section 14-14 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 980, § 12, 3/82)
14-3
CHAPTER 15
NUISANCES 1
1. For state law as to authority of towns in relation to nuisances, see W.S. 1977, §
15-1-103 (xvii).
As to hogs in the City limits being declared a nuisance, see § 4-1 of this Code. As to
unsafe buildings being considered a nuisance, see § 5-25. As to foul premises
generally being declared a nuisance, see § 16-15. As to hawkers, peddlers,
solicitors, etc., entering private premises without invitation being considered a
nuisance, see § 16-18. As to nuisances in connection with trailers and trailer courts,
see § 24-4.
§ 15-1. Violation prohibited.
§ 15-2. Enumeration not exclusive.
§ 15-3. Notice to abate nuisance – Compliance required.
§ 15-4. Notice to abate nuisance – Contents – Procedure.
§ 15-5. Hearing procedure.
§ 15-6. Removal – Voluntary consent – Affidavit.
§ 15-7. Disposal – Assessment of costs.
§ 15-8. Search warrant.
§ 15-9. Property maintenance – Owner and occupant responsibility.
§ 15-10. Abatement – Court action authorized.
§ 15-11. Litter removal – Authorization – Notice – Cost to be a lien.
§ 15-12. Littering – General restrictions – Prosecution.
§ 15-13. Dead Animals.
§ 15-14. Nuisance Citations.
§ 15-15. Title to impound vehicles.
§ 15-16. Notice to removal.
§ 15-17. Residential Outside Storage.
SEC. 15-1. VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
The accumulation or storage of derelict, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled vehicles, litter or junk on private or
public property, including public utility easement (P.U.E.) and public thoroughfares is found to create a condition
tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire
hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a
harborage for insects, rodents, skunks and other vermin and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare
of the public. Therefore the presence of litter or abandoned, derelict, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle on
private or public property, except as expressly permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be
abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to maintain or permit
the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. Any person who may be in violation of this section
shall, in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for the violation of this code, be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and be required to reimburse the City for expenses incurred in the abatement of the nuisance.
SEC. 15-2. ENUMERATION NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The City Council shall have the final authority to determine the existence of a nuisance. The various nuisances
described and enumerated in this section provide guidance to the City Council for determining the existence of a
nuisance and are not deemed to be exclusive.
A. Things Interfering With Peace or Comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort.
B. Obnoxious, Offensive Odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of air rendering it
offensive and/or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of persons residing in the neighborhood thereof.
15-1
C. Discharging of Offensive Matter. The placing, throwing or discharging from or out of any house or premises, of
any filthy, foul or offensive matter, liquid or effluent of any kind.
D. Water Pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city.
E. Stagnant Water. Any stagnant pool of water in the city.
F. Emission of Dense Smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other
agency in the city not used for heating or cooking purposes so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the public.
G. Certain Weeds. Weeds determined to be noxious by the Wyoming Weed and Pest Council, any weeds such
as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in
the city including easements, alleys and right of ways.
H. Maximum Height Permitted. Any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental
plants, growing to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in the city, including platted lots, easements and right of
ways except naturally occurring plant life in undeveloped areas of the city.
I. Abandoned, Junked, ect., Vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles and parts or remains thereof parked upon
private property, public property, public streets, alleys, easements, right of ways or other ways are declared to be
nuisances. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, derelict or inoperative vehicle, on private or public
property, is declared to constitute a public nuisance that may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The tearing down, stripping or junking of such vehicles shall be permitted only where such use is
specifically authorized, permitted or licensed under other ordinances of the city and in strict accordance therewith; or
which use is conducted entirely within the confines of an accessory garage building, then only provided that such
vehicle is the property of the owner or occupier of the lot and that such use is not a commercial use of the property,
unless such use is authorized by other ordinances of the city.
A vehicle shall be deemed to be “abandoned” under any of the following circumstances: provided, however, that a
vehicle left unattended due to adverse road or weather conditions, act of God, or mechanical difficulties shall not be
deemed to be abandoned for the period required to see the passage of the conditions or a reasonable time to remove
the vehicle for repairs:
If the vehicle has been left unattended on private property without the consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession thereof.
Derelict Vehicles. A vehicle, or parts thereof, shall be deemed to be “derelict” if the vehicle is:
1. Inoperable to the extent that is unable to perform its original intended function;
2. Partially or wholly dismantled;
3. In a condition that prevents legal operation;
4. Junked or intended to be recycled or scrapped;
This section defining derelict and abandoned vehicles shall not apply to the following:
1. A vehicle that is enclosed in a secure building.
2. A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to
the operation of the business enterprise as determined by the Mayor or his/her designated agent with written
authorization.
3. A vehicle in an appropriate storage or depository facility maintained in a lawful place and manner by a
governmental agency;
4. An antique motor vehicle as defined in W.S. 31-2-210 which is licensed as provided by law.
5. A vehicle which is covered by an intact custom car cover made for the specific type and size of vehicle which it
covers.
15-2
a. In no instance may a person have more than two (2) such covered vehicles on his or her property.
b. No custom covered vehicle may be stored on public property or right-of-way.
6. A race car that is currently actively engaged in racing and equipped for racing with roll cage, windows
removed, drivers name, sponsors and number displayed. Demolition race cars shall be considered derelict vehicles
two weeks after the demolition race.
7. An automobile repair shop may only have derelict vehicles on the premises for the time necessary under
agreement for repair with business customers; automobile dealers may not have derelict vehicles on the premises for
resale.
J. Junk. Any iron, glass, weeds, metal, lumber, stumps, grass, trash, straw, hedge trimmings, cut tree branches,
paper, cordage, cloth, construction debris building material not intended for immediate use of other waste or
discarded material of any nature or substance whatsoever or any scrap or salvage materials which are left or
permitted to remain for any unreasonable period of time upon any real property within the city or any city property
within or without the corporate limits of the city or upon or within the entire width between the boundary lines of every
way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, public utilities and rights of
way.
K. Foul, Offensive Conditions. Any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, privy, sewer or grounds upon any premises
owned or occupied by any person, which becomes nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public health, or any
grounds or other premises in such condition as to be offensive and/or unwholesome to the neighborhood.
L. Any refrigerator or freezer, electronic equipment or appliance which is not being utilized for its intended use.
SEC. 15-3. NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE – COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
A. It shall be the duty of any person receiving the notice of a public nuisance as provided in this Chapter to
comply with the provisions of the notice and to abate such nuisance within ten days after the receipt of such notice,
and if such person shall fail or refuse to abate such nuisance within ten days from receipt of such notice within just
cause, such failure is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such nuisance persists
shall constitute a separate violation.
B. It is unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor for any person, after having received notice as provided in
this chapter, to remove any vehicle or junk from private property to any other private property upon which storage is
not permitted, or onto any public property.
C. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, and after notice as provided by this Section 15-3, the city
may abate the nuisance, and the cost of abatement may be charged to the owner of the nuisance or assessed
against the land upon which the nuisance exists or both.
SEC. 15-4. NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE – CONTENTS -- PROCEDURE.
A. Whenever the City Council determines that a nuisance exists, the Mayor or his/her designated agent or
representative shall attempt to give written notice to the owner of the condition, if his or her address is known, to the
owner of the land where the condition is located, and to any other person or entity known by the Mayor or his/her
designated agent to have a security interest in the vehicle or junk. The notice shall be attempted by registered mail or
personal service, if the address of the individual or entity is known. In the case of vehicles, where practical, the notice
shall also be affixed to the windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen. Where affixing
the notice to a vehicle is impractical, and in the case of junk, the notice shall be posted at the site or on the premises
where the nuisance exists.
B. Such notice shall include substantially the following information:
1. A statement that a certain condition is a nuisance within the provisions of Section 15-1; in the case of a
vehicle, the notice should include make, year and vehicle identification number if reasonable possible;
2. A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists;
3. A statement that such nuisance must be abated within ten days from the date on the notice;
15-3
4. A statement that if the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, the city may abate the nuisance, and
the cost of abatement may be charged to the owner of the nuisance or assessed against the land upon which the
nuisance exists or both;
5. A statement that a hearing upon the allegation of a public nuisance and the assessment of costs may be
requested by giving written notice to the clerk of municipal court within ten days from the date on the notice, and that
a request must specify the property concerning which the request is made, the requesting party’s name and address,
and the nature of the interest held by the requesting party; that upon request a hearing will be scheduled to determine
if a public nuisance exists and as to the assessment of administrative costs and the costs of abatement; that if a
hearing is not so requested the right to a hearing shall be waived;
6. A statement that failure to abate the nuisance may result in a city abatement and/or criminal charges.
C. In the event that notice, as provided in subsection A of this section, cannot be given to each individual known
by the Mayor or his/her designated agent or his representative to have an interest in the vehicle or junk, service shall
be made by publication. Such notice by publication shall be made by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in Johnson County. The notice of publication shall contain the same information required in the notice
described I subsection A of this section. Notice by publication may contain multiple listings of public nuisances.
D. Proof of notice shall be made by certification of any officer or employee of the city, or affidavit of any person
over eighteen years of age, naming the person to whom notice was given and specifying the time, place and manner
thereof. Proof of notice shall be made in each case and maintained for a period of two years from date of abatement
of the nuisance for which notice has been given.
SEC. 15-5. HEARING PROCEDURE.
A. A request for a hearing upon the allegation of a public nuisance and the assessment of costs shall be made in
writing and delivered to the municipal court clerk within ten days from the date of the notice to abate. Such request
shall specify the property concerning which the request is made, the requesting party’s name and address, and
nature of the interest held by the requesting party in the vehicle or junk.
B. In the event of a public nuisance as defined in Section 15-1, of which notice has been given, and which
remains unabated for more than ten days, the Mayor or his/her designated agent or his representative is granted the
authority to abate, remove or cause the removal of the vehicle or junk; provided however, that is a proper request for
hearing if filed, abatement shall only proceed upon order of the municipal judge or hearing examiner.
C. In the event a request for hearing is filed as provided, a hearing shall be held before the municipal judge or
such other individual or group as designated by the city council to act as hearing examiner. The purpose of the
hearing shall be to confirm or deny the existence of a public nuisance and for taking such further action as is
authorized under this chapter. Notice of the time, place and hour of the hearing shall be sent at least ten days in
advance of the hearing to the requesting parties and the city attorney.
D. At such hearing, all parties and the city shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence, to cross-examine
and present argument; provided that all persons testifying shall be sworn; irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded; and the decision of the municipal judge or hearing examiner shall be based upon the type
of evidence commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent people in the conduct of their serious affairs.
E. At or after such hearing, and in the event of confirmation that a public nuisance exists, the municipal judge or
the hearing examiner, as the case may be, may resolve or order that the Mayor or his/her designated agent and/or his
employees or agents remove or otherwise abate the nuisance; provided, however, that is the circumstances justify, in
the opinion of the municipal judge or person presiding at the hearing, the time for abatement may be delayed. In the
vent a nuisance is confirmed, administrative and removal costs may also be assessed at the hearing. If it is found
that a public nuisance does not exist, abatement authority shall be denied and costs shall not be assessed.
F. Appeals from adverse decisions rendered by the hearing examiner or municipal judge pursuant to subsection
D of this section may be made to the district court in the same manner as an appeal from an adverse decision
rendered by an agency in a contested case under the provisions of Section 16-3-114 of the Wyoming Statutes, 1977.
The municipal judge or hearing examiner, as provided in subsection C of this section, is an agency within the
meaning of the Wyoming Administrative Procedures Act and adverse decisions may be appealed in the manner
provided therein.
G. In the event a request for hearing or appeal, as proved, in not filed, the right to a hearing shall be considered to
have been waived. 15-4
SEC. 15-6. REMOVAL-VOLUNTARY CONSENT-AFFIDAVIT.
The owner of any vehicle or junk or the owner of real property where any junk or vehicle has been abandoned my
voluntarily consent to the removal of such property by the city. In order to give such consent, all owners of the
property shall execute an affidavit in a form acceptable to the city attorney, stating that there are no other owners of
the property, or lien holders having security interest in the property; that the owners will reimburse the city for the
actual costs of removal or such other costs as are established by the Mayor or his/her designated agent for such
removal; and that such reimbursement will be made to the city within thirty days of removal. Such affidavit shall
constitute a statement by the owners signing such affidavit that they will indemnify the city for any loss or expense
alleged by any other party as a result of removal or disposal. The execution of such affidavit shall also release the
city from any obligation to account or pay over to the owners any amount the city receives for the property.
SEC. 15-7. DISPOSAL—ASSESSMENT COSTS.
A. Any vehicle or junk which is impounded or removed and taken into custody, as provided in this chapter, may
be disposed of according to the provisions of Section 7-2-105 of the Wyoming Statutes, 1977, or Sections 31-13-108,
31-13-109 and 31-13-110 of the Wyoming Statutes, 1977.
B. The Mayor or his/her designated agent shall, from time to time, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as
administrative costs in relation to enforcement of this chapter. This cost of administration may be set as a fixed sum
per removal or as a percentage of the actual cost of removal under this chapter. The city may take any action
allowed by law to collect, the actual costs of removal and storage of any property constituting a public nuisance.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the city the right to waive cost of removal.
C. Upon the owner’s failure and /or refusal to comply with the written notice to remove the nuisance within the
specified time period, the Mayor or his/her designated agent or his designee may, in addition to issuing the owner a
citation, after due process of law, authorize the removal of such nuisance, and the owner of the lot or parcel from
which the nuisance is removed, shall be liable for all costs of the removal.
D. The Mayor or his/her designated agent or his designee may initiate legal proceedings for the collection of costs
of the removal against the owner of the lot or parcel, upon the owner’s failure and/or refusal to pay the costs within
the thirty (30) days, following demand for payment by the Mayor or his/her designated agent or his designee.
SEC. 15-8. SEARCH WARRANT.
A. The Mayor or his/her designated agent or his representative may make application to the municipal court for
authority to enter upon land to examine vehicles or junk for the purpose of making a determination as to whether a
public nuisance exists and/or securing information as to the ownership of a vehicle or junk thought to constitute a
public nuisance and/or securing information as to the identity of the person or persons in control of the land where the
vehicle or junk is situated.
B. The municipal court has authority to issue search warrants and other process necessary to enforce this
chapter.
C. A warrant shall issue only upon affidavit sworn to before a municipal judge that establishes the grounds for
issuing the warrant. If the judge is satisfied that the grounds for the applications exist or that there is probable cause
to believe that they exist, he shall issue a warrant identifying the purpose of the search, and naming or describing the
place to be searched. The warrant shall be directed to the Mayor or his/her designated agent, his representative or to
any officer authorized to enforce or assist in enforcing the laws of the state or of the city. The warrant shall state the
ground or probable cause for is issuance and the names or the persons whose affidavits have been taken in support
thereof. The warrant shall command that the search take place forthwith. The warrant shall direct that it be served in
the daytime, but for good cause shown, the warrant may direct that it be served at any time.
SEC. 15-9. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE – OWNER AND OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY.
A. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises including
easements, alley, public utility easement (P.U.E.), public thoroughfare and right of ways on or across the premises
free of litter. This requirement applies not only to removal of loose litter, but to materials on, or that become trapped
on, such locations as abutting city sidewalks, strips, parkways, and private or publicly owned fences and wall bases,
grassy and planted areas, borders, embankments and other such lodging points. Any contract with a realtor for sale
or management of unoccupied property shall list who the responsible party is for purposes of this section.
15-5
B. Persons owning or occupying places of business which face on municipal sidewalks and strips or parkways
between streets and sidewalks shall be responsible for keeping those sidewalks and strips free of litter. Cleanliness
of the alleyways, public utility easement (P.U.E.), public thoroughfares if the responsibility of the contiguous property
owners.
C. It is unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks and strips or parkways, public utility easement (P.U.E.),
public thoroughfares into streets. Sidewalk, strip, parkway, public utility easement (P.U.E.), public thoroughfares
sweepings must be picked up and put into household commercial solid waste containers.
D. Waster material or refuse used in the manufacture or remanufacture of salable products may be stored in an
approved manner on the premises and with the written permission of the health, fire and building departments.
E. Rock, stone, brick, concrete, dirt and other building materials or mineral wastes shall not be permitted to
accumulate in alleyways, public utility easement (P.U.E.) or public thoroughfares. Such material mush be stored on
private property in a safe manner and in such a way to prevent rodent harborage.
SEC. 15-10. ABATEMENT – COURT ACTION AUTHORIZED.
The city attorney is authorized to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters against any property, entity or individual for which the charge for abating a nuisance under this
chapter has remained unpaid for a period of thirty days after a bill therefor has been rendered to the owner of the
property involved.
SEC. 15-11. LITTER REMOVAL –AUTHORIZATION – NOTICE – COST TO BE A LIEN.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies, the Mayor or his/her designated agent or his designee is authorized
and empowered to serve notice upon the occupant or the owner, or his agent, to remove litter from his private
property. If the litter is not removed within five days after service of notice, the manager or his designee shall have it
removed and the cost of removal shall be assessed against the property and constitutes a lien thereon. The owner
shall be notified, in writing, of the amount assessed, and if it is not paid, it shall be collected in the same manner as
provided by Section 15-10.
SEC. 15-12. LITTERING – GENERAL RESTRICTION -- PROSECUTION.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place, deposit, distribute, cause or allow to be thrown, discarded,
placed, deposited, or distributed, litter in any manner or amount on any public or private property within the corporate
limits of the city, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor.
SEC. 15-13. DEAD ANIMALS.
All game and animal hides, heads, carcasses and feet must not be kept on any premises and must be disposed of
at the sanitary landfill within twelve hours after being dressed.
SEC. 15-14. NUISANCE CITATIONS.
Code Enforcement Officers are hereby granted authority to enforce the ordinances found in this Chapter through
the use of forfeitable citations through the Buffalo Municipal Court using the bond schedule developed by the Buffalo
Municipal Court.
SEC. 15-15. TITLE TO IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
Title to any impounded vehicle not reclaimed by the registered owner or any lien holder within thirty days of the
date of the requirements of Section____shall vest tin the city. A change in the title may be obtained by the city
pursuant to the authority of this chapter and procedure established in state statutes to obtain a change in title.
SEC. 15-16. NOTICE TO REMOVAL.
A. Upon removal of any vehicle by the city, a written report of the removal shall be sent to the last address of the
owner, if known, otherwise such notice shall be sent to the Wyoming Department of Revenue and Taxation. The
report shall include a description of the vehicle, the date, time and place of removal, the grounds for removal and the
place of impoundment of the vehicle.
B. Proof of providing the report shall be made by the certificate of any city employee involved in the impoundment
of the vehicle, specifying the person to whom the report was directed and the date and manner the report was
provided.
15-6
C. Such report shall not be required if the retail value of the vehicle is less than six hundred dollars as reasonable
determined by the chief of police or his designee.
SEC. 15-17. RESIDENTIAL OUTSIDE STORAGE.
Al residential outside storage shall;
1. Have a residential building on site or a building permit prior to any residential outside storage being permitted.
Any and all permitted residential outside storage shall be limited to residential zoned lots or residential use lots only.
2. Be no closer than the front building line of the residence or twenty five fee (25 ft.) from the front property line
whichever is less.
3. Be limited to an area of no more than one hundred twenty square feet (120 sq. ft.) per lot or combination of lots
as legally described for the primary residence and on file with the Johnson County Assessor’s Office, with the
exception of firewood that is stacked and stored in accordance with and as defined in Section 10-1.4 of this code.
4. Be limited to a height of five feet (5 ft.).
5. The outside storage of tires shall not be permitted on any residentially zoned lots or residential use lots.
6. Residential outside storage of construction materials may be allowed, provided that the construction materials
are for use on site pursuant to a current, valid construction permit. All other construction materials for projects not
requiring a building permit and any other construction materials may be stored subject to all other limitations of this
code. (R.O. 1955, § 62-3; R.O. 1394 5/18)
15-7
CHAPTER 16
OFFENSES – MISCELLANEOUS. 1
1. For state law authorizing the town to suppress, restrain and prohibit disorderly and
vicious practices, riots, routs, affrays, noises, disturbances, etc., see W.S. 1977, §
15-1-103 (xv), (xvi), (xviii).
§ 16-1. Assault.
§ 16-2. Assault and battery.
§ 16-3. Billposting, etc.
§16-4. Breach of the peace.
§ 16-4.1. Disorderly conduct.
§ 16-4.2. Fleeing or attempting to elude police officers.
§ 16-5. Brush and bushes.
§16-5.1. Commercial advertising and signs – U.S. Highway No. 16 Addition.
§ 16-6. Curfew – Persons under sixteen.
§ 16-6.1 Liability of Parents, or persons who knowingly permit breach of law.
§ 16-6.2 Interference with custody.
§ 16-7. Loitering, etc., as to impede use of public places.
§ 16-8. Penalty for curfew, loitering, etc., violations above.
§ 16-8.1. Criminal trespass; Prohibited.
§ 16-9. Disorderly houses.
§ 16-10. Disturbance of assemblage generally.
§ 16-11. Disturbance of religious worship.
§ 16-12. Fireworks, firearms, etc. – Shooting.
§ 16-12.A. Hunting.
§ 16-13. Same – Sale, etc., of fireworks.
§ 16-14. Fortune-telling.
§ 16-15. Foul premises generally.
§ 16-15.1 Premises to be kept clean and orderly.
§ 16-16. Gambling – Prohibited.
§ 16-17. Same – Permitting premises to be used for gambling.
§ 16-18. Peddling.
§ 16-19. Houses of ill fame.
§ 16-20. Indecent, lewd, etc., conduct.
§ 16-21. Injuring, destroying, etc., property – Belonging to City.
§ 16-22. Same – Shade of fruit trees.
§ 16-23. Intoxication.
§ 16-24. Lewd conduct generally.
§ 16-25. Malicious destruction.
§ 16-26. Minors in billiard and pool halls.
§ 16-26.1. Noise prohibited.
§ 16-26.2. Use of Engine Compression Brakes prohibited.
§ 16-27. “Peeping” persons.
§ 16-28. Pickpockets, thieves, etc.
§ 16-28.1. Shoplifting.
§ 16-28.2 Petit larceny.
§16-29. Pollution of grounds or streams.
§ 16-30. Prostitute – Occupying room with.
§ 16-31. Resisting, etc., arrest.
§ 16-32. Soliciting for prostitution or fornication.
§ 16-33. Throwing missiles.
§ 16-34. Unlawful assembly.
§ 16-35. Vagrants.
§ 16-36. Weapons – Carrying.
§ 16-36A Weapons – School facilities
§ 16-37. Weeds.
§ 16-38. Protection of dogs used in law enforcement.
§ 16-39. Tobacco sales.
16-1
§ 16-40. Contact with wildlife.
§ 16-41. Restrictions of smoking in City facilities.
§ 16-42 Social Hosts of Underage Alcohol Parties
§ 16-43 Certain Intoxicating Chemical Compounds
§ 16-44 Intentional misuse of substances.
§ 16-45 Controlled substances-possession, sale, purchase, etc., of certain equipment.
SEC. 16-1. ASSAULT. 2
Whoever, having the present ability to do so, unlawfully attempts to commit a violent injury on the person of
another is guilty of an assault. Any person who violates any section of this article shall upon conviction be fined in
accordance with the general penalties under the ordinances of the City. (R.O. 1955, § 17-1; R.O. 1352, 12/11)
2. For similar state law, see W.S. 1977, § 6-4-501.
SEC. 16-2. ASSAULT AND BATTERY. 3
Whoever, in a rude, insolent or angry manner unlawfully touches another is guilty of an assault and battery and
shall be punished as provided in Sec. 14-13. (R.O. 1955, § 17-2)
3. For similar state law, see W.S. 1977, § 6-4-502.
SEC. 16-3. BILLPOSTING, ETC. 4
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print, paste, stencil or otherwise mark upon, or in any manner to place
upon or affix to, any building, fence, wall or tree, any word, letter, character, figure, sentence or device, or any
handbill or notice of any public sale of property by any sheriff, constable, administrator, executor or guardian, or to
any other notice required by law to be posted. (R.O. 1955, § 20-17)
4. As to billposting in George Washington Memorial Park, see Sec. 17-7 of this
Code.
SEC. 16-4. BREACH OF THE PEACE.
Whoever by any loud or unnecessary talking or by any threatening, abusive, profane or obscene language, or
violent actions, or by any other rude behavior, interrupts or disturbs the peace of the community or of any of the
inhabitants thereof, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace. Any person who violates any section of this article shall,
upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalties under the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 978, § 1,
1/82; R.O. 1352, 12/11)
SEC. 16-4.1. DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
a) A person shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct if he willfully.
1) Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is
placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged.
2) Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health
or property of another.
3) Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot. For the purposes of this section the
term “riot” shall mean a tumultuous disturbance of the peace by persons assembled and acting with a common intent
to the terror of the people of the municipality, either in executing a lawful enterprise in a violent or turbulent manner or
in executing an unlawful enterprise in a violent or turbulent manner.
4) Obstructs, either single or together with other person’s, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the Police or other lawful authority known to be such.
5) Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous,
unhealthy or physically offensive condition.
6) Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a Police Officer, when known to be such an official, where one or
more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is
imminently threatened.
16-2
7) Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by Police or any other authorized official of the municipality,
when known to be such an official.
8) Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger
of his life, limb or health.
9) Interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence.
10) Uses abusive, profane or obscene language in any public place.
b) It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 859, § 2, 6/75)
SEC. 16-4.2. FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICERS.
a) Any person who willfully fails or refuses to stop, or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude a pursuing Police
Officer, when given visual or audible signal to stop, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The signal given by the Police Officer
may be by hand, voice, emergency light or siren. The Officer giving the signal shall be in uniform, prominently
displaying his badge of office, and his vehicle shall be appropriately marked showing it to be an official police vehicle.
b) Any person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the
general penalties under the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1157, § 1, 4/97; R.O. 1352, 12/11)
SEC. 16-5. BRUSH OR BUSHES.
It shall be the duty of any owner of any lot within the City of Buffalo, or the agent having charge and control
thereof, to keep the same free from all brush and undergrowth and shrubbery, which are not ornamental or edible fruit
bearing. Such owner or other responsible person shall cut such brush, undergrowth and shrubbery, and keep the
same cut; provided, however, that any such owner or other responsible person shall not be liable to any punishment
for not complying with the provisions of this section, until fifteen days notice, in writing, has been given him by the
Chief of Police or Water and Street Superintendent. (R.O. 1955, § 60-9)
SEC. 16-5.1. COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING AND SIGNS – U.S. HIGHWAY NO. 16 ADDITION.
For sign regulations, see Chapter 29, Sec. 19-1.11A.
SEC. 16-6. CURFEW – PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN.
1) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen to be upon any street, alley, park, cemetery,
highway, thoroughfare or sidewalk either in the corporate limits of the City, or upon any property owned by the City,
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless such person is actuary and continuously accompanied by his
parents, guardian or other responsible adult person or such person is going directly to his parent’s or his guardian’s
home, from his place of employment, school sponsored activity or other organized recreational activity. (Ord. 1181, §
1, 7/99)
2) It shall be unlawful for any person having legal care and custody of and care of any child under eighteen years
of age to allow or permit such child to violate this section. (Ord. 1181, § 2, 7/99)
SEC. 16-6.1. LIABILITY OF PARENTS, OR PERSONS WHO KNOWINGLY PERMIT BREACH OF LAW.
Any parent or other person having the custody of any minor child under the age of eighteen years who knowingly
shall permit such child to commit any offense in violation of the general and permanent ordinances or state statutes
shall be deemed guilty of willful neglect of such child as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1353, 12/11)
SEC. 16-6.2 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a parent, legal guardian or other legal custodian’s custody of a
child by removal by any means from said custody including but not limited to failure to return the minor into custody or
care, assisting the minor in leaving legal custody, or by assisting encouraging or permitting the minor in violating city
ordinance or state statue while in said person’s care. This shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
a) Any person, without privilege to do so, removes or entices a minor from the care of their parent, legal
guardian or custodian
b) Any person refuses or fails to return a minor into the care of their parent, legal guardian or custodian
c) Any person aids, abets, entices, encourages or knowingly permits a minor to violate or disregard state statute,
city ordinance or any order of the court, police officer or probation officer
16-3
d) Any person removes a minor, or assists a minor in leaving any school in which the minor is enrolled without
proper permission from the minor’s parent, legal guardian or other legal custodian or an appropriate school
official
e) Any person allows a minor in their presence to remain in violation of curfew. (Ord. 1353, 12/11)
SEC. 16-7. LOITERING, ETC., AS TO IMPEDE USE OF PUBLIC PLACES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle, either alone or in consort with other
persons in public place in such manner as to:
a) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or other public place or building by hindering,
impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or pedestrians.
b) Commit in or upon any public street, highway or sidewalk, or any public place or building, any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of the property or to any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or beside such public street, highway or sidewalk, or other public place or building,
all of which prevents the free, uninterrupted ingress and egress therein, thereon and thereto.
c) If any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated as subsections (A) or (B) herein, a Police
Officer or other Law Enforcement Officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to
move on or disperse. Any person who fails to or refuses to obey such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
755, § 2, 4/72)
SEC. 16-8. PENALTY FOR CURFEW, LOITERING, ETC., VIOLATIONS ABOVE.
Any person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general
penalties under the ordinances of the City. Each such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 755, § 3,
4/72; R.O. 1352, 12/11)
SEC. 16-8.1. CRIMINAL TRESPASS; PROHIBITED.
A person is guilty of criminal trespass if he enters or remains on or in the land or premises of another person,
knowing he is not authorized to do so, after being notified to depart or not to trespass. For purposes of this section,
notice is given by:
a) Personal communication to the person by the owner or occupant, or by an agent of the owner or occupant, or
by a peace officer employed by the City of Buffalo; or
b) Posting of a sign reasonably likely to come to attention of intruders.
Any person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general
penalties under the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1009, 9/83; R.O. 1352, 12/11)
SEC. 16-9. DISORDERLY HOUSES. 5
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any business establishment or any other person to keep any
common, ill-governed or disorderly house or to suffer any drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful or notorious
games or disorderly conduct whatsoever on his premises. If such place of business is licensed, in addition to the
penalty provided in Sec. 14-13, such person shall be subject, on conviction, to a forfeiture of his license to be entered
in every case as part of the judgment. (R.O. 1955, § 19-8)
5. For state law authorizing to town to suppress, restrain and prohibit disorderly
houses, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xv)
SEC. 16-10. DISTURBANCE OF ASSEMBLAGE GENERALLY. 6
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage of people by rude or indecent language,
behavior or otherwise. (R.O. 1955, § 20-6)
6. For state law as to disturbing meetings generally, see W.S. 1977, § 6-6-105.
16-4
SEC. 16-11. DISTURBANCE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP. 7
It shall be unlawful for any person to annoy or disturb any congregation or assembly in the City of Buffalo,
gathered together for religious worship, by making a noise or by rude, profane or indecent language or behavior
within the place of worship, or so near the same as to annoy or disturb the members of the congregation. (R.O. 1955,
§ 20-5
7. For state law as to disturbing religious worship, see W.S. § 6-6-105.
SEC. 16-12. FIREWORKS, FIREARMS, ETC. – SHOOTING.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall fire any bow-attached arrow-shooting apparatus,
cannon, gun, rifle, pistol, muzzle loader, air rifle, paintball gun or firearms of any kind, or fire or explode any squib,
rocket, firecracker or roman candle or other combustible fireworks within the City limits of the City of Buffalo,
Wyoming, or on any lands owned by the City of Buffalo lying outside the limits of the Town of the City of Buffalo,
including Canyon Park lands; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any authorized military company
drilling under the command of any officer thereof, or for the use of firearms in lawful defense of the person, family or
property of any person, OR the authorized use of the Buffalo Outdoor Shooting Site. (Ord. 1144, § 1, 12/95; R.O.
1307 8,16/08)
SEC. 16-12A. HUNTING.
No hunting shall be allowed on any lands within the City Limits of Buffalo, Wyoming or on any lands owned by the
City of Buffalo lying outside the City limits, except for the following;
Archery hunting only, for deer and antelope and turkey only, shall be permitted during the official hunting season
authorized by the State of Wyoming, Game and Fish Department and limited to the City’s officially designated hunting
zones and private property over twenty (20) acres in size. All archery hunters shall be required to register with the
Buffalo Police Department prior to accessing these lands for hunting. The City’s Deer Management Policy shall be
referenced for the full regulations of the management of hunting within the City’s officially designated hunting zones.
A copy of the Deer Management Policy shall be available for public review at the Buffalo Police Department, 639 Fort
Street, Buffalo, Wyoming 82834 and at the City of Buffalo, City Hall, 46 North Main Street, Buffalo, Wyoming 82834.
Exception: Archery hunting on land owned by the Veteran’s Home of Wyoming, although within the City Limits
of Buffalo, is controlled by the State of Wyoming and remains unregulated by this or any other City Ordinance or the
City’s archery hunting permit process. Public access to the City of Buffalo’s Water Treatment Plant and the City of
Buffalo’s Wastewater Treatment Plant properties is strictly prohibited and no hunting is permitted on either the Water
Treatment or Wastewater properties. Trespassers will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law.
Discharging any bow-attached arrow-shooting apparatus within 200 ft of any public or private roadway,
building, trail/path, waterway, or vehicle is strictly prohibited.
Minors hunting within City Limits or on City property must be accompanied by an adult at all times.
Archery hunting on City property managed by the Buffalo Golf Club is prohibited until the official seasonal
closure of the golf course, after which time archery hunting will be allowed as needed to control deer and antelope
populations. This determination will be made by the Buffalo Golf Club Board with archery hunters registering with the
Buffalo Police Department prior to accessing these lands for hunting as per the Deer Management Policy.
Any person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the
general penalties under the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1144, § 2, 12/95; R.O. 1307 8, 16/08; R.O. 1352, 12/11;
R.O. 1388, 3/17)
SEC. 16-13. SAME – SALE, ETC., OF FIREWORKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, trade or give away any squibs, rockets, firecrackers or roman
candles or other combustible fireworks of any kind whatsoever within the limits of the City of Buffalo; provided,
however, that stockmen, farmers and ranchers may be so provided to purchase fireworks in the City of Buffalo to be
used outside the City limits for wolf and coyote protection.
It shall be lawful for the Mayor, at his discretion, to give permission for the purchase of fireworks to any
corporation, association, society or club, through any dealer, to be used as any special celebration; provided, that
such corporation, association, society or club shall submit to any written regulations as to how and where within the
City limits such fireworks shall be used. (Ord. 978, § 3, 1/82)
16-5
SEC. 16-14. FORTUNE-TELLING.
Section 16-14 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 978, § 10, 1/82)
SEC. 16-15. FOUL PREMISES GENERALLY. 9
If any person shall suffer or permit any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, privy, sewer or ground, or structure upon
any premises belonging to or occupied by him to become nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public health,
he shall be punished as provided in Sec. 14-13. For every day he shall fail to abate such nuisance after notice has
been given by any City Officer, he shall be subject to the same penalty. (R.O. 1955, § 19-14)
9. As to nuisances generally, see Chapter 15 of this Code.
SEC. 16-15.1. PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND ORDERLY.
It shall be the duty of every person, whether owner, lessee or occupier, of any vacant lot, building or
premises, including any place of business, residence, or public building or place, or other
establishment, to maintain the premises in a clean and orderly condition at all times, permitting no
deposit or accumulation of materials other than those ordinarily attendant upon the use for which the
premises are legally intended. Any such accumulation constitutes a nuisance, and a nonconforming
use of the premises. For every day he shall fail to abate such nuisance after notice has been given by
any City Officer, he shall be subject to the same penalty. (Ord. 1353, 12/11)
SEC. 16-16. GAMBLING – PROHIBITED. 1
It shall be unlawful for any person to deal, play, carry on, open or cause to be opened, or to conduct, either as
owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any slot machine, game of faro, monte, roulette, lansquenette, rondo,
vingtun, commonly known as twenty-one, keno, props or any other games played with cards, dice or other device of
whatever nature, for money, checks, credits or other representative of value. (R.O. 1955, § 18-10)
1. For state law as to gambling generally, see W.S. 1977, § 6-9-1-1 et seq. As to
authority to suppress, restrain or prohibit gambling, etc., see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103.
(xiv)
SEC. 16-17. SAME – PERMITTING PREMISES TO BE USED FOR GAMBLING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any game prohibited by Sec. 16-16 to be played, conducted, dealt or
carried on in any house, tent, booth or shed owned or occupied by him, in whole or in part, in violation of Sec. 16-16.
(R.O. 1955, § 18-11)
SEC. 16-18. PEDDLING.
Section 16-18 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1008, § 15, 9/83)
SEC. 16-19. HOUSES OF ILL FAME. 3
No bawdy house or house of ill fame, house assignation or place for the practice of fornication or common, illgoverned
or disorderly house or place shall be kept or maintained within the limits of the City of Buffalo. No person
shall keep any such place or house, nor shall be inmate of any such house or place, nor shall be in any way
connected with nor in any way contribute to the support of any such house or place and any person who shall permit
any house or place or premises in his possession or under his control to be used or occupied for any of the purposes
herein prohibited, whether the owner, agent, occupant or otherwise connected with such house, or place, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in Sec. 14-13. (Ord. 978, § 4, 1/82)
3. For state law as to house of ill fame, see W.S. 1977, § 6-5-104. As to authority of
town to suppress, restrain and prohibit houses of prostitution, etc., see W.S. 1977, §
15-1-103 (xv).
SEC. 16-20. INDECENT, LEWD, ETC., CONDUCT. 4
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any street or any public place within the City of Buffalo in a state of
nudity, or in a dress not belonging to his or her sex or in an indecent or lewd dress, or to make an indecent exposure
of his or her person, or to be guilty of any other indecent or lewd act or behavior, or to exhibit, sell or offer to sell any
indecent or lewd book, picture, print or other thing, tending to corrupt the public morals, or to exhibit or perform any
indecent, immoral or lewd play, or any other lewd representation. (R.O. 1955, § 18-4)
4. For state law as to indecent, lewd, etc., conduct, see W.S. 1977, § 6-5-301.
16-6
SEC. 16-21. INJURING, DESTROYING, ETC., PROPERTY – BELONGING TO CITY. 5
It shall be unlawful for any person to mar, mark upon, deface or otherwise injure or destroy any property belonging
to the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, § 19-12)
5. As to injuring fire department equipment, see § 8-13 of this Code. As to tampering
with, injuring, defacing or destroying parking meters, see § 13-27. As to injuring, etc.,
park property, see § 17-7. As to injuring, destroying, etc., sidewalks, pavements,
etc., see § 20-1.
SEC. 16-22. SAME – SHADE OR FRUIT TREES. 6
Whoever unlawfully removes, destroys, cuts or girdles any shade tree, fruit tree or fruit-bearing bush or shrub, or
carries off, removes or in any way injures a protecting box placed for the protection of any tree, shrub or bush, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. (R.O. 1955, § 20-15)
6. For similar state law, see W.S. 1977, § 6-10-108.
SEC. 16-23. INTOXICATION. 7
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk, or to be in a state of intoxication in any highway, street,
thoroughfare or other public place within the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, § 20-10)
7. For regulations generally concerning alcoholic beverages, see Chapter 3 of this
Code.
SEC. 16-24. LEWD CONDUCT GENERALLY.
Section 16-24 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 978, § 11, 1/82)
SEC. 16-25. MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or mischievously injure or cause to be injured any property of
another or any public property. (Ord. 978, § 5, 1/82)
SEC. 16-26. MINORS IN BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS. 8
Section 16-26 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 978, § 12, 1/82)
8. For state law, see W.S. 1977, § 33-6-108.
SEC. 16-26.1. NOISE PROHIBITED.
a) The making and creating of an excessively or unusually loud noise within the City, as heard without
measurement or heard and measured in the manner prescribed in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of this section is
hereby declared to be unlawful; except, when made under and in compliance with a permit issued pursuant to
subsections (e) and (g) of this section.
b) No person shall operate any type of vehicle, machine or device, or carry on any other activity in such manner
as would be a violation of subsection (A) above.
c) For the purpose of determining and classifying any noise as excessive or unusually loud, as declared to be
unlawful and prohibited by this section, the following test measurements and requirements may be applied; provided,
however, that a violation of this section may occur without the following measurements being made:
1) The noise shall be measured within the City at a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet from the noise
source located within the public right-of-way, and if the noise source is located on private property or public property,
other than the public right-of-way, at least twenty five (25) feet from the property line on which the noise source is
located.
2) The noise source shall be measured on a decibel or sound level meter of standard design and quality
operated on the “A” weighing scale. 16-7
3) A noise measured or registered as provided above, from any source more than eighty decibels in intensity
on the “A” weighing scale, shall be and is hereby declared to be excessive and unusually loud and is unlawful.
d) Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
nor more than ten (10) days in jail and court costs; provided, however, that each offense or violation of this section
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
e) Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this section on the basis of undue
hardship, may be made to the City Clerk or his duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the City Clerk
hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which such permit shall be granted, and shall specifically state a
reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The City Clerk, or his duly authorized representative, may grant the
relief as applied for if he finds:
1) That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with
this section; or
2) The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner which
would comply with this section; and
3) That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
The City Clerk may prescribe any conditions or requirements he deems necessary to minimize adverse effects
upon continuity, peace and dignity of the surrounding neighborhood.
f) The requirements, prohibitions and terms of this section shall not apply to any authorized emergency vehicle
when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of an emergency.
g) The terms of this section shall not apply to those activities of a temporary duration, permitted by law and for
which a license or permit by the City Clerk has been granted; including, but not limited to, parades and fireworks
display.
This section shall not be construed as in conflict or inconsistent with the general provision of the Code, including
“Disturbing the peace,” “Loud speakers,” “Mufflers” and other nuisances. (Ord. 756, § 3, 2/72)
SEC. 16-26.2. USE OF ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 16-26.1 of this Chapter, no person shall operate or use any vehicle
engine compression brake (commonly referred to as Jacobs Engine Brakes) within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 1091, § 1, 6/91)
SEC. 16-27. “PEEPING” PERSONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to invade, or attempt to invade, the privacy of another person by resorting to
“peeping” which is hereby defined as the stealthy, clandestine or surreptitious visual invasion, or attempted visual
invasion, of a person’s privacy. (Ord. 978, § 6, 1/82)
SEC. 16-28. PICKPOCKETS, THIEVES, ETC.
All pickpockets, thieves, watch stuffers or persons who shall engage in any scheme, device or trick with fraudulent
intent to obtain money or other valuable thing in any place in the City of Buffalo, or aid, abet, or be in any manner
concerned therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 978, § 7, 1/82)
SEC. 16-28.1. SHOPLIFTING.
a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully conceal or take possession of any goods offered for sale by
wholesale or retail stores or other mercantile establishments, without the knowledge or consent of the owner thereof
and with the intent to convert the goods to his own use without paying the purchase price.
b) Any Police Officer, merchant or merchant’s employee who has reasonable cause for believing that a person
has committed a crime of shoplifting, as defined by subsection (A) of this section, may detain and interrogate such
person in regard thereto in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable time.
16-8
c) Wherein a Police Officer, merchant or merchant’s employee, with reasonable cause for believing that a person
has committed a crime of shoplifting, as defined by subsection (A) of this section, detains and interrogates such
person in regard thereto, any such person thereafter brings against the Police Officer, merchant or merchant’s
employee a civil or criminal action for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, assault, battery or wrongful detention
based upon the detention and interrogation, such reasonable cause shall be a defense to the action if the detention
and interrogation were done in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable time. (Ord. 860, § 1, 6/75)
SEC. 16-28.2. PETIT LARCENY.
It is prohibited and declared to be unlawful for any person, with intent to deprive the true owner thereof, to steal,
take, carry, lead, or drive away their personal goods of another, with a value of less than one thousand dollars. Any
person convicted of such offense shall be guilty of petit larceny. (Ord. 1353, 12/11)
SEC. 16-29. POLLUTION OF GROUNDS OR STREAMS.
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to discharge out of, or permit to flow from any shop, factory or
any other place of business or house any foul or nauseous liquid or other substance of any kind whatsoever into or
upon any adjacent ground or lot or into any street, alley or other public place, or into Clear Creek in the City of Buffalo
or near the same. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be further punished as
provided in Sec. 14-13 for every day such nuisance shall continue after notice to abate the same. (R.O. 1955, § 19-
15)
SEC. 16-30. PROSTITUTE – OCCUPYING ROOM WITH.
Section 16-30 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 978, § 13, 1/82)
SEC. 16-31. RESISTING, ETC., ARREST.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist by force or violence, or to encourage, aid, abet or assist any other
person to resist by force and violence any arrest made or attempted to be made by the Chief of Police or any other
Police Officer of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 978, § 8, 1/82)
SEC. 16-32. SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTION OR FORNICATION. 9
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Buffalo, by words, actions, signs or by any means whatsoever, to
solicit, entice or attempt to solicit or entice any person for the purpose of fornication or prostitution or any act of sexual
intercourse. (R.O. 1955, § 18-14)
9. For state law as to enticing females, see W.S. 1977, § 6-5-103.
SEC, 16-33. THROWING MISSILES. 1
No person shall throw any stone or other missile upon any public or private property or upon or at any person in
the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, § 19-7)
1. As to throwing stones, etc., at vehicles, see § 13-14 of this code.
SEC. 16-34. UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
If any two or more persons shall assemble together with intent to do an unlawful act; or, being assembled
together, shall mutually agree to do an unlawful act with force and violence against the property of the City of Buffalo,
or the person or property of another or against the peace of another, or shall make any movement or preparations
therefore, they shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (R.O. 1955, § 20-3)
SEC. 16-35. VAGRANTS.
Section 16-35 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 978, § 14, 1/82)
16-9
SEC. 16-36. WEAPONS – CARRYING.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Buffalo to keep or bear upon the person or carry in a public place
upon the person any pistol, revolver, knife, slingshot, blowgun or any lethal weapon, except the officers of the United
States, of the State and of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 978, §9, 1/82)
SEC. 16-36A. WEAPONS – SCHOOL FACILITIES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry onto, or to possess on, any pistol, rifle, revolver, knife, slingshot,
blowgun or any lethal weapon, on public or private elementary or secondary school premises or school-provided
transportation. This section shall not apply to officers for the United States, the State of Wyoming or of the City of
Buffalo. (Ord. 1353, 12/11)
SEC. 16-37. WEEDS.
No owner of any lot, place or area within the City, or the Agent of such owner, shall permit on such lot, place or
area, or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious
matter, that may be growing, lying or located thereon.
a) Notice to Destroy: The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner
of any such lot, place or area within the City or the agent of such owner, to cut, destroy and/or remove any such
weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, found, growing, lying or located on such
owner’s property, or upon the sidewalk abutting the same. Such notice may be by regular mail, addressed to said
owner, or agent of said owner, at his last known address. (Ord. 1104, § 1, 9/92)
b) Action Upon Non-Compliance: Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to cut,
destroy and/or remove any such weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, growing,
lying, or located upon such owner’s property, or upon the sidewalk abutting same, within ten (10) days after receipt of
the written notice provided for in subsection (A) above, or within five (5) days after the date of such notice, in the
event the same is returned to City Hall because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was
properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized
and empowered to pay for the cutting, destroying and/or removal of such weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful
growths or other noxious matter or to order the removal by the City.
c) Charge Included in Bill: When the City has effected the removal of such obnoxious growth or has paid for its
removal the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of nine percent (9%), per annum, from the date of the
completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the
next regular bill forwarded to such owner by the City, and said charge shall be due and payable by said owner at the
time of payment of such bill. (Ord. 1001, 9/83)
SEC. 16-38. PROTECTION OF DOGS USED IN LAW ENFORCEMENT.
a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously torture, mutilate, injure, disable, poison or kill any
dog used by the Police Department of the City, in the performance of the duties of such department or any member
thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of said department.
b) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 1097, 3/92)
SEC. 16-39. SALE OF TOBACCO, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR MINORS.
A) As used in this Section:
i) “Tobacco products” means any product made or derived from tobacco that contains nicotine, including, but
not limited to, cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco;
ii) “Vending machine” means any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device which, upon insertion
of money, tokens, or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products or electronic cigarettes;
iii) “Retailer” means a business of any kind at a specific location that sells tobacco products or electronic
cigarettes to a user or consumer;
16-10
iv) “Electronic Cigarette” means a product that employs any mechanical heating element, battery or electronic
circuit regardless of shape or size, that can be used to deliver doses of nicotine vapor by means of heating a liquid
nicotine solution, plant, wax, solution or other substance contained in a cartridge or other delivery system, including
but not limited to, electronic cigarettes, vaping pens or vaping mods.
B) No individual shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or electronic cigarettes to any
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
C) No retailer shall sell, permit the sale, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or electronic
cigarettes to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
D) Any person who sells tobacco products or electronic cigarettes shall post signs informing the public of the age
restricts provided by this article at or near every display of tobacco products or electronic cigarettes and on or upon
every vending machine, which offers tobacco products or electronic cigarettes for sale. Each sign shall be plainly
visible and shall contain a statement communicating that the sale of tobacco products or electronic cigarettes to
persons under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited by law. Any person who owns, operates or manages a
business where tobacco products or electronic cigarettes are offered for sale at retail and at which persons under the
age of twenty-one (21) are allowed admission with or without an adult, shall maintain all tobacco products and
electronic cigarettes within the line of sight of a cashier or other employee or under the control of the cashier or other
employee. For purposes of this subsection:
i) “Within the line of sight: means visible to a cashier or other employee while at the sales counter; and
ii) “Under control” means protected by security, surveillance or detection methods.
E) No person shall sell or offer tobacco products or electronic cigarettes through a vending machine unless the
vending machine is located in:
i) Businesses, factories, offices or other places not open to the general public;
ii) Places to which persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age are not permitted access; or
iii) Business premises where alcoholic or malt beverages are sold or dispensed and where entry by persons
under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited.
F) No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco products or
electronic cigarettes, or misrepresent his identity or age, or use any false or altered identification for the purpose of
purchasing or attempting to purchase tobacco products or electronic cigarettes.
G) It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess or use any tobacco products or
electronic cigarettes.
H) Any person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the
general penalties under the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1205, 7/01; R.O. 1352, 12/11; R.O 1373, 12/14; R.O.
1406, 9/2020)
SEC. 16-40. CONTACT WITH WILDLIFE WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF BUFFALO.
A) “Wildlife” shall be defined as those animals described as “Big Game Animal” under W.S. §23-1-101(a)(i) and
“Furbearing Animal” under W.S. §23-1-101(a)(iii).
B) “Contact” means, but is not limited to, physical contact between the public and wildlife, including the
unauthorized provision of food and liquids and also visual, auditory or olfactory contact between the public and wildlife
which may cause or result in subjecting the wildlife to stress, behavioral anomalies, including taming or imprinting or
in any diminishment of the capacity of said wildlife to subsequently survive in the wild independent of human aid and
subsistence.
C) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally engage in physical contact between himself and any wildlife
within the city limits of the Town of the City of Buffalo unless that person is an authorized peace officer, law
enforcement officer, game and fish official, or animal control officer in the official performance of duties as authorized
by any local, state or federal governmental agency. 16-11
D) Any person who violates any section shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalties
under the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1218, 9/02; R.O. 1352, 12/11)
SEC. 16-41. RESTRICTIONS OF SMOKING IN CITY FACILITIES.
A) Definitions:
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
i.) “City of Buffalo Facilities” means any enclosed building or structure that is owned or operated by
the City of Buffalo, which includes, but is not limited to, City Hall at 46 North Main, City Yard at
519 Fort, City Water Treatment Plant at 8875 U.S. Hwy 16 West and the City Wastewater
Treatment Plant facility at 149 Stockyard Road, and those areas under the exclusive control of
the Chief of Police in the Joint Law Enforcement Center.
ii.) “Smoke or Smoking” means the act of burning any tobacco product, weed filler or plant of any
kind in a cigarette, cigar, pipe, water pipe, or any other device.
iii.) “Smoking Instrument” means any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other smoking device.
B) Policies:
i.) No one can smoke or carry any lighted smoking instrument in a City of Buffalo facility, or at a
public meeting in City facilities, except in areas signed as permitted smoking areas.
ii.) City employees will be disciplined in accordance with City Policy. Members of the public will be
evicted from the non-smoking area.
C) Smoking Permitted in Signed Areas:
Smoking shall be permitted in the following City of Buffalo facilities:
i.) City Yard – anywhere on the shop grounds outside the building.
ii.) City Water Treatment Plant – anywhere on the grounds outside the building.
iii.) City Wastewater Treatment Plant – anywhere on the grounds outside the building.
iv.) Joint Law Enforcement Center – those areas designated by the Chief of Police in areas of his
exclusive control and jointly by the Chief of Police and the Johnson County Sheriff.
v.) Other areas designated for smoking by the City Council and signed for that purpose.
D) Prohibited Smoking Areas:
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following City of Buffalo facilities and vehicles:
i.) All areas of Buffalo City Hall at 46 North Main.
ii.) All areas of other City of Buffalo facilities that are not designated as smoking permitted areas and
properly singed.
E) Smoking Prohibited by Other Laws:
Smoking shall not be permitted, and smoking areas shall not be designated, in those City areas where smoking is
prohibited by the Fire Chief, State Statute, Ordinances or Regulations of the City of Buffalo, or other applicable laws.
Nothing herein shall be interpreted so as to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by law.
F) Compliance:
The City of Buffalo Department Head responsible for the operation of each City of Buffalo facility or vehicle shall
make reasonable efforts to obtain compliance with this Ordinance by:
i.) Posting appropriate signs.
ii.) Insuring signed smoking areas have a well maintained ventilation system that vents the area as
to minimize the toxic effect of transient smoke in adjacent non-smoking areas.
iii.) Any other means with may be appropriate.
16-12
SEC. 16-42. REGULATIONS CONCERNING SOCIAL HOSTS OF UNDERAGE ALCOHOL PARTIES.
A) No owner, renter, lessee, or occupant of any premise or apartment within the City shall knowingly permit the
unlawful consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years upon the
premises owned, rented, leased or occupied. Premises shall be defined as the land and all building thereon.
B) It is prima facie evidence of a violation of the ordinance codified in the chapter if the owner, renter, lessee or
occupant is present and one person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is present and is in possession of
an alcoholic beverage. It is prima facie evidence of a violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter if the
owner, renter, lessee or occupant is present, and one person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is
present and has consumed alcohol or is under the influence of alcohol, and an unsealed container of an
alcoholic beverage is present.
C) Upon conviction under the ordinance codified in this chapter, the violator may be fined as provided in the
general penalty section of the Code of the Town of the City of Buffalo. Each person present under the age of
twenty-one (21) years who is in possession of an alcoholic beverage or is under the influence of alcohol is a
separate violation.
D) The ordinance codified in this chapter does not apply to parents or legal guardians who lawfully furnish
alcohol to their children or legal wards when permitted by Wyoming law. (Ord. 1321; 2, 17/09)
SEC. 16-43-1. UNLAWFUL INTOXICATING CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other entity, to manufacture, distribute,
dispense, ingest, use, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, attempt sell,
give, trade or barter, any one or more of the following chemical compounds and/or substances,
including their salts, isomers, homologues and salts of their isomers and homologues:
1. Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia
Divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant,
and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its
seeds or extracts;
2. pentyl-3-(naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018);
3. (6ar,10ar)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo(c)
chromen-1-o1 (also known as HU-210 or 1, 1-dimethylheptyl-11-hydroxy-delta8-
tetrahydrocannabinol);
4. 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol, (also known as CP47, 497), and the
dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues of CP-47, 497;
5. 1-Butyl-3-(1- naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073);
6. 1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl)ethyl)-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-200);
7. 1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also known as JWH-250);
8. 1-Hexy1-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-019);
9. 1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)incole (also known as JWH-398);
10. N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP);
11. 1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl) piperazine (also known as TFMPP);
12. 2-Desoxypipradrol (also known as DPMP);
13. 3, 4 Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (also known as MDPV);
14. Any similar structural analogs of the above chemical compounds;
15. Any other synthetic cannabinoids. 16-13
B. It is not an offense under subsection A of this section if the person was acting at the direction of an authorized
agent of the City of Buffalo to enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the
aforementioned intoxicating chemical compound.
C. If any of the aforementioned intoxicating chemical compounds are found in the possession of any person, they
may be confiscated and destroyed by law enforcement officials.
D. This section shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to drugs or substances which have
been approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by Wyoming
law.
E. Any person found to be in violation of this section will be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to
exceed $750.00. Each day during which a violation of subsection A occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
F. The City of Buffalo shall have the authority to seek an injunction to compel compliance of any business which
fails to or refuses to comply with this Section.
G. If any provision of this Ordinance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this
Ordinance which shall remain effective absent the invalid provision, and to this end, the provisions of this
Ordinance are declared to be severable. (Ord 1345; 12, 7/10)
SEC. 16-44. INTENTIONAL MISUSE OF SUBSTANCES.
A) No person shall for the purpose of causing or resulting in a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement,
exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes
from any glue or similar toxic vapor; or consume or use any otherwise legal substances for a purpose or not
in accordance with its legitimate use or purpose as is generally known, used and advertised; provided, that
this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes, when
administered or directed by a licensed physician or dentist.
B) No person shall for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provisions of this section,
intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or receive possession of any substances herein provided.
(Ord. 1353, 12/11)
SEC. 16-45. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES-POSSESSION, SALE, PURCHASE, ETC., OF CERTAIN
EQUIPMENT DESIGNED FOR SMOKING, ETC., DRUGS OR OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
A) It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess, sell or transfer, buy or receive or offer for
sale or transfer, any pipe, roach clip, cigarette holder or cigarette papers, specially designed and
manufactured for use or actually used for smoking opium, hashish, marijuana, or other controlled substance
of which the uncontrolled manufacture, delivery or possession is declared to be unlawful under the provisions
of the Wyoming Controlled Substances Act of 1971, (W.S. § 35-7-1001 et. seq) except such pipes or other
devices as shall be certified by the chief of police as a collectors item, free of all contamination or residue
from any controlled substance and possessed for collection purposes only.
B) It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess, sell or transfer, buy or receive, or offer for
sale or transfer, any hypodermic needle or syringe specially designed and manufactured for the use or
actually tested for injecting heroin, morphine, codeine or any other controlled substance of which the
uncontrolled manufacture, delivery or possession is declared to be unlawful under the provisions of the
Wyoming Controlled Substance Act of 1971, except: (i) licensed drug manufacturers, wholesale drug jobbers,
pharmacists, physicians, dentists, podiatrists, veterinarians and nurses; (ii) hospital research, teaching and
clinical laboratory personnel, funeral directors and embalmers; (iii) persons specifically authorized by a
licensed physician, dentist or podiatrist to use a hypodermic needle or syringe for medical treatment
purposes, while so using the needle or syringe; (iv) persons using a hypodermic needle or syringe for the
treatment of livestock; and (v) persons using a hypodermic needle or syringe as a work tool for such purposes
as gluing or oiling or as an instrument for the basting of food. (Ord. 1353, 12/11)
16-14

CHAPTER 17
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. 1
1. For state law authorizing the Town Council to establish and regulate parks and
recreational areas, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xx).
§ 17-1. Camping restricted except in designated areas.
§ 17-2. George Washington Memorial Park – Official name.
§ 17-3. Same – Plan of development.
§ 17-4. Board – Official name; Appointment and term of office; Compensation; Vacancies.
§ 17-5. Powers of board and Council.
§ 17-6. Restricted use during certain hours.
§ 17-7. Injuring, etc., park property, etc.; Posting bills.
§ 17-8. No camping.
§ 17-9. The Buffalo Outdoor Pool Board.
§ 17-10. Powers of the Board.
§ 17-11. Creation and establishment of City Tree Board.
§ 17-12. Rules for path systems.
§ 17-13. Rules for Wildlife Habitat Area.
SEC. 17-1. CAMPING RESTRICTED EXCEPT IN DESIGNATED AREAS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, lodge or dwell within and upon any areas owned, controlled and
operated by the City of Buffalo for playground, park or recreational purposes, unless such areas shall be expressly
designated and posted for camping; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to mean that picnics in such
areas or grounds ordinarily used and occupied for that purpose shall be unlawful. (Ord. 630, § 1, 10/62)
SEC. 17-2. GEORGE WASHINGTON MEMORIAL PARK – OFFICIAL NAME.
The tract of land situated in and owned by the City of Buffalo, and laid down and described on the original plat of
the Park Addition to the City of Buffalo, on file and of record in the office of the County Clerk and ex-officio register of
deeds of the County, and shown on the plat as “Clear Creek Park” is hereby set apart, reserved and rededicated as
George Washington Memorial Park. (R.O. 1955, § 65-1)
SEC. 17-3. SAME – PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT.
The plan for the development of the George Washington Memorial Park as designated and drawn by Harold L.
Curtis, University of Wyoming, entitled “General Development Plan of Washington Memorial Park, Buffalo, Wyoming”,
is hereby accepted as the plan for such park, and such plan shall be filed by the City Clerk among the records of the
City of Buffalo. The City Clerk shall endorse on the plan “Approved and accepted by the City of Buffalo, Wyoming,
May 6, 1936.” (R.O. 1955, § 65-2)
SEC. 17-4. BOARD – OFFICIAL NAME; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION;
VACANCIES.
Section 17-4 of the Buffalo City Code is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1175, § 1, 9/98)
SEC. 17-5. POWERS OF BOARD AND COUNCIL.
Section 17-5 of the Buffalo City Code is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1175, § 2, 9/98)
SEC. 17-6. RESTRICTED USE DURING CERTAIN HOURS.
No person shall use the swimming pool, playgrounds or other recreational facilities located in the Washington Park
or be in Washington Park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless such area has been posted for
different hours by the authority of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1183, § 1, 7/99)
17-1
SEC. 17-7. INJURING, ETC., PARK PROPERTY, ETC.; POSTING BILLS. 2
No person shall cut, break or in any way injure or deface any tree, shrub, plant, turf or any of the buildings, fences
or other structures in the Buffalo Parks, nor shall any person post or affix any bill or poster on any such building, fence
or other structure in such parks. (Ord. 967, § 4, 9/81)
2. As to bill posting generally, see Sec. 16-3 of this Code. As to injuring,
destroying, etc., property belonging to the City of Buffalo, see Sec. 16-21.
SEC. 17-8. NO CAMPING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, or dwell within and upon any areas owned, controlled or
operated by the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, for park, playground or recreational purposes including but not limited to
the George Washington Memorial Park.
Any person who violates this section or any rule, regulations, standard or permit issued or adopted by the Buffalo
Park Board as created under the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, shall be fined not more than $100.00 per day
of violation, or imprisoned for not more than one month. (Ord. 901, § 1, 6/78)
SEC. 17-9. THE BUFFALO OUTDOOR POOL BOARD.
There is hereby created and established a pool board to be known as the Buffalo Outdoor Pool Board which will
consist of five (5) members holding title to real property or residing in the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, to be appointed by
the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council. Such member shall serve without pay. Term for appointment
of each member shall be two (2) years and the City Council shall initially appoint two (2) members for a term of two
(2) years and three (3) members for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, all members shall serve for the full two-year
term. Term of office shall be from January 1st until December 31st of said year or years. Any vacancies on such
board, whether by death, removal from office, resignation or otherwise, shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor as
hereinabove provided. (Ord. 1052, § 3, 2/87)
SEC. 17-10. POWERS OF THE BOARD.
The Buffalo Outdoor Pool Board shall have the power to direct the general operation, maintenance, control and
adornment and development of the Buffalo Outdoor Pool. All expenditures from such funds shall be approved by the
chairman of the Buffalo Outdoor Pool Board provided that nothing shall be construed as preventing the Council from
making appropriations for or paying accounts for pool expenditures from the general funds of the City of Buffalo to
purchase equipment, material and property for use of the pool; to contract for and direct operation expenses in the
pool. The Buffalo Outdoor Pool Board has the authority to elect a president or chairman and to hold meetings and to
keep a record of such meetings, and to make and publish any and all rules and regulations for the management,
maintenance and enjoyment of the pool and in their discretion they deem necessary, which rules and regulations may
be enforced by excluding violators thereof from the use and benefit of the pool and to do and perform all other acts
and other things consistent with the proper and efficient management, control and development of the pool. It is
further provided that the board shall provide lifeguards and make arrangements for the payments of such lifeguards
reasonably necessary for the operation of the outdoor pool. The board shall submit on or before the first day of
March of each year to the Mayor and City Council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Said budget shall
be subject to alterations, modification or revision by the City Council and after being approved by them shall be
adopted as the fiscal plan for the board for the ensuing year. All purchases under the budget shall be in accordance
with the purchasing policy of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 1052, § 4, 2/87)
SEC. 17-11. CREATION & ESTABLISHMENT OF A CITY TREE BOARD.
1) Definitions:
A) Street Trees: “Street Trees” are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the City.
B) Park Trees: “Park Trees” are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the City, or to which the public has free access as a park.
17-2
2) Creation and Establishment of a City Tree Board: There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board
for the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, which shall consist of five (5) members, citizens and residents of this City, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
3) Term of Office: The term of the five (5) persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three (3) years, except
that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one (1) year and the term of two
(2) members of the first board shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of
any members, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion to the term.
4) Compensation: Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
5) Duties and Responsibilities: It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, council and develop
and/or update annually and administer a plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually
to the City Council and upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive City tree plan
for the City of Buffalo, State of Wyoming. The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate,
make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. When
planning for the parks and or any other area of the City under the control of the park or other boards or commissions,
the City Tree Board shall make their recommendations in writing to the appropriate board or commission who shall
adopt or otherwise act on the recommendations as they see fit.
6) Operation: The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of
its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
7) Street Tree Species to be Planted: Any trees which are hardy and adaptable to this altitude zone and
recommended for growth in this area. Listings of trees recommended for growth in Wyoming are available from the
Agricultural Extension Service, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, or from the local County Extension Agent.
No noxious type trees or cotton producing cottonwood may be planted without written permission of the City Tree
Board.
8) Spacing: The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the recommendations of the Agricultural
Extension Service, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, or from the local County Extension Agent fro the
particular type of tree to be planted. Consideration shall be given for special plantings designed or approved by a
landscape architect, landscape designer or person engaged in the field of landscape contracting.
9) Distance from Curb and Sidewalk: The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the species and size of tree to be planted. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following: Small trees – 2 feet; Medium trees – 3 feet; Large trees – 4 feet.
10) Distance from Street Corners and Fireplugs: The planting of street trees on any street corner shall be done in
accordance with Section 20-7.2 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming. No street tree shall be planted closer
than ten (10) feet of any fireplug.
11) Utilities: No street trees, other than those species considered to be small trees, may be planted under or
within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
12) Public Tree Care: The City shall have the right, but does not have the obligation, to plant, prune, maintain
and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and
public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds.
13) Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or City department to top any
street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from the Ordinance, at the determination
of the City Tree Board.
17-3
14) Pruning, Corner Clearance: The City shall have the right, but does not have the obligation, to prune any tree
or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from the street light or
interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or does not meet the requirements of Section 20-7.2 of the
Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
15) Dead or Diseased Tree Removal on Private Property: The City shall have the right to cause the removal of
any dead or diseased trees on private property within the City, when such trees constitute a hazard of life and
property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the City. The City Tree
Board will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense
within sixty days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions,
the City shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the owner.
16) Removal of Stumps: All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so
that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
17) Arborists License and Bond: It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the City without first applying for and procuring
a license in accordance with Chapter 26 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming. However, no license shall be
required of any public service company or City employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service
endeavors.
18) Review by City Council: The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the
City Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the City Tree Board to the City Council who may
hear the matter and make final decision.
19) Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty,
subject to a fine of $25.00 minimum but not to exceed $50.00.
20) Severability: Should any paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1056,
7/87)
SEC. 17-12. RULES FOR CLEAR CREEK TRAIL SYSTEM.
A) Definitions:
1) Clear Creek Trail System shall mean any pathway, whether in City limits or not, constructed on City, or
public lands which is not a dedicated street or alley and is cited in the Master Trails Plan or has been adopted by the
City of Buffalo.
B) General Rules for Entire Path System (see subsections C-F herein for additional trail section rules).
Permitted: Foot Travel.
Bicycles Touring, Mountain Biking.
Mountain Skateboards, Nordic Skiing.
Strollers, ADA Mobility Units
Fishing, Wildlife Viewing, Picnicking.
Dogs on Leash
Dogs are Allowed Off Leash at Designated Areas Only (see subsection F herein)
Not Allowed: Motorized vehicles.
Horseback riding.
Campfires.
Overnight camping.
Littering/Paintbal
Fireworks/Firearms.
C) Rules for Veteran’s Home Pasture and Veteran’s Lane
All general rules apply.
Additional rule: No Dogs Allowed
17-4
D) Rules for Main Street Sidewalk Access/Historic Walking Tour
All general rules apply.
Additional rules: No Skateboards of Any Kind, No Bicycles.
E) Rules for West Fetterman Street Access
All general rules apply.
Additional Rule: Not Skateboards of Any Kind.
F) Designated Off-Leash Dog Areas
Old Camp Eagle Rock
Mountain Plains Heritage Park, South of Stockyard Road
(Ord. 1206, § 1, 12/01)
G) Rules for Area “E” – Old Power Plant to Mosier Gulch:
All general rules apply plus “Pets allowed with leash”.
H) Any person violating any provisions of the ordinance shall, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, be subject to a
fine not to exceed $100.00. (Ord. 1081, 11/89; R.O. 1308, 11, 4/2008)
SEC. 17-13.1. WILDLIFE HABITAT AREA.
The Wildlife Habitat Area is defined as those lands and improvements lying generally east of the City and located
within the following legal description:
A parcel of land in the southeast quarter northeast quarter and northeast quarter
northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 51 North, Range 82 West 6th P.M.,
described as follows: Beginning at the northeast corner of the SE1/4NE1/4 of said
section running thence north along the east line of NE1/4NE1/4 a distance of 125
feet, thence West a distance of 1320 feet to the west line of said NE1/4NE1/4, thence
South and along the west side of the NE1/4NE1/4 and the SE1/4NE1/4 of said
section a distance of 1190 feet, thence East a distance of 1320 feet, thence North
and along the east side of said SE1/4NE1/4 a distance of 1065 feet to the point of
beginning, containing 36.06 acres more or less.
SEC. 17-13.2. RULES AND REGULATION OF OPERATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following activities in or on the Wildlife Habitat Area:
A) To use any watercraft, motorized or non-motorized, or any floating device or other device designed for
navigation on water by any energy source including human effort;
B) To camp overnight, hunt, swim, horseback ride, build an open fire or operate any motorized vehicle;
C) To allow any animal to run at large without restraint of a leash;
D) To enter upon or walk upon an island located within the Wildlife Habitat Area; or,
E) To skate on ice at any time the ice shall be unsafe or there is any open water in the Wildlife Habitat Area.
SEC. 17-13.3. PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section 17-13 shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not
less than $25.00 and not more than $250.00, to which costs shall be added. (Ord. 1173, 6/98)
17-5
APPENDIX – PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.
A. CANYON PARK.
§ 17A-1. Designation of Canyon Park.
§ 17A-2. Prohibition against sale, exchange, lease.
§ 17A-3. Control, Management and Direction.
B. COUNTRY CLUB PARK.
§ 17B-1. Designation of Country Club Park.
§ 17B-2. Prohibition against sale or lease.
§ 17B-3. Control, Management and Direction.
A. CANYON PARK.
SEC. 17A-1. DESIGNATION OF CANYON PARK.
The lands hereinafter described belonging to the City of Buffalo, subject to all existing easements and right-ofway,
are hereby set aside, established and dedicated as park property for the protection and preservation of the water
supply of the City of Buffalo. The park shall be known and designated as the CANYON PARK, embracing the
following described land situated in the County of Johnson, State of Wyoming, to-wit:
The northwest quarter of the northwest quarter (NW1/4NW1/4) of Section Five (5), and the north half of the
northeast quarter (N1/2NE1/4); the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter (SW1/4NE1/4); the south half of the
northwest quarter (S1/2NW1/4) and the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter (NW1/4SW1/4) of Section six (6),
in Township Fifty (50), North of Range Eight-two (82) West of the Sixth (6th) Principal Meridian; and Lots Two (2) and
Three (3); the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter (SW1/4NE1/4); the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter (NW1/4SE1/4) and the north half of the southwest quarter (N1/2SW1/4) of Section One (1); the north half of
the southeast quarter (N1/2SE1/4); the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter (SW1/4SE1/4); the south half of
the southwest quarter (S1/2SW1/4) of Section Two (2); the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter (SE1/4SE1/4)
of Section Three (3) and the north half of the northeast quarter (N1/2NE1/4); the east half of the northwest quarter
(E1/2NW1/4) of Section Ten (10) in Township Fifty (50) North of Range Eight-three (83) West of the Sixth (6th)
Principal Meridian;
SEC. 17A-2. PROHIBITION AGAINST SALE, EXCHANGE, LEASE.
Exception – The lands hereby dedicated and set aside as the Canyon Park shall be forever withdrawn from sale,
exchange or lease, except that any of said land now leased or which may hereafter be leased to any religious,
charitable or benevolent organization, determined by the City Council to be a religious, charitable or benevolent
organization, is hereby ratified and declared valid. (Ord. 795, § 2, 9/73)
SEC. 17A-3. CONTROL, MANAGEMENT AND DIRECTION.
Control, management and direction of the Canyon Park is hereby placed with the City Council of the City of
Buffalo, and it shall make and promulgate such rules and regulations governing its care, management and control as
it shall deem necessary. (Ord. 795, § 3, 9/73)
B. COUNTRY CLUB PARK
SEC. 17B-1. DESIGNATION OF COUNTRY CLUB PARK.
That whereas, the City of Buffalo did on the 7th day of February, 1947, purchase from Bess V. Gallup a tract of
land consisting of 18.61 acres located north west of Buffalo more particularly described as follows:
17A-1
Township 51 North, Range 82 West 6th P.M.
Beginning at a point on the center line of Section 27, in Township 51 North, Range 82 West of the 6th Principal
Meridian, Wyoming, said point being 1196.73 feet east of the center of said Section 27, running;
Thence N.52 degrees 44’ W 318 feet
Thence S.77 degrees 16’ W 182 feet
Thence N.84 degrees 32’ W 466 feet
Thence S.60 degrees 23’ W 965 feet
Thence S.00 degrees 00’ W 280 feet
Thence N.85 degrees 36’ W 596 feet
Thence N.75 degrees 48’ E 890 feet
Thence N.43 degrees 02’ E 405 feet
to the point of beginning, containing 18.61 acres of land located in parts of lots eight (8), nine (9), eleven (11) and
northeast quarter of southwest quarter (NE1/4SW1/4) of Section 27 as recorded in official records of the County
Clerk, Johnson, Wyoming. (Ord. 813, § 1, 7/74)
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, that the above described land, purchased for
City use be and the same hereby is established as a City Park and Recreation Area, the same to be called and
forever known by the name Country Club Park. (Ord. 813, § 2, 7/74)
SEC. 17B-2. PROHIBITION AGAINST SALE OR LEASE.
Whereas, it is the belief of the governing body of said City, that the use of the land for pleasure and recreation
shall not cause undue interference with the residents within the immediate area, and that the same should be
withdrawn from sale or lease and dedicated as a public park and recreation area for the use and enjoyment of the
people of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 813, § 1, 7/74)
SEC. 17B-3. CONTROL, MANAGEMENT AND DIRECTION.
The said Country Club Park is hereby placed under the control and discretion of the City of Buffalo Park Board, to
be by it regulated and maintained in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 813, § 3, 7/74)
17A-2
CHAPTER 18
PLUMBING AND STEAM FITTING. 1
Chapter 18 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1984, is hereby repealed. See Chapter 5 Buildings. (Ord.
758, 3/72) (R.O. 1289, 07/07)
18-1
CHAPTER 18A
(Original Chapter 18A repealed by Ordinance 964, 8/81)
SALES TAX
(Ord. 1127, 7/94)
(R.O. 1266, 9.06)
§ 18A-1. Tax imposed; rate.
§ 18A-2. Tax administration.
§ 18A-3. Adoption of State Selective Sales Tax Act.
§ 18A-4. Contract with State Board.
§ 18A-5. Amount taxable not to include any state tax.
SEC. 18A-1. TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
There shall be imposed an excise tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, admissions and
services made within the Town of the City of Buffalo, and upon sales made within the Town of the City of Buffalo, and
storage, use and consumption of tangible personal property in the Town of the City of Buffalo at the rate of one
percent (1%), pursuant to Wyoming Statute #39-15-203 for the purpose of general revenue.
SEC. 18A-2. TAX ADMINISTRATION.
The tax shall be administered pursuant to provisions identical to those contained in Title 39, Chapter 15 of the
Wyoming Statutes, insofar as they relate to use taxes, except the name of Johnson County as the taxing agency shall
be substituted for that of the State and an additional license to engage in business shall not be required if the vendor
has been issued a state license pursuant to law.
SEC. 18A-3. ADOPTION OF STATE SELECTIVE SALES TAX ACT.
Any amendments made to the State Sales Tax Act (Wyoming Statutes #39-15-101, et. Seq.) and the Local Sales
Tax Act (Wyoming Statute #39-15-201, et. Seq.) not in conflict with Wyoming Statutes shall automatically become
part of this ordinance.
SEC. 18A-4. CONTRACT WITH STATE BOARD.
The Town of the City of Buffalo shall, through Johnson County, contract with the Wyoming Department of
Revenue prior to the effective date of this sales and use tax ordinance whereby the department shall perform all
functions incident to the administration of the sales and use tax imposed by this ordinance.
SEC. 18A-5. AMOUNT TAXABLE NOT TO INCLUDE ANY STATE TAX.
The amount subject to this tax shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of
Wyoming.
18A-1
CHAPTER 18B
SALVAGE YARDS & SALVAGE DEALERS
§ 18B-1. Definitions.
§ 18B-2. License Required.
§ 18B-3. Enforcement.
§ 18B-4. Application.
§ 18B-5. Investigation; Approval and issuance of license; Salvage dealers.
§ 18B-6. Period of license and renewal procedure.
§ 18B-7. License fees.
§ 18B-8. License not transferable.
§ 18B-9. General operating requirements.
§ 18B-10. Inspections.
§ 18B-11. Revocation of license.
§ 18B-12. Hearing on granting, denial, renewal or revocation of license.
§ 18B-13. Compliance.
§ 18B-14. Penalties.
SEC. 18B-1. DEFINITIONS.
Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this ordinance.
1) Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
2) Salvage shall mean old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags,
fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material
which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and any or all of the foregoing; and motor vehicles, no
longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but salvage shall not include materials or objects
accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or scraps from the operation of his own business or materials or
objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing process.
3) Salvage Yard shall mean a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building,
containing salvage as defined above, upon which occurs one or more acts of putting, keeping, storing, dismantling,
processing, selling or offering for sale any such salvage, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial
purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity.
4) Automobile Salvage Yard shall mean any establishment or place which is maintained, operated, or used for
storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, junked or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
5) Salvage Dealer shall mean a person who operates a salvage yard or automobile salvage yard, as defined
above, within the City.
6) Business Premises or Premises shall mean the area of a salvage yard as described in a salvage dealer’s
license or application for license, as provided for in this ordinance.
7) Clerk shall mean the Clerk of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
8) City shall mean the Town of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
SEC. 18B-2. LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a salvage dealer in the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, whether personally,
by agents or employees, singly or along with some other business or enterprise without first having obtained a license
therefore from the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. A salvage dealer who operates
more than one salvage yard or automobile salvage yard within the City shall be required to have in effect a separate
license for each yard.
18B-1
SEC. 18B-3. ENFORCEMENT.
It is hereby made the duty of the City Council to enforce or aid in the enforcement of all provisions of this
ordinance, and for this purpose any of the members of the City Council, or their duly authorized representatives, shall
have the right and are hereby empowered to enter upon any premises on which any business subject to the
provisions of this ordinance is located, or about to be located, and inspect the same at any reasonable time. The City
Council is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing and revoking any license provided for in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance.
SEC. 18B-4. APPLICATION.
An applicant for license under this ordinance shall file with the Clerk a written application signed by himself, if an
individual, by all partners, if a partnership, and by the president or chief officer of a corporation or other organization,
upon forms provided by the City, together with three (3) copies of such application and a fee as hereinafter
prescribed. The application shall be sworn to by each of its signers before a notary public or other officer authorized
by law to administer oaths and shall include the following information or material:
Junk Dealer Applications
1. Name residence address and telephone number of each individual owner, partner or, if a corporation or other
organization, each officer and director.
2. Trade names used during the previous five (5) years by the applicant and each person signing the application,
along with the locations of prior establishments.
3. Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous five (5) years.
4. The trade name and address of the business on behalf of which application is made and its telephone number,
if assigned.
5. The name, residence address and telephone number, of each person employed or intended to be employed in
the business as of the time the application is filed.
6. Exact address or location of the place where the business is or is proposed to be carried on, plus a sketch of
the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads,
property lines, buildings and uses.
7. A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the licensed business are
made of, or are to be made; a sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business
premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators
and walls, and distance to and location of nearest fire hydrant(s).
8. Such other information as the City Council shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
ordinance and to arrive at a fair determination of whether the terms of this ordinance have been complied with.
SEC. 18B-5. INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; SALVAGE DEALERS.
A) Upon receipt of an application for a salvage dealer’s license as provided herein, the Clerk shall furnish copies
of the same to the other members of the City Council and Mayor. The proposed or existing premises and equipment
with which the salvage yard or automobile salvage yard is being or is to be operated shall be examined by the other
members of the Council or by their duly appointed representatives. No salvage dealers’ license shall be issued
unless the application is approved by a majority of the Council.
B) The Building Inspector shall approve the application only if he finds that any proposed or existing buildings or
equipment with which the salvage yard or automobile salvage yard is being or is to be operated conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and the requirements of this ordinance.
C) The Fire Chief shall approve the application only if he finds that the proposed or existing premises and
equipment conform to the requirements of this ordinance and all applicable fire-prevention laws.
18B-2
D) If any of the findings provided for in subparagraph B and C above are unfavorable to the applicant, the Mayor
shall, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application, notify the applicant that his application is disapproved
and that no license will be issued. Upon request, he shall furnish the applicant with a brief written statement of the
grounds upon which the application was disapproved. If the findings in subparagraph B and C above are favorable to
the applicant, the City Council shall, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application, issue a salvage dealer’s
license to the applicant if it finds:
1) That the applicant has obtained from the official charged with administration under the zoning regulations a
certificate to the effect that the salvage yard or automobile salvage yard will not be a violation of the existing City
zoning regulations; and,
2) That the applicant has paid the fee prescribed by this ordinance.
E) The license as issued shall bear the following language on its face:
“IMPORTANT – This license applies only to the premises indicated herein and authorizes the licensee to
operate a salvage yard or automobile salvage yard in a lawful place and manner only; it is not a substitute for any
certificate of occupancy, building permit or other certificate or permit that might be required by law of the licensee, and
it does not relieve the licensee of the responsibility to have all such required permits or certificates at all times and
comply with all laws affecting the above-described business.”
SEC. 18B-6. PERIOD OF LICENSE AND RENEWAL PROCEDURE.
Unless otherwise provided by the City Council, a written application upon forms provided by the Council, signed
and sworn to in the same manner required in the case of an original application, together with three (3) copies of the
application and a fee as hereinafter prescribed.
SEC. 18B-7. LICENSE FEES.
The annual fee to be paid for any license or renewal license issued hereunder shall be Ten Dollars ($10.00).
SEC. 18B-8. LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
No license issued under this ordinance shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one
to whom it was issued, and no salvage dealer’s license shall be used at any location other than the one described in
the application upon which it was issued.
SEC. 18B-9. GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all salvage dealers licensed in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance:
1. The license issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be plainly displayed on the business premises.
2. The salvage yard or automobile salvage yard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained
in a sanitary condition.
3. No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business.
4. No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place
for mosquitoes.
5. Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees, shall be kept at a height of not more than four (4”)
inches.
6. No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises, unless
such refuse is salvage as defined herein and is in use in the licensed business.
18B-3
7. No salvage shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, right-of-way, walkway or curb or
become scattered or blown off the business premises.
8. Salvage shall be stored in piles not exceeding the height of the fence surrounding the yard and shall be
arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes.
9. No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the
premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard.
10. Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises.
11. No noisy processing of salvage or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed
business on Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
12. The area on the premises where salvage is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances
and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of uniform and consistent material of a minimum height of six feet (6’)
measured from ground level. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary
for the conduct of the licensed business. Entrances and exits shall have gates, which shall be closed except during
business hours. All gates shall consist of solid material.
13. The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by any employee of the City Council at any
reasonable time.
14. Each acquisition of salvage shall be recorded in English in a permanent type register kept on the business
premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description
of the salvage acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any
member or representative of a member of the City Council for a period of at least three (3) years.
15. No salvage yard or automobile salvage yard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any salvage
yard or automobile salvage yard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of
the community or of any residents close by.
SEC. 18B-10. INSPECTIONS.
The City Council and Mayor, or their duly authorized representatives, shall inspect the salvage yards of all salvage
dealers licensed under this ordinance at least once a year to determine whether such yards are being operated in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and other applicable provisions of law.
SEC. 18B-11. REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
The City Council and Mayor can revoke a salvage dealer’s license if any one of the following conditions are
present:
1. The salvage dealer or any agent or officer of such dealer who takes part in the operation of the licensed
business is not capable of operating the licensed business or carrying on the licensed activity in a manner consistent
with public health, welfare and safety; or,
2. The salvage dealer has failed to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or any provision of law applicable
to the premises, equipment of operation of the licensed business or the itinerant salvage dealer has failed to comply
with this ordinance or any provisions of law applicable to his equipment or licensed operations; or,
3. The licensee has obtained his license through any fraud or misstatement; or,
4. The licensed business or activity is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public, or is a nuisance or is being operated or carried on in any unlawful manner; or,
5. The licensed business or activity is no longer being operated or carried on.
18B4
SEC. 18B-12. HEARING ON GRANTING, DENIAL, RENEWAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
A) Any person aggrieved by an order of the City Council granting, denying, renewing or revoking a license for a
proposed or existing business or activity subject to the provisions of this ordinance, may file a written request for a
hearing before the City Council within ten (10) days after issuance of such order. The City shall give notice of a public
hearing upon this request to be held in not less than five (5) days after service of the notice on the person requesting
the hearing. The City shall also give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the order in question.
At such hearing, the City shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal or revocation of the license was in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and shall issue a written findings of fact, conclusions of law and an
order to carry out its findings and conclusions. These findings of fact, conclusions of law and order shall be filed with
the Clerk and served by the City upon all parties appearing or represented at said hearing.
B) The City Attorney shall furnish such assistance and advice to the City Council as the City shall request.
SEC. 18B-13. COMPLIANCE.
Any person acting as a salvage dealer within the City on the effective date of this ordinance shall have a period of
ninety (90) days after such effective date to comply with provisions of this ordinance.
SEC. 18B-14. PENALTIES.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding Five Hundred and no/100 Dollars ($500.00). Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate fine and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. (Ord. 1033, 3/91)
18B-5
CHAPTER 19
SECONDHAND DEALERS.
§ 19-1. Definitions.
§ 19-2. License – Required.
§ 19-3. Same – Issuance; fee; term.
§ 19-4. Records to be kept and reports made.
§ 19-5. Inspection of record book and property.
§ 19-6. Dealing with persons under sixteen.
SEC. 19-1. DEFINITIONS.
Section 19-1 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1146, § 1, 5/96)
SEC. 19-2. LICENSE – REQUIRED.
Section 19-2 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1146, § 1, 5/96)
SEC. 19-3. SAME – ISSUANCE; FEE; TERM.
Section 19-3 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1146, § 1, 5/96)
SEC. 19-4. RECORDS TO BE KEPT AND REPORTS MADE.
Section 19-4 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1146, § 1, 5/96)
SEC. 19-5. INSPECTION OF RECORD BOOK AND PROPERTY.
Section 19-5 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1146, § 1, 5/96)
SEC. 19-6. DEALING WITH PERSONS UNDER SIXTEEN.
Section 19-6 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1146, § 1, 5/96)
19-1
CHAPTER 20
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. 1
1. For state law as to power and authority of town in connection with streets and
sidewalks generally, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (x). As to state law in
connection with local improvements see W.S. 1977, §15-6-101.
For regulations concerning play streets, see § 13-7. For regulations concerning
curfew, see §§ 16-6, 16-7.
Article I. In General.
§ 20-1. Injuring, destroying, etc., sidewalks, pavements, etc.
§ 20-2. Street grades established.
§ 20-3. Digging up, etc., street pavement – Permit required; side of opening; costs.
§ 20-4. Same – Type of trench walls; tunneling prohibited.
§ 20-5. Same – Backfilling, etc.
§ 20-6. Same – Fencing, etc., excavation at night.
§ 20-7. Obstructing streets, etc.
§ 20-7.1. Erecting awnings, etc., over federal-aid highways.
§ 20-7.2. Obstruction of intersection by hedge, fence, wall or any other structure - Repealed
Article II. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Division 1. Generally.
§ 20-8. Permitting water generally to run onto or depositing water on sidewalks.
§ 20-9. Depositing of filthy, etc., water on sidewalks prohibited.
§ 20-10. Cleaning sidewalks; snow, etc., removal.
§ 20-10.1 Depositing of snow from parking lots or driveways
§ 20-11. Installation of gasoline pumps, etc., in sidewalks, etc.; sale, etc., of gasoline, oil, etc., while vehicle on
sidewalk.
§ 20-12. Sidewalk widths – Main streets.
§ 20-13. Same – Other streets.
Division 2. Construction and Repair.
§ 20-14. Generally.
§ 20-15. Grade.
§ 20-16. Petition to abutting owners.
§ 20-17. Sidewalk specifications.
§ 20-18. Specifications for curbs and gutters.
§ 20-19. Unsafe or dangerous sidewalks.
Article III. Street Vacations.
§ 20-20. Application to vacate.
§ 20-21. Action on application; notice of hearing.
§ 20-21.1. Notification of property owners.
§ 20-22. Protests may be filed; approval of application; cost of publishing notices.
§ 20-22.1. Vacation by City Council.
§ 20-22.2 Registration of Deed.
20-1
Article IV. Levy on Pipes, Wires, Conduits or Other Erections or Structures.
§ 20-23. Definition of “business”.
§ 20-24. General levy and assessment; exemptions.
§ 20-25. Amount of levy; liability for license fee.
§ 20-26. Time of making payments; accompanying statement.
§ 20-27. Right of City to examine books.
§ 20-28. Right of action to recover compensation.
Article V. Excavation of streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public grounds.
§ 20-29. Definitions.
§ 20-30. Excavation permit.
§ 20-31. Application.
§ 20-32. Excavation permit fees.
§ 20-33. Excavation placard.
§ 20-34. Indemnity.
§ 20-35. Cash Deposits.
§ 20-36. Routing of traffic.
§ 20-37. Clearance for fire equipment.
§ 20-38. Protection of traffic.
§ 20-39. Removal and protection of utilities.
§ 20-40. Protective measures.
§ 20-41. Attractive nuisance.
§ 20-42. Care of excavated material.
§ 20-43. Damage to existing improvements.
§ 20-44. Property lines and easements.
§ 20-45. Clean-up.
§ 20-46. Protection of water courses.
§ 20-47. Breaking through pavement.
§ 20-48. Tunnels.
§ 20-49. Back-filling.
§ 20-50. Back-fill material.
§ 20-51. Back-filling at the surface.
§ 20-52. Restoration of surface.
§ 20-53. City’s right to restore surface.
§ 20-54. Trenches in pipe laying.
§20-55. Prompt completion of work.
§ 20-56. Urgent work.
§ 20-57. Emergency action.
§ 20-58. Noise, dust and debris.
§ 20-59. Excavations barred in new street improvements.
§ 20-60. Preservation of monuments.
§ 20-61. Inspections.
§ 20-62. Maintain drawings.
§ 20-63. Chapter not applicable to City work.
§ 20-64. Public service companies.
§ 20-65. Insurance.
§ 20-66. Liability of City.
§ 20-67. Penalties.
§ 20-68. Validity.
20-2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL.
SEC. 20-1. INJURING, DESTROYING, ETC., SIDEWALKS, PAVEMENTS, ETC. 2
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, tear up, mark, paint, deface or destroy any pavement, sidewalk or
crossing without authority. (R.O. 1955, §§ 19-10, 31-15)
2. As to injuring, destroying, etc., City property, see § 16-21 of this Code.
SEC. 20-2. STREET GRADES ESTABLISHED.
The grade of the streets of the City of Buffalo shall be and the same are hereby established as uniform straight
lines between the adjacent points specified in such streets, and between such points and the present established
grades of the adjacent streets; such points being established as elevations above and in reference to the datum plane
which is fixed by section 1-6. (R.O. 1955, § 25-3)
SEC. 20-3. DIGGING UP, ETC., STREET PAVEMENT – PERMIT REQUIRED; SIZE OF OPENING; COSTS.
Section 20-3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 20-4. SAME – TYPE OF TRENCH WALLS; TUNNELING PROHIBITED.
Section 20-3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 20-5. BACKFILLING, ETC.
Section 20-5 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 20-6. SAME – FENCING, ETC., EXCAVATION AT NIGHT.
Section 20-6 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 20-7. OBSTRUCTING STREETS, ETC. 3
No person shall place or cause to be placed any stone, brick, timber, lumber, plank, board or other material,
equipment or machinery for building or for any other purpose whatsoever in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
public square in the City of Buffalo, without written permission from the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk under the
corporate seal. Upon conviction therefore, such person shall be punished as provided in section 14-13 for every
twenty-four hours during which the article or articles above-enumerated shall be or remain in any street, alley or
public square without permission as foresaid, after notice to remove the same; provided, that the permit aboverequired
shall state the length of time for which the same is granted an such other conditions as may be deemed by
the Mayor essential for the protection of the citizens of the City of Buffalo; and, provided further, that such permit shall
expire by limitation forty-eight hours after the completion of the work for which the same is granted. (R.O. 1955, § 20-
11)
3. For further provisions in connection with this subject, see § 5-17 et seq., of this
Code. For provisions prohibiting the throwing of combustibles into streets, see §
9-10. As to disposing of rubbish or other material in or upon any street or
sidewalk, see § 10-3.
SEC. 20-7.1. ERECTING AWNINGS, ETC., OVER FEDERAL-AID HIGHWAYS.
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall permit, erect or cause to be erected any awnings,
canopies, marquee, advertising signs or similar installation that extends into, over or across any primary, secondary,
urban or other classes of Federal-aid highways within the City of Buffalo, Wyoming. All awnings, canopies, marquee,
advertising signs shall not be less than two feet (2’) behind the curb line with a minimum clearance of ten feet (10’)
from the sidewalk to the bottom of the sign. All supports, braces, guy-wires or similar supporting devices shall not be
in or on any established highway right-of-way.
All awnings, canopies, marquee, advertising signs or similar installations which are in a place prior to the date of
this section, which are supported entirely from outside the highway right-of-way, may be permitted to remain under a
revocable permit from the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, in accordance with the limitations and restrictions contained
therein, but subject, however, to complete compliance with this section in the event extensive repair or maintenance
of such awnings, canopies, marquee and advertising signs is instituted by the owner.
20-3
Application for such permits must be made within ninety (90) days after the passage of this section and failure to
do so will cause any violation to be subject to the fines and penalties hereinafter set forth.
Any person or corporation violating this section or any permit granted hereunder shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per day of violation. (Ord. 871, § 1, 2, 3, 4)
SEC. 20-7.2. OBSTRUCTION OF INTERSECTIONS BY HEDGE, FENCE, WALL OR ANY OTHER STRUCTURE.
Section 20-7.2 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1984, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1222, §20, 5/03) (R.O.
1285, 07/07)
ARTICLE II. SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS. 4
4. As to regulation prohibiting gutters from being obstructed in connection with the
construction of buildings, see 5-15 of this Code.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 20-8. PERMITTING WATER GENERALLY TO RUN ONTO OR DEPOSITING WATER ON SIDEWALKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit water to flow, run or trickle from the roof or eaves of any
building owned, rented or controlled by any such person or to place or deposit, or cause to be placed or deposited,
any water upon any sidewalks so as to cause the same to become wet, slippery or otherwise inconvenient,
dangerous or obnoxious. (R.O. 1955, § 32-2)
SEC. 20-9. DEPOSITING OF FILTHY, ETC., WATER ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed upon any of the sidewalks within the City limits
any foul or dirty water of any kind whatsoever, or to sweep, or to remove from their places of residence or business,
upon the sidewalks, any foul or dirty water. (R.O. 1955, § 32-1)
SEC. 20-10. CLEANING SIDEWALK; SNOW, ETC., REMOVAL. 5
The owners, agents and occupants of any house, warehouse, store, tenement house and any other building, and
the ground belonging thereto, or occupied by them, and the owner and agent of any vacant lot within the City of
Buffalo, shall keep the sidewalks, whether paved or not, in front of such property and adjoining thereto clean, and
after any fall of snow, shall cause such snow and all slush and ice to be immediately removed from the sidewalk
fronting their respective lot or lots, into the carriage way of the street.
5. For state law authorizing the town to require the owner or occupant of any
adjacent premises to remove snow, etc., from sidewalks, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-
103 (x).
SEC. 20-10.1. DEPOSITING OF SNOW FROM PARKING LOTS OR DRIVEWAYS.
No owner, agent or occupant of any house, store, warehouse, building or vacant lot and any ground belonging
thereto or occupied by them shall deposit snow from any driveway or parking lot located thereon into or on the rightof-
way of any adjoining ci1ty street. All such snow shall be disposed of on private property or at a location specifically
identified and approved by the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 1110, § 1, 5/93)
SEC. 20-11. INSTALLATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS, ETC., IN SIDEWALKS, ETC.; SALE, ETC., OF GASOLINE,
OIL, ETC., WHILE VEHICLE ON SIDEWALK.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating, managing or owning any filling station, garage, store, repair shop or
any other of any nature whatsoever to attach or install upon any sidewalk or parking along any street in the City of
Buffalo any gasoline pump or any other contrivance or device for dispensing or selling of gasoline or motor oil or any
other similar product; or, to permit any stand, container, display rack, advertising sign or any other thing or device of
any kind whatsoever, whether of a permanent or temporary nature, to be placed upon any sidewalk; or to give service
to or to sell or dispense gasoline or oil or any similar product to, or to repair or install any part in any motor vehicle
while such vehicle, or any part thereof, is standing or parking upon any sidewalk. (R.O. 1955, § 32-20)
20-4
SEC. 20-12. SIDEWALK WIDTHS – MAIN STREET.
The sidewalk on the west side of Main Street from Fort Street to Angus Street shall be of uniform width of twelve
feet, exclusive of curbing; and, from Angus Street to Onderdunk Street on the west side of Main Street, the sidewalks
shall be of uniform width of eight feet, exclusive of curbing; and, from Onderdunk Street south on the west side of
Main Street all sidewalks shall be of the uniform width of five feet, exclusive of curbing. All sidewalks on the east side
of Main Street from Fort Street to Bennett shall be of the uniform width of twelve feet, exclusive of curbing. All
sidewalks on the east and west sides of Main Street from Fort Street to Benteen Street shall be of the uniform width
of eight feet, exclusive of curbing and on both the east and west sides of North Main Street commencing at Benteen
Street and extending north to the City limits, all sidewalks constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall be of the
uniform width of five feet, exclusive of curbing. (R.O. 1955, § 32-15)
SEC. 20-13. SAME – OTHER STREETS.
On the south side of Fort Street from Main Street to the alley west of the School House Square, and on the west
side of Fetterman Street to the southeast corner of the School House Square, the sidewalks shall be of the uniform
width of six and one-half feet, exclusive of curbing, and the inner edge of the same shall be eighteen inches from the
property line. On all other streets, or parts thereof, not otherwise specifically provided for, the sidewalks hereafter
constructed, reconstructed or rebuilt thereon shall be of the uniform width of five feet, exclusive of curbing; provided,
that on Fetterman Street, Benteen Street, Holland Street, Parmalee Street and Onderdunk Street, all sidewalks laid,
constructed, reconstructed or rebuilt shall be of uniform width of four feet, exclusive of curbing.
All sidewalks which shall be constructed on the east side of Burritt Avenue between Lott and Holland Streets, and
both sides of Brock Street between Main Street and Western Avenue shall be five feet wide, exclusive of curbing, and
shall be constructed so that they shall be immediately adjacent to the curbing and no parking strip shall be provided
for in such areas.
All sidewalks which shall be constructed on the east and west side of North DeSmet Avenue, from Fort Street to
Watkins Street (16th Street), and both sides of North Carrington Avenue, from West Snider Street to Watkins Street,
shall be forty-two inches wide, exclusive of curbing, and shall be constructed so as to be immediately adjacent to the
curbing, and parking strips shall not be provided for, or allowed in the area above-described. (R.O. 1955, § 32-16;
Ord. 537, § 1; Ord. 547, § 1; Ord. 573, § 1)
Division 2. Construction and Repair. 6
6. For state law as to local improvements, see W.S. 1977, § 15-6-101.
SEC. 20-14. GENERALLY.
Sidewalks shall be altered, constructed or rebuilt by the owners of property abutting on the same, or by the City of
Buffalo, at the expense of the property owners as provided in this division, throughout the City of Buffalo, upon either
side or both sides of the street whenever such streets are laid out and improved and are in common use by foot
travelers. (R.O. 1955, § 32-6)
SEC. 20-15. GRADE.
All sidewalks shall conform to the established grade upon which they shall be constructed, which grade shall in all
cases be shown or designated by the City Engineer. Whenever any sidewalk is not laid to the grade as established
and designated by the City Engineer, the Council may direct the same to be rebuilt to conform to such grade, and the
same proceeding shall govern the rebuilding of any such sidewalks as is provided in this division for the construction
of sidewalks, and shall be enforced accordingly. All sidewalks shall be of the width and extent as provided in this
division. (R.O. 1955, § 32-11)
SEC. 20-16. PETITION TO ABUTTING OWNERS.
Whenever the Council shall decide upon the construction or repair of any sidewalks coming within the purview of
this division, it shall direct the water and street superintendent to ascertain the names of the owners of the lots or
parcels abutting on the construction or repairs deemed necessary, and he shall, within five days after ascertaining the
same, circulate a petition among the resident owners of such property, setting forth the cost of the construction or
repair along each lot or parcel of land adjacent thereto, and the amount of the proposed assessment to be placed
thereon, according to the front footage, and unless a majority of the resident owners petition the Council to have such
construction or repairs done, such sidewalks shall not be made or repaired, until three fourths of the Council shall, by
vote, consent to the making of the same. (R.O. 1955, § 32-7)
20-5
SEC. 20-17. SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.
All sidewalks constructed hereafter by or under the authority of the City of Buffalo, or under its direction, shall be of
Portland cement concrete and shall conform with the following requirements except when otherwise shown or
indicated on detailed plans by the City Engineer:
1) Cushion: No cushion will be required, except in cases where, in the judgment of the City Engineer, drainage
conditions require such construction. When cushion is used, it shall be constructed of four inches of gravel, cinders
or course sand thoroughly tamped and provided with suitable drainage outlets.
2) Subgrade: The subgrade shall be compacted to a firm surface with uniform bearing power.
3) Cement: Cement shall meet the requirements of the standard specifications of the American Society of
Testing Materials. (Serial designation of most recent date.)
4) Fine aggregate: Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or screening from hard, tough, durable, crushed
rock or gravel. All fine aggregate must be clean and well-graded, passing a one-quarter inch screen with not less
than five percent passing a one hundred mess screen.
Aggregates shall not contain strong alkali or organic materials which give a color darker than the standard color
when tested with the Standard Method of Test for Organic Impurities in Sands for Concrete, (Serial Designation: C40-
22) of the American Society for Testing Materials.
5) Coarse aggregate: Course aggregate shall consist of natural gravel or crushed rock, clean, hard, durable and
uncoated. All course aggregate shall pass a two-inch screen and ninety-five percent shall be retained on a one-half
inch screen.
6) Water: The water used in making concrete shall be clean and free from strong acids, alkalis, oil or organic
materials.
7) Joint filler: Joint filler shall be premoulded strips of bitumen filled fiber or mineral aggregate, one-half inch thick,
as wide as the slab thickness and at least two feet long.
8) Forms: Forms shall be of lumber two inches thick or of steel of equal strength and flexible strips may be used
on curves. They shall be rigidly held to line and grade by stakes or braces.
9) Division plates: Division plates shall be of one-eighth inch steel not shorter than the width of the slab.
10) Thickness and proportions: Sidewalks shall not be less than five inches thick. Width shall be not less than
five feet. Concrete shall be mixed in the proportions of one part Portland cement, two and one-half parts of fine
aggregate and three and one-half parts of coarse aggregate. Consistency shall be such that no segregation of
aggregates occurs.
11) Mixing: Mixing shall continue for at least one and one-half minutes after all materials are in the mixer.
12) Placing and finishing: Concrete shall be placed immediately after mixing. It shall be tamped and struck off
with a template and shall be floated with a wood float until the surface has a true contour. Care shall be taken not to
bring an excess of water and fine sand to the surface of overfinishing.
13) Jointing: The slab shall be cut into separate sections at intervals of not greater than six feet. The surface
edges shall be rounded to a one-fourth radius.
14) Expansion joints: Expansion joints shall extend from the surface to the subgrade and shall be at right angles
to the surface and completely filled with joint filler. A one-half inch expansion joint shall be installed at intervals of not
more than fifty feet. At all places where the sidewalk intersects a curb line or another walk, one-inch expansion joints
shall be installed.
15) Curing: Finished concrete shall be kept wet for at least seven days. (R.O. 1955, § 32-13)
20-6
SEC. 20-18. SPECIFICATIONS FOR CURBS AND GUTTERS.
All curbs and gutters constructed by or under the authority of the City of Buffalo, or under its direction, shall be of
Portland cement concrete and shall conform with the following requirements, except when otherwise shown or
indicated on detailed plans by the City Engineer:
1) Cushion: See paragraph 1 under section 20-17.
2) Subgrade: See paragraph 2 under section 20-17.
3) Cement: See paragraph 3 under section 20-17.
4) Fine aggregate: See paragraph 4 under section 20-17.
5) Coarse aggregate: See paragraph 5 under section 20-17.
6) Water: See paragraph 6 under section 20-17.
7) Joint filler: See paragraph 7 under section 20-17.
8) Forms: See paragraph 8 under section 20-17.
9) Division plates: See paragraph 9 under section 20-17.
10) Dimensions and proportions: The curb and gutter shall be of one piece (monolithic) section. Both curb and
gutter slab shall be six inches in thickness. The top edge of the curb on the street side shall be rounded and
the angle between the curb and gutter formed with a filler of one and one-half inch radius. Overall width of
curb and gutter shall be twenty-four inches. Alternate curb and gutter design may be adopted and installed in
accordance with the following dimensions and proportions: Overall dimensions of curb and gutter shall
remain twelve inches in height and twenty-four inches in width. The rounded portion of the street side of the
curb shall begin two and one-half inches from the back face of the curb and at a point of four inches below the
top of the curb shall have a thickness of not less than six inches nor more than seven inches. The gutter slab
shall have a thickness of six inches and the flow line shall not be less than seven inches nor more than eight
inches from the back face of the curb. The flow line shall be one and one-half inches in elevation below the
outer top edge of the gutter. A full scale drawing of such alternate curb and gutter shall be placed on file and
of record in the office of the City Clerk for reference; provided, however, that the dimensions and proportions
herein provided shall be uniform in any one total frontage of any one block and the same curb and gutter
design shall be therein fixed and established in accordance with the petitions of the property owners owning a
majority of the front footage in such block desiring the construction and installation of curb and guttering.
11) Mixing: See paragraph 11 under section 20-17.
12) Placing and finishing: See paragraph 12 under section 20-17.
13) Jointing: See paragraph 13 under section 20-17.
14) Expansion joints: A one-half inch expansion joint shall be installed at intervals to be determined by the
supervising engineer.
15) Curbing: See paragraph 15 under section 20-17. (R.O. 1955, § 32-14; Ord. 580)
SEC. 20-19. UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS SIDEWALKS.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises knowingly to permit or suffer any sidewalk abutting
on or in front of any building or premises owned or occupied by him to be or remain out of repair, so as to be in any
way unsafe or dangerous for travelers thereon. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, and
any person, who, after having received notice from the Chief of Police and water and street superintendent that such
a sidewalk is out of repair and unsafe and in a dangerous condition, shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the
requirements of this notice, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to put the same in a safe condition, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (R.O. 1955, § 32-18)
20-7
ARTICLE III. STREET VACATIONS. 7
7. For state law authorizing the town to vacate streets, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103
(x).
SEC. 20-20. APPLICATION TO VACATE.
Whenever any person for any purpose shall desire to have any portion of a street, avenue, alley or other public
thoroughfare, within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo, vacated, such person shall file a notice of “Application
to Vacate” with the City Planning Department. The application shall contain the name of the applicant, a legal and
physical description and a legible drawing of the vicinity of the proposed street, avenue, alley or other public
thoroughfare to be vacated. In addition, the application shall also include a narrative description of the purpose of
such vacation. The application shall also bear the signatures of all the applicants named and acknowledgement by
the utility companies. The Planning Department shall have seven (7) days to review the application for completeness.
(Ord. 970, § 1, 11/81; R.O. 1316 § 20-20, 11/2008; R.O. 1316, 11, 18/2008)
SEC. 20-21. APPLICATION FOR VACATION; NOTICE OF HEARING.
When a complete application has been filed the City Planning Department shall schedule a public hearing with the
Zoning and Planning Commission. The hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper of general circulation. The
Planning Commission public hearing shall be held no sooner than seven (7) days after publication of the public notice.
The City Planning Department shall schedule a public hearing on the vacation before the Buffalo City Council, such
hearing to be duly advertised in a local newspaper of general circulation at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
hearing. Notice for both public hearings may be published concurrently. All publishing costs are the responsibility of
the applicant.
SEC. 20-21.1. NOTIFICATION OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
The applicant requesting the vacation shall notify by certified mail at least fourteen (14) days prior to the Zoning
and Planning Commission public hearing, the owners of all real property located adjacent to the proposed vacation.
The applicant shall prepare an “Affidavit of Property Owners Notified” showing a list of all property owners who were
notified of the proposed vacation.
The Notice of Application for Vacation and the “Affidavit of Property Owners Notified” shall be filed with the Buffalo
Planning Department at least fourteen (14) days prior to the Zoning and Planning Commission meeting.
SEC. 20-22. PROTESTS OF APPLICATION AND PROCESSING OF APPLICATION.
Protests may be filed in writing or in person and presented at the time of, or prior to the Zoning and Planning
Commission meeting at the date, hour and place mentioned in the Public Notice. Any protests together with the
recommendations of the Zoning and Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council.
Protests also may be filed in writing or person and presented to the City Council at the date, hour and place
mentioned in the notice. After considering such protests together with the Zoning and Planning Commissions
recommendations, the Council may deny, approve or table the application. Approval of the application will be in
ordinance form and shall provide for the vacation of any such streets, avenue, alleys or public thoroughfares as shall
be the subject of the application provided for in this article. (Ord. 970, § 4, 11/81; R.O. 1316, 11, 18/2008)
SEC. 20-22.1. VACATION BY CITY COUNCIL.
Vacations initiated by the City Council shall require the following action:
A) Study and recommendation by the Zoning and Planning Commission.
B) Compliance with the process outlined in Section 20-20 through Section 20-22 of Buffalo’s Municipal Code.
(Ord. 970, § 5, 11/81; R.O. 1316 § 20-22.1, 11/2008)
SEC. 20-22.2 REGISTRATION OF DEED.
The City Attorney shall create a deed for the vacated property and shall register said deed with Johnson County.
The Applicant shall pay all costs for registering the deed with Johnson. (Ord. 1316, § 20-22.2, 11/2008)
20-8
ARTICLE IV. LEVY ON PIPES, WIRES, CONDUITS OR OTHER ERECTIONS OR STRUCTURES.
SEC. 20-23. DEFINITION OF “BUSINESS”.
The provisions of this article shall include, but shall not be limited to, those businesses or activities legally
denominated as public utilities, and shall include any person conducting, carrying on, trafficking, maintaining or
operating any business whatsoever in the City of Buffalo, where goods or services or both are dispensed and sold to
the general public as a result of overhead or underground conduits, lines, pipes or other erections or structures on,
over, through, under or adjacent to the streets, alleys, thoroughfares or other property within the City of Buffalo. (Ord.
561, § 8)
SEC. 20-24. GENERAL LEVY AND ASSESSMENT; EXEMPTIONS. 8
There is hereby levied and assessed a compensation fee on all persons conducting, carrying on, trafficking,
maintaining or operating any business whatsoever, within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo, where overhead
or underground conduits, lines, pipes or other erections or structures are maintained and operated for the benefit of
such persons who are engaged in the business of selling goods or services as a result of such overhead or
underground conduits, lines, pipes or other erections or structures on, over, through, under or adjacent to the streets,
alleys, thoroughfares or other property maintained and operated by the City of Buffalo, for the benefit of the public;
provided that such person now compensating the City of Buffalo for such as their business requires or who have
provided for such compensation by special arrangement, uniform and consistent herewith, are expressly exempt from
the operation of this chapter. (Ord. 561,§ 1)
8. For state law authorizing the town to license, tax and regulate any business, see
W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xii).
SEC. 20-25. AMOUNT OF LEVY; LIABILITY FOR LICENSE FEE.
For the privilege of doing business within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, as defined in
section 20-23, above, and enjoying the use and facilities of the streets, alleys, thoroughfares or any other property
maintained and operated by the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, any person, persons, corporations, partnerships, or
associations shall reimburse the City of Buffalo, Wyoming two (2) percent of their gross earnings from such business
conducted, carried on, trafficked, maintained or operated within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming,
whereby goods or services are sold.
The payment of such fee relieves such person from the liability of paying any other duly authorized license fee.
(Ord. 848, § 1)
SEC. 20-26. TIME OF MAKING PAYMENTS; ACCOMPANYING STATEMENT.
The compensation referred to in the preceding section shall be payable to the City Clerk / Treasurer on or before
the thirtieth day of January, April, July and October of each year, together with a statement under oath at the time of
making such payment, setting forth the gross earnings for each preceding period of payment, or fraction thereof, and
the amount due the City of Buffalo, which statement shall be filed with the City Clerk / Treasurer. (Ord. 561, § 3)
SEC. 20-27. RIGHT OF CITY TO EXAMINE BOOKS.
The City of Buffalo, through its duly authorized representatives, may examine the records of the person affected
hereby, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the sworn statements; provided, that such examination is made
within thirty days from the date of filing such sworn statement with the City Clerk / Treasurer. (Ord. 561, § 4)
SEC, 20-28. RIGHT OF ACTION TO RECOVER COMPENSATION.
The City of Buffalo shall have the right to institute in any court of competent jurisdiction a civil action to recover the
amount of any business compensation fee required by this article as shall be unpaid when due, together with the
costs of the action, and neither the recovery by the City of Buffalo of judgment for such fees and costs, nor the
satisfaction thereof, shall release the delinquent business from liability for conviction for violating any of the provisions
of this article, and shall not release such delinquent business from order made or penalty imposed by reason of such
conviction. (Ord. 561, § 6)
20-9
ARTICLE V. EXCAVATION OF STREETS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC GROUNDS.
SEC. 20-29. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
1) “Applicant” is any person making written application to the City Inspector for an excavation permit hereunder.
2) “City” is the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
3) “City Council” or “Council” is the City Council of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
4) “City Inspector” is the City Inspector of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
5) “Excavation Work” is the excavation and other work permitted under an excavation permit and required to be
performed under this chapter.
6) “Permittee” is any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect an excavation permit issued
hereunder.
7) “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
8) “Street” is any street, sidewalk, alley, avenue or other public way or public grounds in the City. Any state
highway excavation within the City is not included and requires a permit from the Wyoming State Highway
Department. (Ord. 945, § 2, 10/80)
SEC. 20-30. EXCAVATION PERMIT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any
street or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to
place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstruction or tending to interfere with
the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefore from the City
Inspector as herein provided. (Ord. 945, § 3, 10/80)
SEC. 20-31. APPLICATION.
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of an excavation permit is
submitted to the City Inspector. The written application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature,
location and purpose of the excavation, the date of commencement and date of completion of the excavation, and
other data as may reasonably be required by the City Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by plans
showing the extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the existing ground prior
to said excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the location of the excavation work, and such other
information as may be prescribed by the City Inspector. (Ord. 945, § 4, 10/80)
SEC. 20-32. EXCAVATION PERMIT FEES.
A permit fee of $15.00 shall be charged by the City Inspector for the issuance of an Excavation Permit, which shall
be in addition to all other charges relative to any proposed construction work. (Ord. 948, § 1, 5/81)
SEC. 20-33. EXCAVATION PLACARD.
The City Inspector shall provide each permittee at the time a permit is issued hereunder a suitable placard plainly
written or printed in English letters at least one inch (1”) high with the following notice:
CITY OF BUFFALO, WYOMING
PERMIT NO: ______________
EXPIRES: ________________
20-10
And in the first blank space there shall be inserted the number of said permit and after the word “expires” shall be
stated the date when said permit expires. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the placard posted
in a conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such placard at
or about any excavation not covered by such permit, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of
expiration of the permit. (Ord. 945, § 6, 10/80)
SEC. 20-34. INDEMNITY.
The permittee agrees to secure and hold the City and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments
or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the City, the
City Council or any City officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through
the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the
negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as
may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the City Inspector, all openings and excavations made in
streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twelve (12) months
after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before said work shall have been
done. Any settlement of the surface within said one-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective
back-filling by the permittee. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any
repairs to pavement made by the City if such repairs should prove defective. In the event of any suit or claim against
the City by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the City’s giving written notice to the permittee
of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the City requiring to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon
the permittee. (Ord. 945, § 7, 10/80)
SEC. 20-35. CASH DEPOSITS.
The application for an excavation permit to perform excavation work under this Ordinance shall be accompanied
by a cash deposit; a performance bond signed by a corporate surety licensed to do business in the State of Wyoming;
or a letter of credit on a bank approved by the City Clerk, the bank doing business within the City of Buffalo, all of
which bonds or letters of credit are to be for the benefit of the City of Buffalo in sums at least equal to the following
amounts:
a) A sum equal to $6.00 per square foot of surface of each excavation to be made in streets which have been
paved;
b) A sum equal to $3.00 for each square foot of surface of each such excavation to be made in City streets
which are not paved;
No deposit shall be less than $100.00. Any deposit made hereunder shall serve as security for the repair and
performance of work necessary to put the street in as good a condition as it was prior to the excavation if the
permittee fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the proper refilling of the opening and the excavation
work under the excavation permit. Upon the permittee’s completion of the work covered by such permit in conformity
with this Ordinance as determined by the City Inspector such cash deposit shall be promptly refunded by the City to
the permittee; provided, however, that the City may use any or all of any such deposit to pay the cost of any work the
City performs to restore or maintain the street as herein provided in the event the permittee fails to perform such
work, in which event the amount refunded to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount thus expended by the City.
(Ord. 1055, § 1, 2/87)
SEC. 20-36. ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work traffic
conditions as nearly normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as
possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the City Inspector may
permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him or her if in his or her opinion it is
necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic including its own vehicles as directed by the City Police
Department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic.
a) The permittee must receive the approval of the City Inspector and the Police Department therefore;
b) The permittee must notify the Chief of the Fire Department of any street so closed;
c) Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the City Inspector and City Police Department
before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made;
20-11
d) Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the City Police Department they shall be furnished by the permittee
at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which
this would not be feasible by the City Police Department will designate detours. The City shall maintain roadway
surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee but in case there are no
existing highways the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of
the City Inspector. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the
operation of its equipment. (Ord. 945, § 9, 10/80)
SEC. 20-37. CLEARANCE FOR FIRE EQUIPMENT.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire
hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within twenty feet (20’) of fire plugs. Passageways leading to
fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. (Ord. 945, § 10,
10/80)
SEC. 20-38. PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC.
The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable timber barriers to confine earth from trenches or other exactions in
order to encroach upon highways as little as possible. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe
crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic
at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and blocking of
adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Decking shall be not less than four inches (4”) thick and shall
be securely fastened together. Pedestrian crossings shall consist of planking three inches (3”) thick, twelve inches
(12”) wide and of adequate length, together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not less than three feet (3’) in
width and shall be provided with a railing as required by applicable federal or state laws and regulations. (Ord. 945, §
11, 10/80)
SEC. 20-39. REMOVAL AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES.
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the City Inspector and the
utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility this shall be done by
its owner. No utility owned by the City shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be
borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it
makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or
otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation
work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. In
case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency
or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and his or its bond shall be
liable therefore. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason
of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility and its bond shall be liable
therefore. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the
same against damage. (Ord. 945, § 12, 10/80)
SEC. 20-40. PROTECTIVE MEASURES.
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent
danger to persons using the City Street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work
shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon such place of excavation and upon
any excavation materials or structures or other obstructions to streets suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept
burning throughout the night during the maintenance of such obstructions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove
or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided there for the protection of the
public. The permittee must comply with all federal and state laws and regulations concerning safety about the site of
the excavation work. (Ord. 945, § 13, 10/80)
SEC. 20-41. ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE.
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain unguarded at the place of excavation or opening
any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children
and hazardous to their safety or health. (Ord. 945, § 14, 10/80)
20-12
SEC. 20-42. CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained
in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as
little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the
area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be
the case in a narrow alley, the City Inspector shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated
material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of back-filling. It shall be the permittee’s
responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and
disposal sites. (Ord. 945, § 15, 10/80)
SEC. 20-43. DAMAGE TO EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS.
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the
permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance. If upon
being ordered the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the City Inspector shall
have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the City and the cost shall be
charged against the permittee. (Ord. 945, § 16, 10/80)
SEC. 20-44. PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS.
Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plan of excavation submitted with the application
for the excavation permit and it shall be the permittee’s responsibility to confine excavation work within these limits.
(Ord. 945, § 17, 10/80)
SEC. 20-45. CLEAN-UP.
As the excavation work progresses all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish,
excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All clean-up operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the
City Inspector. From time to time as may be ordered by the City Inspector and in any event immediately after
completion of said work, the permittee shall at his or its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused
materials of any kind resulting from said work and upon failure to do so within twenty four (24) hours after having
been notified to do so by the City Inspector, said work may be done by the City Inspector and the cost thereof
charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof. (Ord. 945, § 18, 10/80)
SEC. 20-46. PROTECTION OF WATER COURSES.
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all water courses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation
work and shall replace the same in as good condition as it found them or shall make such provisions for them as the
City Inspector may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures
to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee shall make provision to take care of all surplus water,
muck, silt, slickings or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall
be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. (Ord. 945, § 19, 10/80)
SEC. 20-47. BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.
Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation purposes and where trenches are to
be four feet (4’) or over in depth, the pavement in the base shall be removed to at least six inches (6”) beyond the
outer limits of the sub-grade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent settlement, and a six-inch (6”) shoulder of
undisturbed material shall be provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining pavement
shall be approximately vertical. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so as to permit complete breakage of
concrete pavement or base without ragged edges. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line.
No pile drive may be used in breaking up the pavement. Any paved street consisting of asphaltic cement shall
require a four inch (4”) concrete slab on subgrade overlaid with new asphalt material as required by the City
Inspector. (Ord. 945, § 20, 10/80)
SEC. 20-48. TUNNELS.
Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by permission of the City Inspector. (Ord. 945, § 21,
10/80)
20-13
SEC. 20-49. BACK-FILLING.
Back-filling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued hereunder shall be
compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall
be done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, or by rolling in layers, as required by the soil in question and sound
engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry.
Back-filling up to the first eighteen inches (18”) above the top of the utility pipes or similar installations shall be
done with thin layers. Each layer is to be tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand tamped
shall not exceed four inches (4”) in thickness. Layers that are power tamped shall not exceed eight inches (8”) in
thickness. The same requirements shall apply to the remainder of the back-filling if tamping is the method used for
back-filling. Back-filling of all pipes of over twenty-four inches (24”) in diameter shall be carried up to the spring line of
the pipe in six inch (6”) layers, with each layer moistened and thoroughly tamped with suitable mechanical equipment.
The back-fill around all pipes twenty-four inches (24”) or less in diameter shall be tamped as specified above to a
depth of eighteen inches (18”) above the top of the pipe before any additional back-filling is placed thereon. (Ord.
945, §§ 22, 23, 10/80)
SEC. 20-50. BACK-FILL MATERIAL.
Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches (6”) above
the rock bottom of the trench and the space under, around and six inches (6”) above the pipe shall be back-filled with
clean sand, non-corrosive soil or material approved by the City Inspector. Broken pavement, large stores and debris
shall not be used in the back-fill. (Ord. 945, § 24, 10/80)
SEC. 20-51. BACK-FILLING AT THE SURFACE.
Back-filling shall be completed by placing the back-fill material well up over the top of the trench. For dry backfilling,
the material shall be compacted with a roller of an approved type or with the rear or a truck carrying at least five
(5) tons until the surface is unyielding. The surface shall then be graded as required. (Ord. 945, § 25, 10/80)
SEC. 20-52. RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets, broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work, to
its original condition in accordance with the specification of the City Inspector. The permittee may be required to
place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except when the pavement is to be replaced
before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab shall be made with suitable material
well tamped into place and this fill shall be topped with a minimum of at least one inch (1”) of bituminous mixture
which is suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until permanent restoration can be made. The crown of
the temporary restoration shall not exceed one inch (1”) above the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall exercise
special care in making such temporary restorations and must maintain such restorations in safe traveling condition
until such time as permanent restorations are made. The asphalt which is used shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the City Inspector. If in the judgment of the City Inspector it is not expedient to replace the pavement
over any cut or excavation made in the street upon completion of the work allowed under such permit by reason of
the looseness of the earth or weather conditions he may direct the permittee to lay a temporary suitable material
designated by him over such cut or excavation to remain until such time as the repair of the original pavement may be
properly made.
Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications
prescribed by the City Inspector to restore the street to its original and proper condition, or as near as may be.
Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the City Inspector shall not prevent the City from asserting a
claim against the permittee required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if discovered within twelve (12)
months from the completion of the excavation work. The City Inspector’s presence during the performance of any
excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of its responsibilities hereunder. (Ord. 945, § 26, 10/80)
SEC. 20-53. CITY’S RIGHT TO RESTORE SURFACE.
If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the
expiration of the time fixed by such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by
such permit, the City Inspector, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to
restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and
20-14
25% of such cost in addition for general overhead and administrative expenses. The City shall have a cause of action
for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it for such work and shall apply in payment of the amount due it
any funds of the permittee deposited has herein provided.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior
to the excavation for one year after restoring it to its original condition. (Ord. 945, § 27, 10/80)
SEC. 20-54. TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING.
Except by special permission from the City Inspector, no trench shall be excavated more than two hundred fifty
feet (250’) in advance of pipe laying nor left unfilled more than five hundred feet (500’) where pipe has been laid. The
length of the trench that may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length of pipe and the
necessary accessories which are available at the site ready to be put in place. Trenches shall be braced and
sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction work as prescribed by applicable federal
and state laws. No timber bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench. (Ord. 945, § 28,
10/80)
SEC. 20-55. PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit
and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon
as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit therefore. (Ord. 945, § 29,
10/80)
SEC. 20-56. URGENT WORK.
If in his or her judgment traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest
require that the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the City Inspector shall have full power to order,
at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee twenty four
(24) hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. (Ord. 945, § 30,
10/80)
SEC. 20-57. EMERGENCY ACTION.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or
otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the
person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation
permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for
the protection of property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such
facilities shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the City
Inspector’s office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder. (Ord. 945, § 31, 10/80)
SEC. 20-58. NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary
inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take
appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise,
dust and unsightly debris and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express
written permission of the City Inspector or in case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance
or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring
property. (Ord. 945, § 32, 10/80)
SEC. 20-59. EXCAVATION BARRED IN NEW STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
Whenever the City Council enacts any ordinance or resolution providing for the paving or repaving of any street,
the City Clerk shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to each person owning any sewer, main, conduit or other
utility in or under said street or any real property, whether improved or unimproved, abutting said street. Such notice
shall notify such persons that no excavation permit shall be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in said street for
a period of five (5) years after the date of enactment of such ordinance or resolution. Such notice shall also notify
such persons that applications for excavating permits, for work to be done prior to such paving or repaving, shall be
submitted promptly in order that the work covered by the excavation permit may be completed not later than forty five
20-15
(45) days form the date of enactment of such ordinance or resolution. The City Clerk shall also promptly mail copies
of such notice to the occupants of all houses, buildings and other structures abutting said street for their information
and to state agencies and City departments or other persons that may desire to perform excavation work in said City
street.
Within said forty five (45) days every public utility company receiving notice as prescribed herein shall perform
such excavation work, subject to the provisions of this chapter, as may be necessary to install or repair sewer, mains,
conduits or other utility installations. In the event any owner of real property abutting said street shall fail within said
forty five (45) days to perform such excavation work as may be required to install or repair utility service lines or
service connections to the property lines, any and all rights of such owner or his successors in interest to make
openings, cuts or excavations in said street shall be forfeited for a period of five (5) years from date of enactment of
said ordinance or resolution. During said five (5) year period no excavation permit shall be issued to open, cut or
excavate in said street, unless in the judgment of the City Inspector an emergency, as described in this chapter,
exists which makes it absolutely essential that the excavation permit be issued.
Every City department or official charged with responsibility for any work that may necessitate any opening, cut or
excavation in said street is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such excavation work within said forty
five (45) day period so as to avoid the necessity for making any openings, cuts or excavations in the new pavement in
said City street during said five (5) year period. (Ord. 945, § 33, 10/80)
SEC. 20-60. PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on the line of excavation work until ordered
to do so by the City Inspector. (Ord. 945, § 34, 10/80)
SEC. 20-61. INSPECTIONS.
The City Inspector shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this chapter.
The City Inspector shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may
be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 945, § 35, 10/80)
SEC. 20-62. MAINTAIN DRAWINGS.
Users of sub-surface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans and profiles showing the location and
character of all underground structures including abandoned installations. Corrected maps shall be filed with the City
Inspector within sixty (60) days after new installations, changes or replacements are made. (Ord. 945, § 36, 10/80)
SEC. 20-63. CHAPTER NOT APPLICABLE TO CITY WORK.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any excavation work under the direction of competent City
authorities by employees of the City or by any contractor of the City performing work for and in behalf of the City
necessitating openings or excavations in streets. (Ord. 945, § 37, 10/80)
SEC. 20-64. PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES.
All persons operating public utilities in the City under franchises granted by the City and having the right either by
general or special permission to enter upon streets and open and excavate pavements, sidewalks or disturb the
surface thereof by excavation or other work shall be required to apply for a permit and shall be required to perform the
work and bring it to completion as promptly as practicable and to that end shall employ an adequate standing force.
Any person operating any such public utility shall comply with other requirements of this chapter, including the deposit
requirements. (Ord. 945, § 38, 10/80)
SEC. 20-65. INSURANCE.
A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder, shall furnish the City Clerk satisfactory
evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of the excavation
work and the period of the excavation permit public liability insurance of not less than $100,000 for any one person
and $300,000 for any one accident and property damage insurance of not less than $50,000 duly issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in this State. (Ord. 945, § 39, 10/80)
20-16
SEC. 20-66. LIABILITY TO CITY.
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any official or employee any liability or
responsibility for damage to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation
permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the City of any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any
such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the
approval of any excavation work. (Ord. 945, § 40, 10/80)
SEC. 20-67. PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment in the City Jail for
a period not to exceed three (3) months, to which may be added costs. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become civilly liable to the City for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. (Ord. 945, § 41, 10/80)
SEC. 20-68. VALIDITY.
All ordinances or a part of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any part of
this chapter which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. (Ord. 945, § 42, 10/80)
20-17

CHAPTER 21
SUBDIVISIO REGULATIOS
Table of Contents:
ARTICLE TITLE PAGE
21-1 GEERAL PROVISIOS - TITLE, PURPOSE AD ITET 2
21-2 ADMIISTRATIO & EFORCEMET 6
21-3 MAJOR SUBDIVISIOS 9
21-4 MIOR SUBDIVISIOS 9
21-5 CODOMIIUM & TOWHOMES-APARTMETS FOR RET/LEASE 9
21-6 REPLATTIG & SUMMARY PLATS 9
21-7 PLAED UIT DEVELOPMETS 9
21-8 LOT SPLITS & LOT LIE/BOUDARY ADJUSTMETS 11
21-9 SUBDIVISIOS WITHI THE EXTRATERRITORIAL ZOE (ETZ) 11
21-10 PRE-APPLICATIO MEETIG & SKETCH PLAT/PLA APPLICATIO 11
21-11 SITE PLA & PLAT REVIEW PROCESS 11
21-12 PRELIMIARY PLAT APPLICATIO & APPROVAL 12
21-13 FIAL PLAT APPLICATIO & APPROVAL 13
21-14 VARIACES & WAIVERS 14
21-15 COSTRUCTIO STADARDS & BUILDIG PERMIT PROCESS 15
21-16 GEERAL DESIG STADARDS 16
21-17 OPE SPACE, PARKS, PATHS, TRAILS & SIDEWALKS 20
21-18 SUBDIVISIO IMPROVEMET SURETY 21
21-19 IMPACT FEES (RESERVED) 22
21-20 STORMWATER MAAGEMET STADARDS 22
21-21 SUBDIVISIO IMPROVEMET AGREEMET 24
21-22 SIGIG & RECORDATIO OF THE FIAL PLAT 25
SUBDIVISIO FEE SCHEDULE:
 The Fees described below are due when the application is made and they are non-refundable.
 These Fees cover the City’s expenses incurred during the application, Site Plan/Plat review and
approval processes and include the City’s contracted Engineer or Staff Engineer, if available.
 The total Fees shall not exceed $7,500 for any single application.
 Any external expenses required and not mentioned above for any outside agency reviews will be
paid directly by the applicant to the external outside agency and/or service provider.
 The review process will not begin or continue until the City and all external service providers
or outside agencies have been paid in full, as required, for each individual application.
1. Major, Minor, Condominium and Townhome Subdivisions (Commercial or Residential):
A. $1,000 for the first five (5) Lots and $100 for each additional Lot, not to exceed $7,500.
2. Planned Unit Developments (Commercial or Residential): $500.00 and $45.00 per Acre.
3. Lot Splits (Commercial or Residential): $400.00.
4. Lot Line Adjustments (Where no external property, easements or ROW are affected): $150.00.
5. Replats and Summary Plats (Where five (5) or fewer lots are affected):
21-1
A. Residential Replats are $250.00. B. Commercial Replats are $450.00
Fees not listed above for other types of applications will be found in Article 29 – Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE 1. GEERAL PROVISIOS
Section 1. Title Upon adoption by the City Council, these Regulations will be known and may be cited as “The
Subdivision Regulations for the City of Buffalo” hereinafter referred to as “these regulations.”
Section 2. Authority
A. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to and in accordance with the authority vested in the City Council of the City of
Buffalo Wyoming, by the Statutes of the State of Wyoming, Sections 15-1-501 through 15-1-709, and Sections 34-12-101.
All previously existing subdivision regulations for the City are hereby superseded with the adoption of these regulations.
B. No plat of a subdivision or creation of a new parcel shall be approved by the Buffalo Planning Department, P & Z
Commission, or City Council unless it conforms to the provisions of this Chapter.
C. The reviewing authorities include the City Planning Department, the Development Review Committee, the P & Z
Commission and the City Council.
Section 3. Scope/Applicability Any Subdivision of Land and Development Guidelines.
Section 4. Purpose
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a subdivision review and approval process to examine and regulate the
subdividing of land within the City limits and jurisdictional boundary. The process of dividing a single parcel of land into
separate parcels within the City of Buffalo’s jurisdiction needs to be critically reviewed and examined by City officials,
citizens and developers in order to provide the necessary information the City’s governing body needs to make informed
and objective decisions in regards to a proposed subdivision.
B. The City of Buffalo understands that subdivision and/or development can potentially impact adjacent property owners,
the capacity and safety of public roads, City services and natural resources including groundwater, surface waters,
floodplains, wetlands, and drainage.
C. The intent of these regulations is to encourage subdivisions and development which produces a strong viable economy,
an attractive community which preserves and protects the City’s natural resources and quality of life, does not impose
unreasonable costs upon the City, and is in alignment with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and other planning documents.
D. The elements which make up this code are interrelated and shall not be taken in isolation, but shall be taken within the
context and intent of the entire code.
E. The subdivision process of the City of Buffalo is designed to:
1. Protect the health, safety, and general welfare of current and future residents;
2. Ensure orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the City and the one-mile extraterritorial zone (ETZ) by
insuring through prescribed rules and standards for the functional arrangements of street lay-outs and open spaces
by promoting new ideas, allowing for intelligent and justified flexibility, encouraging innovative and attractive
community design and requiring functional city infrastructure;
3. Provide a forum for developers, citizens and city officials to identify and resolve issues related to proposed
subdivisions and ensure the fair handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards;
4. Generate information that allows City officials to make informed decisions on subdivision proposals;
5. Incorporate the objectives and goals identified in the City’s Comprehensive Plan;
6. Safeguard the interests of the present and future residents and the developer by restricting or requiring mitigation
for construction occurring in areas poorly suited for structures or infrastructure within new subdivisions;
7. Maintain social and economic diversity, protect the vitality and the cultural and historic character of the City;
8. Encourage the preservation of important and unique natural or scenic features, including but not limited to native
or indigenous trees and vegetation, bluffs, hillsides, or similar geologic features, rivers and other bodies of water;
9. Ensure for the provision of an adequate and safe source of water and means of sewage disposal;
10. Establish complete and accurate records of subdivided land within the City limits and the extraterritorial zone;
11. Provide suitable public facilities and services to the existing and future populations; provide the adequate space for
development of schools, parks, and other community facilities that serve the population of Buffalo;
12. Provide an integrated transportation system that promotes a recreationally active community, encourages nonmotorized
modes of transportation, and reduces congestion and air pollution;
21-2
13. Encourage the conservation of water and energy with innovative planning techniques;
14. Ensure subdivisions conform to adopted City, County and State public improvement plans.
Section 5. Jurisdiction These regulations shall apply to all land located within the City and the extraterritorial zone
(ETZ). These regulations supplement all other regulations, and where conflicts arise with other laws, regulations,
ordinances, or resolutions, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
Section 6. Relationship to Zoning Chapter 29 Subdivided or replatted lands shall conform to the allowable uses,
requirements and provisions of the underlying zoning district as provided in the Chapter 29 Zoning Code for the City.
Section 7. Exemptions Whenever any lot, parcel, or tract of land located within the area governed by these regulations
has been subdivided, re-divided, replatted or similarly processed and recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations, it
shall be exempt from this Chapter and the following exemptions shall also apply:
• Land used for adjusting street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or other public utilities subject to
local, state, or federal regulations, where no new street or easement of access is involved;
• The sale of land to Johnson County, State of Wyoming, U.S. Government or any political subdivision thereof;
• Land used for burial lots in cemeteries;
• Any transfer of title of operation of eminent domain or court ordered partition or decree.
Section 8. Construction Timing and Preventative Measures
A. The applicant or his/her contractors shall not proceed with any construction work on a subdivision, including grading
and excavation relating to public improvements, until the governing body has given Final Plat approval of the proposed
subdivision; the Subdivision Improvement Agreement (SIA) has been signed by all necessary parties; and the Mayor has
issued a Permit to Construct. If improvements are initiated prior to Final Plat approval, the subdivider shall assume all risks
and liability for error or damage in placement of improvements and the improvements must comply with the conditions and
agreements of the Preliminary Plat approval. The City shall require certification of completed improvements by the City’s
Engineer at the developer’s cost if a Permit to Construct has not been obtained by the applicant prior to any construction at
the subdivision site that is determined by the City Engineer or Public Works Director to be impacting public infrastructure.
B. The developer shall be required to institute measures and obtain the necessary permits as determined and directed by the
Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality (WDEQ) to insure the prevention of wind and water erosion prior to,
during, and upon the completion of construction as per WDEQ requirements. The City reserves the right to declare dust,
debris, and any unsatisfactorily mitigated wind and water erosion associated with development a nuisance and take
appropriate action. Contractor shall adhere to all other local, state and federal rules and regulations for construction.
Section 9. Transfer of Title An appropriate plat must be recorded with the Johnson County Clerk and Recorder before
title to the subdivided land can be sold or transferred in any manner.
Section 10. Suitability of Land
A. If the City, County or State Staff, the P & Z Commission or City Council after review, finds any portion of a parcel of
land proposed to be subdivided unsuitable for subdivision by these standards due to potential hazards such as being situated
within areas prone to flooding, subsidence associated with tunnels or mines, land slides, steep slopes, rock falls, shallow
groundwater, polluted or non-potable water supply, high pressure gas lines, danger from fire or explosion, proximity to
hazardous industrial zones or other features which may be deemed detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of
existing or future residents, or unreasonably burdensome to taxpayers unless mitigated, they will not approve the
subdivision unless the hazards can be eliminated or mitigated through approved design and construction methods.
B. Any piece of land containing such species identified in the Wyoming State Noxious Weed listing shall document
eradication of these species prior to petitioning the City Council for adoption of public infrastructure.
C. In reviewing a subdivision and when requiring mitigation, the City Council may not unreasonably restrict a landowner’s
ability to develop land, but it is recognized that in some instances the unmitigated impacts of a proposed development may
be unacceptable to the City residents’ health, safety and welfare and may prevent approval of a plat.
Section 11. Permission to Enter The governing body or its designated agent(s) may investigate, examine, and evaluate
the site of a proposed subdivision to verify information provided by the subdivider. The submission of a Sketch Plat or the
process constitutes a grant of permission by the applicant or property owner to enter the subject property for these purposes.
Section 12. Severability If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, or other part of these regulations invalid, that judgment will affect only the part held invalid.
21-3
Section 13. Regulations in Effect Review and action on a subdivision under these regulations may only occur under
those regulations in effect at the time an application for approval of a Preliminary Plat or an extension of Preliminary Plat
approval is submitted to the governing body.
Section 14. Delayed approval of Subdivision When a public entity proposes a new park, playground, school site or
other public site within the boundaries of a proposed subdivision, such land shall be reserved and no action shall be taken
towards approval of a Preliminary Plat for a period not to exceed two (2) months to allow the opportunity to consider and
take action towards acquisition of such land by the appropriate jurisdiction.
Section 15. Transfer of Water Rights If the City requests or desires the Water Rights of subdivided and/or annexed
lands, the City of Buffalo shall pay for the process and the developer shall willingly transfer said Water Rights to the City.
Section 16. Amendments The P & Z Staff, P & Z Commission, City Council or any member of the public may amend
these regulations as necessary. Prior to any change being made the same shall have been submitted to the P & Z
Commission for a recommendation to City Council for approval and a public hearing shall be required before each entity.
Section 17. Definitions For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words and definitions shall
have the meaning given in this section. When inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include
the future tense; words in the singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular.
Access: An entrance or exit to another public roadway or to private or public land from a street or highway.
Accessory Structure: A detached subordinate structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to, and supportive of,
the principal structure or use of land and which is located on the same parcel of ground with the principal structure or use.
Accessory Use: A use customarily incidental to, subordinate to, and supportive of the principal use of the parcel.
Adjacent: To be abutting or adjoining. Widths of public rights-of-way, easements, canals, or ditches shall not be counted
when determining distance for adjacent properties, uses, etc.
Affordable Housing: A housing unit which a person/family earning 120% or less of the median household income in the
City can purchase with a mortgage payment not exceeding 25% of the gross household income; and, a housing unit which
this person/family can rent with gross rent and utility payments not exceeding 30% of the gross household income.
Agent/Representative. Anyone appointed by the property owner to represent them on matters regarding their property.
Alley/Service Street: A private or public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to adjoining property.
Amended Plat: The final drawing of any change to a subdivision plat filed with the Johnson County Clerk and Recorder.
Appurtenant: Attached to something else; the attachment of a restriction, such as an easement or covenant, to a piece of
land, which benefits or restricts the owner of such land in their use and enjoyment.
Applicant: Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, group or organization who may apply for
any permit, approval or decision required by this code.
Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Buildable Area: The area on a lot or parcel in which all structures and development shall be constructed or occur, unless
specifically exempted, including but not limited to excavation, landscaping, building, grading, demolition or filling.
Building Inspector: The person authorized by the City Council to issue Building Permits and inspect construction.
Building Permit: Authorization for the construction of a building issued by the Building Inspector.
Building Setback: The minimum horizontal distance from the lot line as defined in the Zoning Chapter (Chapter 29).
Certificate of Occupancy: As defined in the International Building Code as adopted by the City of Buffalo.
Certificate of Survey: A drawing of a field survey prepared by a registered Wyoming land surveyor.
Comprehensive Plan: A comprehensive document prepared and approved by the P & Z Commission which indicates the
general locations recommended for various functional classes of land used, places and structures for the general physical
development of the City and includes any unit or part of such plan separately prepared and any amendments.
Commercial Subdivision: A subdivision consisting of lots or parcels for the primary purpose of a business land use.
Common-interest Subdivision/Condominium: Any condominium project, planned development, community apartment
project, or stock cooperative.
City: The City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
Condominium: A single-dwelling unit in a multi-unit, five (5) or more structure, that is separately owned and may be
combined with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the property.
Conversion: The process by which an existing structure is subdivided into multiple interests.
County: Johnson County, Wyoming.
Covenant: An written agreement, of two (2) or more parties which any one of the parties pledges something is to be done.
Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use, reserving no rights which
are incompatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been donated.
21-4
Density: The number of dwelling units that are allowed to be constructed on an acre of land.
Design Plan: A rendering or sketch of a proposed development.
Detention Ponds: Ponds designed to accumulate stormwater drainage and release it at a rate previously let undeveloped.
Development Review Committee (DRC): City Staff and any outside agencies required, specifically coming together for
the review of new developments within the joint-jurisdiction zone of the City.
Driveway: A private access road or drive pad to a structure.
Duplex: A Two-Family dwelling.
Dwelling, Multiple-Unit: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A detached dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one family.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two (2) families living independently.
Dwelling Unit: A fully functional living space which provides complete living facilities for one (1) or more persons.
Easement: A specific use authorized by a property owner appurtenant to the land.
Environmental Impact Report: A detailed statement by the Wyoming Environmental Quality Act (WDEQ) describing
and analyzing the significant environmental effects of a project and discussing ways to mitigate or avoid the effects.
Final Plat: A map establishing real estate interests for recording with the Johnson County Clerk and Recorder prepared by
a Wyoming Registered Surveyor. This survey shall be marked on the ground so that streets, blocks, lots and other
divisions thereof can be identified and drawn in accordance with the requirements of this code.
Findings of Fact Decision: The decision and justification arrived at by the P & Z Commission and City Council on the
issues related to the proposal which was heard by either or both entities.
Fire Flow Survey: The testing of fire hydrants to determine capacity by volume and pressure for fire-fighting purposes.
Floodplain: The area adjoining a watercourse or drainage way which would be covered by the floodwater of a flood of a
100-year frequency. A 100-year flood can be expected to recur on the average of once every one hundred (100) years, i.e.
a flood of such magnitude has a one percent (1%) chance of occurring in any given year.
Floodway: The channel of a watercourse or drainage way and those portions of a floodplain adjoining the channel which
are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of any watercourse or drainage way.
Floor Area Interior, Gross: The sum of the areas of floors of a building measured from the exterior face of walls or, if
appropriate, from the center line of dividing walls; including courts, decks or porches when covered by a roof.
Floor Area Interior, et: The sum of the areas of floors of a building measured from the interior face of walls.
Floor Area, et: For Parking, the floor area of a structure which is readily accessible to patrons or visitors to a business.
Frontage: The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right-of-way measured along the front property line.
Historic District: A related group of structures, objects, features, and/or areas listed on any registry of Historic Places.
Historic Significance: A structure, park, cemetery, archeological site, landscape or object which is of historic importance.
Improvements: Any structure or facility constructed to serve common use by the residents of a subdivision or the general
public. The improvements may include parks, streets, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, street lighting
utilities and systems for water supply, sewage disposal and drainage.
Legal Access: Where the subdivision abuts a public road or where the subdivider has obtained adequate and appropriate
easements across all necessary properties from a public road to the subdivision.
Licensed Engineer: A person licensed as a professional engineer by the State of Wyoming.
Live-Work Units: A structure or portion of a structure combining a residential living space with an integrated workspace
principally used by one (1) or more of the residents. The workspace is secondary to the principal residential use.
Lot: A parcel, piece, or portion of land designated by metes and bounds, registered land survey, plat, or other means and
separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease, or separation thereof.
Lot, Corner: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets, having two (2) adjacent sides abutting streets; the interior
angle of the intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five (135) degrees.
Lot Coverage: That area of a parcel which may be occupied by principal and accessory structures.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line.
Lot Line: The property line bounding a lot on all sides.
Lot Line Adjustment: An adjustment between two or more adjacent lots where the land taken from one lot is added to an
adjacent lot and does not create additional lots.
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of the lot measured parallel to the front line of the lot.
Lot Split: A subdivision of land that divides a single contiguous parcel into two (2) individual parcels.
Major Subdivision: A subdivision consisting of six (6) or more proposed lots.
Minor Subdivision: A subdivision consisting of five (5) or fewer proposed lots.
Modular Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least eight (8) feet in width and thirty-two
(32) feet in length, which carries an International Building Code (IBC) seal of approval and is designed to be used as a
dwelling unit on a permanent foundation, connected to the required utilities.
21-5
Monument (Permanent Monument): A structure of a permanent material placed in the ground, which is exclusively
identifiable as a monument to a survey point, expressly placed for surveying reference.
uisance: Reference Chapter 15 in the City Code.
Official Map: The map or maps established by the City Council in accordance with State Statutes, showing streets,
highways, and parks and drainage, both existing and proposed.
Off-street Parking: A designated space or area of land with a paved or all-weather surface not within a public street or
right-of-way and used for the parking of vehicles.
Open Space: Public or private land or water held under covenants, regulations, easements, or agreements restricting
physical structures and prohibiting storage except where accessory to the provision of recreation.
Parcel: An area of land which is capable of being described with such specificity that its location and boundaries may be
established and which has been or may be developed as a single unit of land.
Pedestrian Right-of-Way: A right-of-way or easement dedicated for public pedestrian use.
Permit to Construct: Final written documentation issued by the Mayor authorizing the developer to begin construction
associated with public improvements within an approved subdivision.
P & Z Commission: The City of Buffalo Planning and Zoning Commission.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A residential, commercial, or mixed use development guided by a total design plan in
which one or more of the zoning or subdivision regulations, other than use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or
varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and location, in accordance with general guidelines.
Plat: A map or plan with written provisions that is prepared in compliance with this Chapter which, when approved by the
City, is recorded at the Clerk and Recorder’s Office of Johnson County.
Preliminary Plat: A formal development submittal reviewed by the City and ruled on by the P & Z Commission and City
Council, containing at a minimum the requirements outlined in the appendices of this Chapter.
Public Hearing: A public meeting for which public notice has been given and where public testimony is provided.
Public Improvement: (See Improvements above) These are any improvements which the local government may assume
the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or for which local government responsibility has been established.
Public Right-of-Way: A dedicated strip or other area of land on, over, or under which the City and/or public may travel
or use for passage and within which public utilities and/or streets, alleys, trails, sidewalks, and other ways may be installed.
Public Uses: The public use of land or buildings for such uses as government administration and service, transportation
buildings and facilities, utility services and administration, public parking, post offices, fire stations, police stations,
libraries, meeting halls, visitor centers, hospitals, essential public facilities and other similar purposes.
Recreational Uses: Land or buildings whose principal use is for recreational purposes.
Representative of the P & Z Commission: The person authorized to administrate and enforce this Chapter.
Resubdivision: The division of an existing parcel within a subdivision plat previously recorded.
Retention Ponds: Ponds designed to hold stormwater drainage until evaporated or soaked into ground, with no release.
Setback: The required distance between a property line and the structure, including any covered portion of the structure.
Sketch Plat: A drawing or sketch with adequate information to evaluate feasibility and design at the beginning stages of
development for a proposed subdivision which contains the requirements identified in the appendices of this Chapter.
Sidewalk: The area within the street right-of-way which is designated as a pedestrian way or access for pedestrian traffic.
Site Plan: A plan that outlines the use and development of any tract of land.
Street, Arterial/Major/Thoroughfare: A street which local and collector streets feed into, for high traffic volumes.
Street, Collector: A street which local neighborhood streets feed into, for medium volumes of traffic.
Street, Local/Minor: A neighborhood street which typically feeds into a collector street, for low volumes of traffic.
Street, Cul-de-Sac: A street with only one vehicular ingress and egress, with a turnaround space at the end of the street.
Street, Private: A privately owned and maintained right-of-way/easement for a street, not built to City standards.
Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built.
Subdivision: The division of any lot, parcel, piece or tract of land into two (2) or more parts, pieces, tracts, parcels or lots
for the purpose of separate ownership, lease or building development. The term includes re-subdivision and relates to the
process of subdividing land.
Subdivision Improvement Agreement (SIA): A contractual agreement between the City and a project owner/developer
documenting an approved subdivision, regulatory approvals, financial assurances, timing and acceptance procedures for
physical improvements, noncompliance provisions and any other requirements of the land use approval.
Summary Plat. The consolidation of five (5) or fewer lots into one lot of record, under single ownership.
Survey Control etwork: This refers to the current titled Survey Report, City of Buffalo Survey Control Network.
Surveyor: A person duly registered as a professional land surveyor by the State of Wyoming.
Townhouse: A building or structure which contains five (5) or more dwelling units, and where the owner of each unit may
exclusively own the land underneath the unit in addition to jointly owning the common areas in the development.
21-6
Tract of Record: A parcel of land, irrespective of ownership, that can be identified by legal description, independent of
any other parcel of land, using documents on file in the records of the Johnson County Clerk and Recorder’s office.
Traffic Impact Study (TIS): The gathering and analysis of information that is used to determine the need for any
improvements to interior, adjacent, or nearby road systems as a result of the proposed development.
Trail: A marked or dedicated path or way for pedestrian and other non-motorized modes of traffic.
Use: The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which
land or a building is or may be occupied, including all accessory uses.
Warranty (Public Infrastructure) Period: The 12 month period commencing upon City Council action on public
infrastructure related to a development which is used to determine construction defects, to be fixed at developer’s expense.
Zoning District: An area as described by the adopted Zoning Chapter 29 of the City of Buffalo Codes.
ARTICLE 2. ADMIISTRATIO & EFORCEMET
Section 1. Organization The administration of this Ordinance is hereby vested in the P & Z Staff, the P &
Z Commission and the Buffalo City Council.
Section 2. Administration The P & Z Staff shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
In performing their duties, they shall:
A. Receive, review and analyze all zoning applications and research and prepare all zoning case descriptions which apply
to this Ordinance, which are to be heard by the P & Z Commission and/or City Council.
B. Make final determinations on all Lot Line and boundary adjustments, sketch plans and plats, re-plats and summary plats
where two or more lots are consolidated into one lot of record, under single ownership, and where summary plat does not
change or alter any public rights-of-way or easements.
C. Report determinations concerning all cases heard by the P & Z Commission to the City Council.
D. Receive and file copies of written requests for appeals by person(s) aggrieved with cases heard by the P & Z
Commission and any other matters relating to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, and transmit same to
the City Council.
E. Cause inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, and where there are violations, initiate action and follow-through to secure compliance.
F. Coordinate and administer all site plan reviews for new residential-commercial, commercial and industrial construction
to determine if construction complies with the provisions of this and other City ordinances and City Building Codes.
G. Maintain permanent records of all current and past comprehensive master plans, zoning ordinances, maps, zone
changes, special uses, variances, conditional uses, amendments to this ordinance, non-conforming uses, appeals, and
applications, to include the recording of zoning district amendments and special uses on the official zoning map.
H. Decide or make recommendations on all other matters under this Ordinance upon which the P & Z Staff is required to
act upon on a daily basis.
I. Provide such technical assistance as may be required by the public at large, the P & Z Commission or the City Council in
the exercise of their respective duties.
J. Provide public information services relative to matters arising out of this Ordinance.
Section 3. P & Z Commission The P & Z Commission, being duly appointed, shall:
A. Receive, hear, and make final determinations on applications for all lot splits and planned unit developments.
B. Receive, hear, and make recommendations to City Council on all major, minor and condominium subdivision
preliminary plats, final plats, annexations, and amendments to this Ordinance which come before them in the manner
prescribed by the procedures established herein and report determinations and/or make recommendations to City Council.
C. Receive and hear all written requests for appeals by any person(s) aggrieved with the P & Z Staff’s decision concerning
and related to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
D. Instruct the City Planner, from time to time, to make and initiate studies, draft reports, create strategic and/or master
plans concerning issues arising from this ordinance and from any and all other planning and zoning practices.
21-7
Section 4. City Council The City Council, being duly elected, shall:
A. Receive recommendations from the P & Z Staff and P & Z Commission on all cases required to be heard by them,
including major, minor and condominium subdivision preliminary plats, final plats, annexations and requests for
amendments to this Ordinance, so Council can hear and make determinations upon same in the manner prescribed by the
procedures established by this and other City ordinances and City Code.
B. Receive and hear all written requests for appeals by any person(s) aggrieved with the P & Z Commission’s decision
concerning and related to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
C. Instruct the City Planner, from time to time, to make and initiate studies, draft reports, create strategic and/or master
plans concerning issues arising from this ordinance and from any and all other planning and zoning practices.
Section 5. Development Review Committee (DRC) The DRC shall be comprised of the Public Works Director,
Building Inspector, Police Chief, Fire Chief, City Engineer, City Planner and any outside agency with jurisdiction. The
committee is responsible for providing information, documenting existing conditions, initiating recommendations,
completing comprehensive analysis using review criteria, and critically examining submitted applications and generating a
written report to the Planning Department. The City Planner shall call the DRC to meetings as required by cases.
Section 6. Procedures - Generally Applications for requested amendments to this Ordinance, annexations, and
plats shall be made and reviewed according to the following: (See City Code-Chapter 29 “Zoning” for more details)
A. Amendments to this ordinance, annexations and plats may be initiated and applied for by City Council, the Planning &
Zoning Commission and/or staff or any person owning property within the City limits.
B. Applicants shall first confer with the P & Z Staff, which shall initially review the proposed request and provide the
approved application forms and methods prescribed by this Ordinance for making application.
C. The applicant shall complete and submit the approved application forms, with help from the P & Z Staff as required,
along with the required application and processing fee by the required deadline which is the first Monday of each month.
D. The P & Z Staff shall schedule a plan review for the application with all departments and external entities affected by,
or having authority over anything regarding the application. Plan reviews shall be concluded within 10 business days after
application deadline to allow time to prepare the case for advertising prior to the P & Z Commission meeting for the month.
E. The P & Z Staff are required to advertise all required cases a minimum of fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the date
of the P & Z Commission meeting for that month.
F. The P & Z Staff are required to deliver all cases, the meeting agenda and minutes from the previous P & Z Commission
meeting to all commissioners at least 48 hours in advance of the P & Z Commission meeting date and time.
Section 7. Procedures - Public Hearings
A. All P & Z Commission meetings serve as Public Hearings, where the cases are heard publicly and where determinations
are made on those cases by the P & Z Commission. All cases heard by the P & Z Commission shall only become effective
after a public hearing has been held in which all interested parties and/or citizens have had an opportunity to be heard.
B. Since all P & Z Commission meetings constitute Public Hearings, notice of the time and place of all P & Z Commission
meetings (Public Hearings), and all cases to be heard at that hearing, shall be published by the P & Z Staff a minimum of
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper with general circulation within the City limits.
C. For Major and Minor Subdivisions and Annexations, notice of public hearing shall be mailed, to be received a
minimum of one week prior to the public hearing, via certified mail - return receipt requested, by the applicant, to the
property owners as shown by the records of the County Assessor, of lots or land within three hundred (300) feet of the area
under consideration, excluding public rights-of-way. The applicant shall place one (1) sign, as approved by the P & Z
Staff, on the subject property, clearly visible from the most traveled street or highway abutting said property, that shall be
easily readable and clearly legible by all vehicle operators on that street or highway.
21-8
Section 8. Procedures - Voting Requirements
A. Three (3) of the five (5) Commissioners present constitute a quorum and a simple majority of the Commission. A
quorum is required to hold a meeting. Approval of a proposed zoning case heard by the P & Z Commission shall require a
favorable vote from the majority of the commission members present at the meeting.
B. Written protests against a proposed zoning case from property owners within the 300 foot notification area whose sum
of property area exceeds 20 percent of the total area within the 300 foot notification area will require a four-fifths vote (four
of the five member Commission or a super-majority), to approve the proposed zoning case. If at least four commissioners
are not present at the meeting to form the super-majority, the case shall be postponed until the next regularly scheduled
meeting. If the zoning case is appealed to City Council, only a majority vote from City Council is required for approval.
C. Decisions by the P & Z Commission on zoning cases heard by them shall be final and effective after 12:00 noon on the
second business day following the Commission meeting. This allows for any appeals to be submitted after the meeting.
D. An appeal of a P & Z Commission decision to the City Council shall stay the effective date of the decision until a
decision on the appeal is made by the City Council at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
E. A zoning case denied by the P & Z Commission and/or City Council cannot again be applied for within one year from
the date of the denial, unless the new request is determined to be substantially different from the original request submitted
to the P & Z Staff. Substantially different means a change in scope, size, use, zoning, design, number of buildings, etc.
Section 9. Procedures - Appeals
A. Generally. Any person(s) aggrieved with a decision of the P & Z Commission, or by a determination made by City
staff in the enforcement of this ordinance may appeal the decision or determination in the following manner.
B. Appeal of a City Staff Decision or Determination. Any person(s) aggrieved with a determination made by City staff
in the enforcement of this Ordinance may appeal the decision to the P & Z Commission and must file a written notice of
appeal, concisely explaining why the appeal is being made with the City Clerk's Office within thirty (30) calendar days
following the City staff determination, which shall be heard by the P & Z Commission at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. In deciding on the appeal, the P & Z Commission shall consider it, and the determination as presented to the
aggrieved person(s), without modification. A decision to approve/modify/deny the appeal shall require a majority vote.
C. Appeal of a P & Z Commission Decision. City staff or any person(s) must file a written notice of appeal, concisely
explaining why appeal is being made with the City Clerk's office prior to 12:00 noon on the second business day following
the decision. Prior to 5:00 p.m. on the second business day following the date of decision, the appellant shall mail copies of
the appeal to all persons supporting the decision. The appeal shall be heard by City Council at the next regularly scheduled
meeting and shall require a majority vote to approve/modify/deny the appeal. In deciding on the appeal, City Council shall
consider it, and the P & Z Commission determination as it was presented to the P & Z Commission, without modifications.
D. Appeal of a Decision by the City Council. Any person(s) aggrieved with the decision of the City Council may present
the decision to Johnson County District Court for review, within the time and in the manner required by state law.
Section 10. Enforcement, Violation and Penalties
A. Upon complaint from any resident of the City or City Official of a violation of these regulations, the City Planner shall
investigate and refer the matter to the City Attorney if a violation is suspected.
B. Any person or agent acting on the behalf of another person who transfers, sells, barters or leases any land without first
complying with these regulations is in violation of these regulations.
C. The person, firm or corporation violating said regulations shall be fined in accordance with the General Penalty 14-13
as outlined for Municipal Court.
D. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to
prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of
a building, structure or premises, and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.
E. After the date of the adoption of these rules and regulations by the P & Z Commission and the adoption of the
Subdivision Ordinance by the City Council, no building permit shall be issued for any structure that is located upon a lot in
a subdivision that has not been subdivided, or is otherwise in violation of these regulations. This shall not apply to
subdivisions or lots of record which were platted prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance.
21-9
ARTICLE 3. MAJOR SUBDIVISIOS
Divisions of land creating six (6) or more parcels must be submitted and reviewed as a Major Subdivision. If any part of
the proposed subdivision lies partly within the Extraterritorial Zone of the City, the proposed plat must be submitted and
approved in accordance with Article 9 of this Chapter. Major Subdivisions require the Pre-Application Meeting and
Sketch Plat Administrative Approvals. These also require Preliminary Plat and Final Plat P & Z Commission and
City Council Final Approvals.
ARTICLE 4. MIOR SUBDIVISIOS
Divisions of land creating five (5) or fewer parcels must be submitted and reviewed as a Minor Subdivision. Lot splits that
do not meet the criteria identified in Article 8 shall adhere to the subdivision process required for this Article. If any part of
the proposed subdivision lies partly within the Extraterritorial Zone of the City, the proposed plat must be submitted and
approved in accordance with Article 9 of this Chapter. Minor Subdivisions require the Pre-Application Meeting and
Sketch Plat Administrative Approvals. These also require Final Plat P & Z Commission and City Council Final
Approvals.
ARTICLE 5. CODOMIIUMS & TOWHOMES – APARTMETS FOR RET/LEASE
Condominiums, townhomes, and apartments for rent/lease must be submitted and reviewed according to these regulations.
This regulation shall apply to new construction units of five (5) or more units and all conversions. If any part of the
proposed subdivision lies partly within the Extraterritorial Zone of the City, the proposed plat must be submitted and
approved in accordance with Article 9 of this Chapter. Condominium & Townhomes and Apartments for rent or lease
require the Pre-Application Meeting and Sketch Plat Administrative Approvals. These also require Final Plat P &
Z Commission and City Council Final Approvals.
Conversions: Prior to recording a declaration which could convert an existing multi-unit development to condominium
or townhome units, the owner of such property shall meet with the City Planner and Building Inspector regarding the
proposed conversion and shall demonstrate that the following provisions have been met:
1. The structure subject to the proposed condominium conversion shall meet current off street parking requirements for the
underlying zoning district found in Chapter 29. Each residential condominium unit shall be considered a separate
dwelling unit for the purposes of determining parking compliance.
2. A minimum two (2) hour fire wall shall be required between units as a condition of City approval of any conversion.
3. Owners of properties proposed for condominium conversion shall notify all residential tenants in writing of the
conversion at least ninety (90) days prior to termination of any residential tenancy. Copies of the notification shall be
filed with the City Clerk as proof of notification.
ARTICLE 6. REPLATTIG & SUMMARY PLATTIG
Replatting and/or summary platting results in an amendment of all or a portion of a recorded subdivision plat for the
purpose of correcting a drafting or other technical error or is used to dissolve or rearrange existing lot lines in an existing
subdivision which results in an equal number or fewer lots where five (5) or fewer lots are changed. Re-Plats and
Summary Plats require the Administrative Pre-Application Meeting and Final Approvals from the City Planner.
ARTICLE 7. PLAED UIT DEVELOPMETS (PUD)
Section 1. Purpose PUD districts allow for more of a mixed use and an alternative to conventional zoning by permitting
flexibility and innovation in land use, design, placement of buildings, use of open spaces, circulation facilities and off-street
parking areas to encourage a more creative approach in the utilization of land. This district permits a more efficient,
aesthetic and desirable development characterized by special features of the geography, topography, size or shape of a
particular piece of property while simultaneously providing a compatible and stable environment in harmony with largely
the same population density and area coverage of adjoining properties. PUD’s require the Pre-Application Meeting and
Sketch Plan Administrative Approvals. These also require P & Z Commission Final Plan Approval.
Section 2. Use Regulations The PUD district permits any use or combination of mixed uses allowed in the various
residential, commercial and/or industrial zoning districts established by this Ordinance in accordance with the procedures,
requirements, and standards set forth herein.
21-10
Section 3. Procedures, Requirements, and Standards Applications for a PUD district shall meet and follow the
same procedures, requirements, and standards as that of a zone change request. In addition, the application for a PUD
shall include a development plan that meets the following requirements and standards:
A. Ownership. The tract shall be under unified ownership and shall be planned as a whole. If the tract is to be developed
in phases, all phases must be indicated and a schedule shall be provided showing the chronological order of development.
B. Conformance with the City's Land Use and Thoroughfare Plans. The development shall conform to the City's Land
Use and Thoroughfare Plans for land use, density, streets, and traffic.
C. Lot Area Regulations. A residential PUD or one mixed with commercial and/or industrial uses shall be no smaller
than five acres in size. A proposed commercial and/or industrial PUD shall be no smaller than two acres in size.
D. Density. In a residential PUD with a variety of housing types, the number of dwelling units allowed per net acre shall
be as close to that outlined in the Comprehensive Master Plan for the property’s current zoning classification. The
maximum density standards may be exceeded if it can be demonstrated that a higher density will not adversely affect public
facilities, traffic flows, safety or enjoyment of adjacent properties. Open space shall be provided to offset increases in
dwelling unit density, if required.
E. Setbacks. Building setbacks for all perimeter property lines in the PUD shall blend well with adjacent property
setbacks already developed or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance for the current zoning district classification of the
property, whichever one blends best.
F. Height Restrictions. Heights of structures shall blend well with adjacent structures already developed or as set forth
elsewhere in this ordinance for the height restrictions for the property as currently zoned prior to the approval of the PUD,
whichever height restriction is lower.
H. Streets, Utilities, Services, and Public Facilities. Because of the uniqueness of each PUD, the specifications and
standards for streets, utilities, services, and public facilities may be different from those normally required in this and other
ordinances if it can be demonstrated that such variations will not adversely affect the interests of the general public or City.
In addition, the PUD proposal shall illustrate how the streets, utilities, services, public facilities and traffic circulation will
function and serve the PUD as well as adjacent properties.
I. Off-Street Parking. The PUD shall provide the necessary amount of off-street parking spaces and illustrate how such
proposed parking will adequately serve the entire development.
J. Any other information which allows staff to properly assess the request for the PUD district.
Section 4. Building Permit Requirements
A. Exact development information shall be submitted either with the application for a PUD, or separately at a later time as
a whole, or in phases, prior to receiving a Building Permit for construction of any structures within the PUD.
B. The exact development plan shall be substantially the same as that submitted for the initial PUD request. In addition to
the information submitted for the application for a PUD district, the development plan shall include specific details such as,
but not limited to: type and placement of buildings/structures; internal building setbacks; building and structure heights;
location, number, and operation of off-street parking spaces; street construction, flows and maintenance standards; traffic
circulation; pavement and ROW widths; utility and facility type, location and service; easement type, location and service;
size and location of open spaces; dwelling unit densities; and any other information which staff may require to assess and
approve the request.
Section 5. Decisions and Conditions
A. Approval. The PUD request shall be approved after a public hearing by the P & Z Commission, where additional
conditions may be imposed to insure the public interest, safety and welfare and where the development plan has been
presented to meet the general and/or specific uses, placement of buildings and structures, amount and location of open
space areas, street and utility locations and performances, off-street parking areas, and other items essential to the
development's operation, performance and ability to blend well with adjacent properties.
B. Building Permit. A building permit shall be issued only if the building or structure is in conformance with the
approved development plan and only if all site and facility improvements are in place for the building or structure.
21-11
ARTICLE 8. LOT SPLITS & LOT LIE/BOUDARY ADJUSTMETS
Divisions of land resulting in the net creation of one (1) newly created parcel that is adjacent to and serviceable by existing
City water, sewer, storm sewer and transportation infrastructure and will not result in any measurable impact to these basic
City services, are exempt from the general subdivision process and shall be submitted to the Planning Department and
reviewed as a Lot Split. At no time shall the Lot Split procedure be used intentionally to evade other applicable
Subdivision Code. Lot Line/Boundary Adjustments result when the exterior boundary lines of all properties in questions do
not increase in total size and the adjustment is required on an internal lot or boundary line(s) only. If any part of the
proposed subdivision lies partly within the Extraterritorial Zone of the City, the proposed plat must be submitted and
approved in accordance with Article 9 of this Chapter. Lot Splits require the Pre-Application Meeting and Sketch Plan
Administrative Approval. These also require the Final Plan Approval from the P & Z Commission. Lot Line
and/or Boundary Adjustments require Administrative Approval from the City Planner.
ARTICLE 9. SUBDIVISIOS WITHI THE EXTRATERRITORIAL ZOE (ETZ)
Pursuant to the provisions of W.S. 18-5-308, when any part of the subdivision lies outside of, but within the jointjurisdictional,
extraterritorial zone of the City of Buffalo, that subdivision shall be approved by the applicable requirements
for the zoning case as required by Johnson County and the City of Buffalo. The lead agency shall always be Johnson
County as the property lies within the County’s jurisdiction first, and within the City’s ETZ jurisdiction second.
ARTICLE 10. PRE-APPLICATIO MEETIG & SKETCH PLAT/PLA APPLICATIO
A. Applicant shall meet with the Planning Department to become familiar with the City’s application requirements and
review process, discuss the design of the proposed subdivision, and any other items needing special consideration. Items
discussed at the Pre-application meeting shall not constitute formal approval of any elements of the proposed subdivision.
B. Applicant shall submit a Sketch Plat/Plan to the City Planner to serve as the preliminary schematic of the proposed
subdivision with the necessary information for staff to, as thoroughly as possible, examine the potential impacts of the
subdivision. The Sketch Plat/Plan shall conform to the requirements of these regulations and include the following:
1. Sketch Plat/Plan showing the proposed number of lots, street layout, building locations and natural features.
2. Any additional supporting information, documents, maps or plans to assist in the review of the plat or plan.
3. Acreage of proposed subdivision, lots, open spaces, parking, landscaping, etc.
4. Any additional information that will assist the staff in making determinations on the proposed subdivision.
C. Upon submittal, and while talking with the applicant, the City Planner shall notify the Applicant of any additional
information that may be required to allow for a thorough review of the proposed subdivision.
D. The City Planner shall then distribute copies of the Sketch Plat/Plan and any supporting information to the Development
Review Committee (DRC) and schedule a DRC review meeting with all applicable staff and affected outside agencies.
E. During the DRC review meeting, the City Planner will note all comments and recommendations made by the DRC
review attendees applicable to the proposed subdivision and draft a letter to be mailed to the applicant within three (3)
business days after the DRC review, explaining each of the issues in regards to the proposed subdivision.
F. The DRC review report will be made available to the P & Z Commission and City Council, as required, prior to their
review at their regularly scheduled meeting(s). The report will also be posted on the City’s Website a minimum of four (4)
calendar days prior to the P & Z Commission meeting, whether requiring P & Z Commission and/or City Council approval.
G. If the Applicant wishes to appeal staff’s determinations, they may file an appeal as outlined in Article 2, Section 9-B.
H. If staff approves the Sketch Plat, the Applicant may then begin and complete a Preliminary Plat with the assistance of
the City Planner. The Preliminary Plat should be submitted to the Planning Department within six (6) months from the date
the Sketch Plat was approved. If more than six (6) months is required to complete the Preliminary Plat, the applicant
should let the City Planner know when the expected date of completion will be.
ARTICLE 11. SITE PLA/PLAT REVIEW
The Site Plan/Plat Review procedure allows the City to examine development proposals that potentially impact publicly
owned City services. The review process ensures a development submitted under this heading complies with all applicable
City Development and/or Building codes. The developer shall be required to obtain the necessary permits as required by
21-12
the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality (WDEQ) to insure the prevention of wind and water erosion prior to,
and throughout the completion of construction. The City reserves the right to declare unsatisfactorily mitigated wind and
water erosion associated with development a nuisance and take appropriate action.
A. A Site Plan/Plat shall be required for all new industrial and commercial construction, multi-family development, new
construction exceeding ten-thousand (10,000) square feet, or expansions or additions to existing commercial, multi-family
uses increasing square footage by more than one-third (1/3), or footprints of any structure that exceed fifty (50) percent of
the buildable lot area. The owner, tenant, or lessee shall file a Site Plan according to the requirements of this section.
B. Site Plans/Plats shall be submitted for approval to the Planning Department and shall be accompanied by
documentation, maps or other information as needed for the Development Review Committee (DRC) to determine if the
proposed development meets the requirements of this Article and all other pertinent and required City Codes.
C. The DRC shall review Site Plans/Plats and may require revisions to them. The purpose of this review is to relieve
demonstrable adverse impacts of the development upon the public safety, health, and welfare; to protect public investments
in roads, drainage facilities, sewage facilities, etc.; to conserve the value of buildings; and to ensure that the regulations of
this Ordinance and all other City Codes are upheld.
D. Site Plans/Plats shall contain the following information as applicable to allow a detailed review of the development:
1. Name, address and location map of the project or development.
2. Name, mailing address and phone numbers for the developer, Architects and/or Engineers for the project.
3. North indicator, scale and all other items typically found on Architectural/Engineering plans or plats.
4. Zoning classification and proposed use for the building and/or land.
5. Location of all public and private utilities, easements and public rights-of way.
6. Topography of the land proposed for development.
7. Any watercourse or bodies of water and its location to the development or any alterations to same.
8. Square footage of all buildings and location of all buildings/structures in relation to property lines.
9. Location and amount and type of landscaping proposed for the development.
10. Location and number of on-street and off-street parking spaces.
11. Location of any fences, walls, retaining walls or other obstructions on the site.
12. Location and elevations of structures in regards to the floodplain and possible considerations for the site.
13. Drainage of all stormwater off of the site and how it will be addressed.
14. Any applicable professional seals, signatures and dates as required on the plans for the development.
15. Any other items or information which will aid in the thorough review of the site plan/plat for development.
E. The DRC shall have three (3) business days to respond in writing to the applicant regarding any staff requirements,
comments or recommendations resulting from the Site Plan/Plat review. Any appeals of staff determinations shall be
submitted and heard in accordance with Article 2, Section 9-B.
F. Variance Requests shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of Article 14 of this Chapter
G. In considering applications for Site Plan Approval under this Ordinance, the following criteria shall be considered:
1. The impact and/or effect on the public health, safety, and welfare of current and future residents of the City.
2. The impact and/or effect on local municipal services, utilities and the natural environment.
3. Consistency with the current Comprehensive Plan and other developed Plans guiding City policy.
4. Compliance with this Article and the Development Guidelines and Construction Specifications and City Codes.
ARTICLE 12. PRELIMIARY PLAT APPLICATIO & APPROVAL
A. The applicant shall submit a Preliminary Plat application for the proposed Subdivision, as applicable, to the City
Planner for review and recommendation. The Preliminary Plat application shall conform to the requirements of these
regulations as well as any contingencies, conditions and/or modifications required during the Sketch Plat review.
B. The Applicant shall provide the Planning Department with five (5) 24’’x 36’’ Preliminary Plats and applications
including, if applicable, any required supplemental material and six (6) 11’’x 17’’ Preliminary Plats and applications
including required supplemental material of the proposed subdivision and electronic files of the proposed subdivision.
Survey points and electronic files must reference the City’s Survey Control Network.
21-13
C. The Preliminary Plat submittal shall contain the following, as applicable to the case up for review and approval:
1. All of the information required during the Sketch Plat review as outlined in Article 11.
2. The Preliminary Plat drawn and sealed by a Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor licensed in Wyoming.
3. All information deemed necessary by the PE, PLS and P & Z Staff to facilitate approval by a government entity.
4. All natural features, topography and any artificial features, such as irrigation ditches, septic fields, etc.
5. All necessary site data, including acreage, land use, zoning, layout of all lots, open spaces and parks.
6. Proposed layout and measurements for the waterlines, sewer lines, storm drainage and transportation system.
7. Stormwater drainage reports and any other reports applicable to the Preliminary Plat under review.
8. Existing and proposed street names for roads in and connecting to the subdivision.
9. Location of existing and proposed fire hydrants along with expected fire flow rates and pressures.
10. Existing and proposed covenants or deed restrictions.
11. Subsurface groundwater reports and geotechnical reports as applicable to the Preliminary Plat under review.
12. Traffic Impact Study if requested and required by the Development Review Committee.
D. If after working with the applicant through the application process, the City Planner determines the application is
complete; the City Planner shall distribute copies of the Preliminary Plat application to the Development Review
Committee (DRC) and schedule a meeting for it to be reviewed.
E. During the DRC review meeting, the City Planner will note all comments and recommendations made by the DRC
review attendees applicable to the Preliminary Plat and draft a letter to be mailed to the applicant within three (3) business
days after the DRC review, explaining each of the issues in regards to the proposed subdivision. Applicant shall only apply
for Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality (WDEQ) and other permits after Preliminary Plat has been approved.
F. The DRC review report will be made available to the P & Z Commission and City Council, as required, prior to their
review at their regularly scheduled meeting(s). The report will also be posted on the City’s Website a minimum of four (4)
calendar days prior to the P & Z Commission meeting, where it is to be heard, prior to receiving City Council approval.
G. The Planning Department shall publish a Public Notice for the Preliminary Plat Public Hearing in the local newspaper
of general circulation not less than fourteen (14) calendar days before the P & Z Commission meeting.
H. The P & Z Commission, as the authorized agent of the governing body, shall hold a Public Hearing on all Preliminary
Plat applications. In their review of the Preliminary Plat Application the P & Z Commission shall consider the proposed
subdivision against the following review criteria:
1. The impact and/or effect on the public health, safety, and welfare of current and future residents of the City.
2. The impact and/or effect on local municipal services, utilities and the natural environment.
3. Consistency with the current Comprehensive Plan and other developed Plans guiding City policy.
4. Compliance with this Article and the Development Guidelines and Construction Specifications and City Codes.
I. The P & Z Commission shall determine if there are any significant adverse impacts and/or effects the subdivision may
have based on their review and Staff Recommendation and shall approve, deny, approve with contingencies, or table the
Preliminary Plat Application until a specific day and time. If the P & Z Commission does not recommend approval of the
Preliminary Plat, the plat may be revised; incorporating the recommendations of the P & Z Commission and a Preliminary
Plat may be resubmitted. If approved, the Preliminary Plat shall be heard by the City Council for final approval.
J. If applicant wishes to appeal the P & Z Commission’s actions, they may appeal as outlined in Article 2-Section 9.C.
K. After City Council Preliminary Plat approval, the applicant shall submit a Final Plat application to the Planning
Department within six (6) months from date of approval. If more than six (6) months is required to complete the
Preliminary Plat, the applicant shall request an extension from the P & Z Commission, with justification for the extension.
L. The City Planner shall send the Findings of Fact Decision to the applicant including the P & Z Commission’s motion
regarding the Preliminary Plat Application as well as any contingencies, conditions and/or modifications required to be
addressed with the submittal of a Final Plat. This letter will include any additional studies or documentation that may have
been required by the P & Z Commission for the Final Plat Application.
21-14
ARTICLE 13. FIAL PLAT APPLICATIO & APPROVAL
A. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department for review and recommendation a Final Plat application of the
proposed Subdivision. The Final Plat application shall conform to the requirements of these regulations and will include
any contingencies, conditions and/or modifications required during Preliminary Plat review.
B. At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall provide the Planning Department with five (5) 24’’x 36’’ Final Plats and
applications including required supplemental material and six (6) 11’’x 17’’ Final Plats and applications including required
supplemental material of the proposed Subdivision and electronic files of the proposed Subdivision. Survey points and
electronic files must reference the City’s Survey Control Network.
C. The Final Plat submittal shall contain the following, as applicable to the case up for review and approval:
1. All of the information required during the Preliminary Plat review as outlined in Article 12.
2. A “Notification of Coverage” letter from WDEQ authorizing a “General Permit to Construct”.
3. A streetlight plan indicating spacing, types of fixtures/poles in compliance with “Wyoming Night Skies Act”.
4. A draft Subdivisions Improvements Agreement and Subdivision Surety for review.
5. Any other conveyances, certificates, affidavits, endorsements or deductions as may be required.
D. If the City Planner determines the application complete the City Planner shall also determine if significant changes have
taken place from the approval of the Preliminary Plat to the Final Plat application as submitted. If significant changes have
occurred, the City Planner will distribute copies of the Final Plat Application to the Development Review Committee
(DRC) and schedule a meeting for the Final Plat to be reviewed one additional time. If an additional DRC review is
required, paragraphs D. through F. in Article 12 shall be followed accordingly for the Final Plat approval process.
E. The Planning Department shall publish a Public Notice for the Final Plat Public Hearing in the local newspaper of
general circulation not less than fourteen (14) calendar days before the City Council meeting.
F. The City Council shall hold a Public Hearing on all Final Plat applications. In their review of the subdivision the City
Council shall consider the proposed subdivision against the following review criteria:
1. The impact and/or effect on the public health, safety, and welfare of current and future residents of the City.
2. The impact and/or effect on local municipal services, utilities and the natural environment.
3. Consistency with the current Comprehensive Plan and other developed Plans guiding City policy.
4. Compliance with this Article and the Development Guidelines and Construction Specifications and City Codes.
G. The City Council shall determine if there are any significant adverse impacts and/or effects that the subdivision may
have, based on their review and the Staff and P & Z Commission recommendations, and shall approve, deny, approve with
contingencies, or table the Final Plat Application until a specific date and time, and after providing just cause in doing so.
If the City Council does not recommend approval of the Final Plat, the City Council may require revisions to be submitted
to the Development Review Committee (DRC) prior to taking action on the resubmitted Final Plat. The Final Plat may be
revised; incorporating the recommendations of the staff and be resubmitted to the City Council.
H. If the Applicant wishes to appeal the City Council’s decision, they may appeal as outlined in Article 2-Section 9.D.
I. The City Planner shall send the City Council’s Findings of Fact Decision to the applicant including the City Council’s
motion regarding the Final Plat Application and related ordinance as well as any contingencies, conditions and/or
modifications required to be addressed with the submittal of a revised Final Plat. This letter will include any additional
studies or documentation that may have been required by the City Council for a revised Final Plat Application.
ARTICLE 14. VARIACES AD WAIVERS
A. The P & Z Commission may approve a variance to the zoning and/or subdivision requirements for a property, if the
reason for the requested variance is due to the property being of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or having
topographical conditions or other extraordinary conditions which prevent the property owner from being able to comply
with the subdivision and zoning requirements and, if the strict application of this ordinance would result in a peculiar,
exceptional or undue hardship, as opposed to a mere inconvenience upon the property owner.
B. Where the P & Z Commission finds that, due to special circumstances of a particular plat, the provision of certain
required improvements is not in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare or is inappropriate because of
inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such requirements.
21-15
C. The applicant for a variance shall be the property owner or agent. Application shall include the following information:
1. The legal and common description of the property to be considered for a variance
2. The properties present zoning classification.
3. A site plan drawn to scale showing the subject property and all adjacent properties.
4. The location, dimensions and square footage of all structures, existing and proposed.
5. The variance requested and existing hardships that caused the variance request.
6. Other information the P & Z Commission may need to make a decision.
D. No variance can be approved until a public hearing has been held by the P & Z Commission.
E. The P & Z Commission shall decide whether or not to approve a variance request. In its deliberations, the P & Z
Commission shall consider all oral and written statements from the applicant, the public, the City staff, and its own
members. The P & Z Commission shall also consider the effect of the proposed variance upon the public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, traffic and parking conditions, open space areas, danger of fire, and upon the values of
property in the surrounding area. The Commission shall not approve a variance unless it is satisfied that the request will
alleviate some unusual hardship, is consistent with the general intent of this Ordinance, that it conforms to the City's Land
Use Plan, and that it is in the public interest and is not solely in the interest of the applicant.
F. Limitations, Amendments, and Revisions. The P & Z Commission may approve, deny or table a variance request for
not more than one regularly scheduled Commission meeting or for a period of time specified at the public hearing. The
Commission may stipulate conditions and restrictions upon the property benefited by the variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this ordinance, to reduce or minimize the adverse effect the variance may have upon
adjacent properties, and to ensure consistency with the general intent of the ordinance.
ARTICLE 15. COSTRUCTIO STADARDS & BUILDIG PERMIT PROCESS
Section 1. Permit to Construct Prior to construction, developer shall obtain a Permit to Construct from City Council,
which includes time proposed to commence and finish construction of improvements as stipulated within the Subdivision
Improvement Agreement. The construction schedule should include how the developer plans to make up for any time lost
due to bad weather days to keep the construction schedule on track for completion. See Article 18 for more information.
All construction by the owner/contractor shall adhere to all local, state and federal guidelines and regulations.
Section 2. On-Site Representative Within the Subdivision Improvement Agreement, the developer shall designate the
name of the agent who shall be available during its progress and who shall not be replaced without a written notification to
the City. The agent will be the developer's site representative and shall have the authority to act on the developer's behalf.
Section 3. Construction Oversight & Standards The developer shall install the improvements identified in Article
16 in a timely manner and in accordance with plans, specifications, and data as approved by the City’s designated Engineer.
A. The developer is responsible for retaining an Engineer to observe the installation of improvements and certify to the
City that the work is completed in accordance with the plans and specifications. The installation of proposed public
infrastructure or any other facility or improvement as may be specified on the Final Plat, Site Plan, Subdivision
Improvements Agreement (SIA), or in a Contract and agreed to by the developer, shall be installed under the supervision
and inspection of said engineer or his associates. Construction observation reports must be kept and copies furnished to the
City’s Director of Public Works in addition to other construction oversight measures identified within the SIA.
B. Water and sewer design shall meet all standards and regulations of the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality
(WDEQ), the City Public Works Director and engineer. Developer shall demonstrate submittal to WDEQ for Notification
of Coverage has been made prior to obtaining a Permit to Construct from City Council. Plans for street improvements shall
comply with the City of Buffalo Construction Standards and Specifications and show all typical cross sections, dimensions
and specifications of roads, sub-grade, base, curb, gutter and sidewalk and other proposed construction. Plans shall
incorporate any improvements required by the City as a result of the Traffic Accessibility Study, if applicable.
C. After construction is complete, the developer’s Engineer shall provide the City with three sets of signed record “As-
Built” drawings which show all features of improvements and utility conflicts and electronic media for GIS data. All sheets
shall be stamped or visibly marked “record or “As-Built” drawings” and be certified by the developer’s Engineer.
Section 4. Warranty of Improvements Upon completion of all public improvements, the developer shall request in a
written statement to the City Council, the commencement of a twelve (12) month warranty period for said improvements.
21-16
A. The developer shall warrant all improvements with a bond or letter-of-credit equal to ten (10) percent of the value of the
improvements for a period of one year following the date of acceptance by the City’s Director of Public Works. Any
failure, defect or deficiency during the warranty period shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works
at the developer’s sole expense. Failure to do so may result in calling of the bond or letter of credit by the City, which shall
have the sole right to remove any funding held for such purpose upon request.
B. All publicly owned infrastructure related to the subdivision shall, upon final approval and acceptance by the City,
become the property and responsibility of the City.
Section 5. Final Acceptance of Infrastructure Upon completion of the public improvements, the developer shall
file with the Public Works Director a written statement dedicating said improvements to the City of Buffalo, together with a
statement stipulating the following: 1. That the developer knows of no defects from any cause in the improvements; and, 2.
That the improvements are free and clear of any encumbrance or lien and all costs of installation have been paid.
A. The City’s Public Works Director shall, after making final inspection, produce a written statement either accepting the
improvements in compliance with appropriate specifications and requirements or, list the defects and deficiencies in the
improvements which shall be repaired and/or replaced by the developer at his/her expense, unless some defects or
deficiencies were created or caused by the City.
B. If the contracted improvements are accepted as complete and free from defect, and all other items listed in any
agreements between the parties have been addressed to the City’s satisfaction, then the City shall accept the dedication of
those improvements and no further action is required by either party.
Section 6. Inspections and Test requirements Inspections during construction and final testing of all public
improvements shall adhere to the requirements and schedule set forth in the development’s SIA. The City’s Public Works
Director and City Engineer shall have the authority to require additional inspections and/or testing of improvements when
they identify a risk to the public health, safety, or welfare.
Section 7. Compliance with Drainage Plans Subdivision drainage patterns, shall comply as specified on the
Preliminary and/or Final Plat. Upon completion of final subdivision grading and prior to building permits being issued, a
certified topographic survey verifying final grades with proposed grades shall be submitted. Spot elevations shall be given
for all inverts, low points and flowing entry and exit points.
Section 6. Building Permit Issuance
A. Building permits may only be issued by the City Building Inspector after all monumentation and staking has been
completed, sewer and water improvements installed, subdivision grading is completed, and the warranty period for public
infrastructure has commenced. The developer’s Engineer shall provide curb elevations for all lots prior to issuance of any
foundation permit. Plot plans for Building Permits must show, and be consistent with, the drainage pattern approved for the
subdivision. Individual lot drainage patterns included on the Preliminary and/or Final Plat shall also be included on the
Final Plat Construction Plans. Certificate of Occupancy (C of O) Permits for buildings shall not be issued until the final
grading has been conducted and approved by the City Building Inspector.
B. No C of O for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the improvements and
dedication of same to the City of Buffalo as required in the Final Plat approval except that, in the event of winter freeze
occurring prior to the placement of the final pavement on the adjacent street surface, a certificate of occupancy may be
issued provided the City’s Director of Public Works has certified the following improvements, serving the subject property,
have been completed and accepted: Sewage collection system; Water distribution system; Storm drainage facilities; Curbs,
gutters and sidewalks; Fire hydrants; Final street and lot grading; Base course; Asphaltic prime coat.
C. The extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant, the police and fire
equipment, prior to the issuance of an certificate of occupancy permit.
D. Approval of a temporary street surface shall not relieve the subdivider of the responsibility to complete improvements
within the time specified in the Subdivision Improvement Agreement.
ARTICLE 16. GEERAL DESIG STADARDS
The following are the minimum design standards. Improvements shall be installed in accordance with adopted engineering
standards and specifications, as detailed in the City of Buffalo Construction Standards and Specifications document.
21-17
Section 1. General Design Guideline and Improvements In addition to the general requirements of this ordinance,
all subdivision plats hereafter approved by the City of Buffalo shall conform to the following laws, rules, regulations and
standards, and approval may be withheld by the City if the subdivision is not in conformity with any of the following items:
The general policies and land use recommendations of the current Buffalo Comprehensive Plan; Approved plans for streets,
water, sewer, drainage, and parks for the City of Buffalo; The Buffalo Zoning Chapter #29; Any applicable laws,
regulations or standards adopted by any department of the State of Wyoming having jurisdiction; Rules, codes, regulation,
Planning Documents and/or standards adopted by the City of Buffalo; Other rules, regulations or standards recommended
by any City agency, board, commission or official so empowered.
Section 2. Required Improvements The developer of any land to be platted as a subdivision shall, at their own
expense, install the following improvements to their properties including extending improvements to the outermost
boundaries to allow for future connections, according to these Design Standards and the City of Buffalo Construction
Standards and Specifications.
A. Replatting: No infrastructure improvements shall be required save those required by other laws, regulations,
ordinances or resolutions. This includes, but is not limited to, the City of Buffalo Zoning, Building and Fire Codes;
B. Major and Minor subdivisions and Subdivisions for rent or lease:
1. Water distribution system including laterals located to a minimum of two (2) feet into City right-of-way/easement;
2. Adequate water volume and pressure for firefighting purposes, including fire hydrants, control valves, etc.
3. Sewage collection system including laterals located to a minimum of five (5) feet from the lot line of each lot
4. Drainage structures, storm sewers and other drainage facilities;
5. Concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks as determined during the review process under Article 11;
6. Asphalt or concrete paved streets, alleys, street name signs and street lights in conformance with the American
National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting as approved by City Planner and the appropriate power company.
C. Other improvements may be required by the City Council. Such improvements may be located within the subdivision
or offsite, so long as they are rationally related to and proportionate to the impact of the proposed subdivision.
D. The City Council may establish development fees or require money in lieu of any required improvements. The City
Council may establish monetary contributions for any infrastructure which may be necessary in whole or in part due to
increased demands posed by any proposed subdivision.
E. The developer of any major or minor subdivision shall, at their own expense, cause the installation of the following
public utilities and items to be made available to each lot and parcel within the subdivision: Electrical distribution system
including streetlights; telephone communication system; and, gas distribution system.
F. All public utilities, including service laterals, shall be installed underground and completed prior to street surfacing.
G. Monuments shall adhere to the “Rules and Regulations adopted by the Wyoming Board of Professional Engineers and
Professional Land Surveyors, Chapter 5, Section 4”, which require surveyors to set monuments with metallic identifying
markers showing the Wyoming Registration Number. All property corners shall be set within 60 days after improvements
are completed and a letter of certification by the land surveyor shall be submitted certifying that the monuments were set.
Attached to the letter shall be a list of all block corner coordinates based on the City Survey Control Network to enable
future surveyors to re-establish corners that have been removed.
Section 3. Street and Alley Development Standards Streets shall conform to the widths designated herein. All
streets and pedestrian ways shall be platted according to the minimum standards in Table 16.1. Increased widths may be
required where streets are to serve adjoining commercial or industrial property or where probable traffic conditions warrant.
21-18
16.1 TABLE STREET AD EASEMET WIDTHS
* Width determined during application process. ** Width determined by on-street parking status and design criteria
A. Public streets, Right-of-Way and alleys shall be dedicated to the City of Buffalo.
B. The arrangement of streets, in new subdivisions, shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets and
Right-of-Way with adjoining landowners (or their proper projection where adjoining land is not already platted nor being
subdivided simultaneously with the new subdivision) insofar as such may be deemed necessary by the City Council for
public requirements. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no unreasonable hardship to owners of adjoining
property if they were to plat their own adjoining lands and shall seek to provide for convenient access to it.
C. Minor streets shall intersect arterial or collector streets at an angle of not less than eighty (80) degrees.
D. The following design standards shall be applied to all street layouts:
1. Each Major Subdivision shall provide one primary and at least one secondary access route to an approved dedicated
public street. Any alternate means of satisfying the secondary access options set forth hereunder shall be approved
by the P & Z Commission after considering comments from the DRC.
2. Secondary access route shall provide access to an approved dedicated public street by one of the following methods:
a. The physical construction of additional roadway within the boundaries of the subdivision or through adjoining
property to the existing public street; or
b. Access by means of a physical connection to a transportation corridor shown in the transportation plan adopted by
the City of Buffalo.
c. Access route confirmed through the adjoining property with the consent of the adjoining landowner. Said access
shall be at a minimum defined by written easement, and plans for the construction of the connecting roadway
shall be provided by a civil engineer licensed in the State of Wyoming; or
d. If a written easement cannot be secured to satisfy alternative (c), above, then the secondary access route
requirement may be satisfied only with approval of City Council if the following criteria are satisfied:
21-19
Street
Classification
Developed
Street
Width
BOC-BOC
Right-of-
Way
Width
Minimum
Centerline
Curve
Radius
Minimum
Tangent
Between
Curves
Maximum
Grade
Estimated
ADT
Access
Spacing
Distance C-C
Major (Arterial)
Streets
* 150' 500' 100' 7%
10,000—
25,000
500'
Minor Arterial
Streets
* 100' 500' 100' 7%
5,000—
10,000
30'
Collector Streets 42' 80' 300' 100' 7%
1,000—
10,000
150'
Local Streets
Industrial Areas
42' 60' 150' 0' 8% 0—500 NA
Local Streets,
Commercial
Areas
30' or 36' or
42'**
60' 150' 0' 8% 0—500 NA
Local Streets,
High and Low
Density
Residential
Areas
30' or 36’ or
42’'**
60' 100' 0' 8% 0—250 NA
Local Streets,
One-way Traffic
24' 50' 75' 0' 8% 0—125 NA
Alleys 20' 20' 75' 0' 8% NA NA
Pedestrian Ways 5'-12' 12' NA 0' 8% NA NA
Cul-de-Sac 60' radius 60' NA NA 2% NA NA
i. Evidence that negotiations were attempted with the adjoining landowners to secure a written easement
described in alternative (c), above, but such an easement could not be secured;
ii. The proposed secondary access point connects to exterior boundary line of the new subdivision in a location
which is logical for future road construction/extension through adjoining properties as provided in (c) above;
iii. Written notice was delivered to the landowners owning property adjoining the possible future secondary
access point notifying such landowner of (i) the location of the proposed access point and (ii) that approval of
the possible secondary access connection to the adjoining landowner’s property is being sought by the City
Council and the date of the City Council meeting at which the matter will be reviewed. Such notice must be
delivered to the adjoining landowner at least thirty (30) days prior to City Council’s review.
E. Any secondary access proposal shall be approved by the DRC, subject to final approval by the City Council. The
Council shall consider staff recommendations, the adopted transportation plan, and fire code in making their determination.
F. All connecting roadways shall meet the requirements established in this section of these Subdivision Regulations. The
City Council may require any subdivision street, right-of-way or access to be designed to accommodate existing or
projected traffic flows as determined by the Traffic Accessibility Study, adopted city transportation plan, or any other
relevant investigation or study.
G. Cul-de-sacs shall be no longer than five hundred feet from the center of the turnaround to the centerline of the last
intersecting, non-cul-de-sac street. All cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum curb radius of sixty (60) feet, a minimum right-ofway
radius of sixty (60) feet and be connected to street right-of-way by a reverse curve of a seventy-five (75) foot radius.
H. Street jogs shall have a center offset of one hundred and fifty (150) feet or more when applied to local streets; in all
other cases, they shall be prohibited. Exceptions may be made where lot and block boundaries are in conflict. If a street
jogs at an intersecting street and does not continue in a straight alignment, the centerline offset of the two parts of the street
approaching the intersecting street shall be not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
I. No more than two streets shall intersect at one point.
J. Paved alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the requirements may be waived where
other definite and assured provisions are made for service access to off-street loading and unloading areas and to off-street
parking areas, consistent with and adequate for the use proposed. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited.
K. Where a residential subdivision abuts a major highway, a railroad right-of-way or a limited access freeway, a frontage
road may be required.
L. Dead-end streets are prohibited except where they may be necessary to provide future access to adjacent, undeveloped
property. In that event, temporary turnarounds may be required on the dead-end street until adjacent property is developed
and the street is extended. Temporary turnarounds shall meet the minimum radius and dimensions of a cul-de-sac.
M. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves.
. Streets platted as extensions of existing streets shall be designed with the same profile as the existing street.
O. No street shall change direction by more than ninety (90) degrees without a change in the street name and all proposed
street names shall be substantially different so as not to be confused in sound or spelling with present names except that
streets that join or are in alignment with streets or an abutting or neighboring subdivision shall bear the same name.
P. The street plan of a proposed subdivision shall bear a logical relationship to the topography of the property, and all
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many of the building sites as possible at or above the grade of the streets. Grades
of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography, within the allowable street grades in Table 16.1.
Q. Private streets are prohibited, unless part of an approved planned unit development, mobile home park, or condo/
townhome/apartment development, in which case the streets shall conform to the approved design criteria of the City.
R. Barricades and reflectors shall be provided along the ends of all dead-ends or streets without turn-arounds, and at the
ends of culverts and other dangerous areas as determined by the City’s Police Chief.
21-20
S. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. The geometrics of all streets shall be designed to promote
vehicular safety by optimizing visibility around curves and on hills, while designing the slope and camber of roads in the
best possible way to promote safe vehicular travel.
T. Thirty (30) foot Sight Triangle: To provide clear visibility at intersections, that portion of any corner lot shall be
cleared of all growth (dirt, rocks or plant life), structures, signs and/or any other obstructions taller than three (3) feet above
the top of the street, for a distance of at least thirty (30) feet from the intersection point of the right-of-way lines at the
intersection. If directed, the ground, natural rocks and/or vegetation shall be excavated and removed to achieve visibility.
(Exception: isolated trees trimmed clean from the ground, up to a point six feet above finished grade, are acceptable.)
Section 5. Layout of Lots, Blocks and Tracts The lot and block arrangement shall be such that there will be no
foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with the Zoning Chapter and health regulations or in providing a reasonable grade for safe, all weather
driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street.
A. Subdivisions shall comprise an integrated and logical arrangement of streets, tracts, blocks and lots. All blocks and all
lots within each block shall be consecutively numbered. Numbering of blocks and lots in later phases of a phased
subdivision shall continue the sequence established in earlier phases.
B. Lot dimensions and configuration shall comply with the following standards:
1. The depth-to-front ratio of lots shall not exceed 2.5 to 1. An average depth shall be determined for irregularly-shaped
lots. In R-1 zones, the minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be sixty feet.
2. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the type of development contemplated and
shall be such that in constructing a building in compliance with the Zoning Chapter and Building Ordinance, there
will be no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other natural conditions. Lots shall not be of a depth
as to encourage the later creation of a second building lot at the front or rear.
3. Corner lots and lots with streets on three sides for residential use shall have extra width to allow for a proper setback
from all streets.
4. Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where these lots back upon an arterial street. Where this is the case,
access to those lots from the arterial street shall be prohibited.
5. Every platted lot shall have access to a publicly dedicated street or road. Such access shall consist of frontage of at
least sixty (60) feet, except in cul-de-sacs or other non-standard lots, subject to P & Z Commission approvals.
6. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
7. Whenever a plat is resubdivided, the newly-created lots shall be numbered to avoid duplication of any original lot
numbers. A letter may be used in conjunction with a number, for example, Lot “2A.” for clarification purposes.
C. Blocks shall meet the following standards:
1. The maximum length of blocks, generally, shall be one thousand three hundred feet and the minimum length of
blocks shall be three hundred feet unless a shorter block length is desirable to match existing streets.
2. The width of blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots or as otherwise approved by the P & Z Commission
in the preliminary plat because of design, terrain or other unusual conditions.
3. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purposes, with adequate space
set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities.
4. Blocks exceeding six hundred (600) feet in length may be required to provide an easement for underground utilities
and pedestrian traffic, if so determined by the P & Z Commission.
D. Reverse-lotting is encouraged where lots would normally front a high traffic roadway.
E. Temporary staking is allowed through the construction period of a subdivision. Final survey monumentation shall be
required prior to the commencement of the infrastructure warranty period.
Section 6. Dedication of Easements
A. Easements centered on rear and other lot lines as required shall be provided for utilities where and of the size necessary.
B. Easements shall be provided along each side of the center line of any water course or drainage channel whether or not
shown in the Comprehensive Plan, to a sufficient width to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for
water run-off and installation and maintenance of storm sewer.
C. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right-of-way as required by the Engineer.
21-21
D. Where a subdivision proposes a common mail facility or similar public collection point within the boundaries, there
shall be provided appropriate documentation of such an easement.
E. Easements shall be provided for the purpose of maintaining proposed detention ponds of similar runoff control
structures such as culvert headwalls, riprap slopes, etc..
F. Slope easements shall be provided for the purpose of maintaining roadway slopes outside of the right-of-way.
G. Easements shall be dedicated for the required use on the Final Plat.
Section 7. Mandatory Connection to Sewer and Water
A. All commercial, industrial and residential development property located outside of the City Limits but located within
three hundred (300) feet of existing mains shall be required to make provision for connection to the water and sewer system
of the City of Buffalo in accordance with the Construction Specification Standards.
B. If sewer and water facilities are not available adjacent to the proposed development, it shall be the responsibility of the
developer to extend such lines in a manner satisfactory to the Public Works Director, City Planner and the City’s designated
Engineer. Where such lines may be determined by the P & Z Commission to serve only the proposed subdivision, it shall
be the responsibility of the developer to pay the entire expense of extension of the sewer and water infrastructure to the
proposed development. Where such lines may benefit existing or other potential development, the City Council may make
such a determination, and participate in financing or make other legal agreements as needed to assist in such construction.
C. Where impractical due to terrain, this requirement may be temporarily waived only by the approval of the City Council.
Any alternative method of providing water and sewer service shall be designed by the City Engineer and approved by the
City Director of Public Works.
Section 8. Reservation for School Sites
A. Where it is determined that land contained within a subdivision application is required for school sites, the School
District, following the Sketch Plat submittal, shall inform the City Planner of the school site requirements. The School
District, City Planner, and Applicant shall coordinate to determine the location of the proposed school site which shall be
platted on the Preliminary Plat prior to its consideration by the P & Z Commission.
B. The School District shall have not more than two (2) months to negotiate with the developer, unless the P & Z
Commission grants an extension to this period.
ARTICLE 17. OPE SPACE, PARKS, PATHS, TRAILS AD SIDEWALKS
Parks, open space, recreational and other municipal service facilities (MSF) have been determined by the citizens of the
City of Buffalo to be desirable and essential features. It has further been determined that land development inherently
contributes to increases the City’s population and the number of persons visiting the City, thus placing greater demands and
pressures on the existing MSF. In order to protect and maintain standards regarding the availability, quality and
accessibility of these MSF, the City Council finds it necessary and appropriate to enact land development dedication
requirements as provided for in this Article to ensure that new development pays a fair and equitable share of the cost of
providing for new MSF and shares in the maintenance costs.
A. Where a new MSF is justified by the P & Z Commission or City Council, the P & Z Commission shall require that such
area or areas be shown on Plats in accordance with the requirements specified in this Chapter. Such area or areas shall be
dedicated to the City by the Applicant if the City Council approves such dedication.
B. The P & Z Commission shall require that plats show sites of a character, extent and location suitable for the
development of a MSF. The P & Z Commission may require that the applicant satisfactorily grade any such recreation
areas shown on the Plat. These MSF shall be dedicated as shown in the following example:
Example: <umber of Subdivided Lots, divided by the total Subdivision Acreage, multiplied by two (2) equals the
percentage (%) of Dedication, i.e. 80 lots divided by 20 acres multiplied by two(2) equals eight percent (8%) to be
dedicated. Eight percent (8%) of Acreage Subdivided (20 acres) equals 1.6 Acres (amount to be dedicated to MSF).
D. If the P & Z Commission or City Council determines that a subdivision is too small or in a location that precludes the
need an MSF, a recommendation to waive this requirement shall be requested of the City Council by the developer.
E. Cash contributions made in lieu of dedication shall be made to a fund to be known as the Park Land Dedication Fund,
21-22
which shall be used only for acquisition and initial development of MSF. Monies from the Fund shall be used only for the
specific project for which they are allocated, which allocation shall be made by resolution of the City Council following a
public hearing for which notice shall be given.
F. The fair market value (FMV) shall be the value of the land based on the date of the submission of the Preliminary Plat
of the subdivision. The FMV shall be established by an appraisal made by two appraisers, one selected and paid by the
subdivider and one selected and paid by the City. If the values are not satisfactory to both parties, a third appraiser shall be
selected by the two appraisers and the price will be determined by the average of the three appraisals. The appraisal fee for
the third appraisal will be paid by the party requesting the third appraisal. The City may elect to accept the value
determined solely by the developer’s appraiser, in which case the City Council shall approve the choice of appraiser. Such
election shall be made before any appraisal(s) and shall be binding.
G. The applicant may be further required to dedicate an easement to be used as a pedestrian pathway. Such parcels to be
dedicated shall be located in a position within the development in a manner consistent with the Buffalo Master Trails Plan.
Pathways up to 12 feet in width may be required within the subdivision. The easement shall be of a size large enough to
allow for such a pathway. The Buffalo Master Trails Plan is the control document for the Clear Creek Trail System. The
applicant may be required to install upon the pathway such improvements as determined by the City Council as
recommended by the Buffalo Trails Board. All such improvements shall be erected and constructed in accordance with
standards established in the Buffalo Master Trails Plan.
H. Sidewalks are a required improvement for all publicly owned streets. However, some circumstances may warrant
flexibility if the development has the ability to demonstrate equally accessible non-motorized transportation alternatives
that provide similar infrastructure and overall access to the community, and which do not violate the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) Standards.
I. Minimum publicly dedicated MSF shall be 20,000 square feet with no dimension less than 100 feet and the average
dimension not less than 140 feet. Area calculated shall begin at a point 20 feet from any building wall on adjoining
property. Park areas or open spaces shall be accessible from a public street meeting current improvement standards as
contained herein. Utilities in the above street or streets will be installed by the subdivider in the same manner as other
streets in the subdivision and as approved by the City.
J. Areas occupied by drainage channels, draws, cliffs, easements and land areas with grades in excess of 10% shall not be
suitable for MSF dedication. Such areas may be accepted in combination with suitable adjacent land provided the adjacent
land area has a grade of 10% or less and a width of at least 100 feet, and in all other respects complies with (B) above. In no
case shall the unsuitable portion of the dedicated MSF lands comprise more than 50% of the required park area.
K. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course or stream, such area shall be designated as open-space.
L. Where determined that a greater amount of land is required for MSF, or where it is determined that land is required for
any other type of public facilities, the developer at the time of filing the Final Plat with the P & Z Commission must offer to
sell such additional lands to the City at fair market value as described in paragraph F above.
M. The filed Final Plat shall clearly show the amount and location of any MSF lands dedicated, and/or any cash fees paid.
ARTICLE 18. SUBDIVISIO IMPROVEMET SURETY (SIS)
Section 1. Surety Compliance
A. For subdivision regulated under this Chapter, the Developer shall provide financial security to assure the City that the
required public improvements and any related subdivision requirements outlined in a Subdivision Improvement Agreement
(SIA) are constructed in compliance with City’s specifications. The financial security for the construction of said
improvements shall be in the amount of 110% of the total cost of construction thereof. The financial security shall be
secured and delivered to the City prior to the issuance of a Permit to Construct by City Council.
B. The Developer may submit to the City an agreement between Developer and Contractor bonded by a Wyoming-licensed
company to complete the “Permit to Construct” work. No building permits shall be issued in the development until the
improvements have been completed, a letter of completion has been submitted, infrastructure has been certified as complete
by the City’s Engineer and the warranty period has begun.
Should Developer elect to construct a project without a bonded agreement or other form of surety for construction
improvements, the Developer shall provide a written affidavit to the City stating no sales or leases of real property within
21-23
the subdivision will be closed until after a letter of completion is issued by the City and the warranty period has begun.
C. No building permits will be issued in the development until a letter of completion is issued by the City and the warranty
period has begun. If the Developer desire to sell lots and have building permits issued within the project prior to letter of
completion or the warranty period starting, the Developer shall be required to fully comply with this section to guarantee
financial surety for all public improvements and other subdivision requirements as outlined in the SIA.
Section 2. Financial Security Forms Financial security shall be provided in one of the following forms: An escrow
agreement providing for the Developer’s line of credit or other assets in an amount/form approved by City; Cash;
Performance bonds verified as acceptable by the City Clerk; Unconditional letter of credit subject to the laws and courts of
Wyoming in a form approved by City.
Section 3. Construction Costs of Improvements The Developer’s engineer shall provide an engineers opinion of
probable construction costs to the City for the purposes of determining the amount of the financial security for the
construction phase and warranty period of the improvements. All cost estimates shall be supported by documents of the
proposed improvements. Construction costs shall include curb, gutter, street pavement, sidewalks, drainage facilities such
as storm sewers, water and sewer lines, and any other requirements outlined in the SIA.
Section 4. Release of Financial Guarantee As improvements are inspected and approved by the City Engineer or
Public Works Director, the developer may apply for a proportionate release of any collateral deposited with City.
ARTICLE 19. IMPACT FEES (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 20. STORMWATER MAAGEMET STADARDS
All developments with excess of 10,000 square feet of impervious surfaces of improvements shall be required to connect to
the City’s storm sewer system. If this is not feasible as determined by the Development Review Committee (DRC), the
development shall adhere to the Design Guidelines of this chapter, City Construction Standards and Specifications, and the
following Stormwater Management Standards to adequately address storm water flows arriving on, and generating from the
developing property. Further, the City is in the process of creating a Storm Water Master Plan and Storm Water Design
Criteria manual for the City of Buffalo. Once these documents are developed and approved by City Council, they will
become the guidance and design documents for which all storm water management within the City of Buffalo shall adhere
to. Until such time that these documents are adopted, the following stormwater standards shall apply.
Standards All stormwater management facilities and improvements required by this Article shall comply with the
following standards:
A. Connection to existing systems. Where connection with an existing storm sewer system is feasible that system shall
be utilized so as to provide complete drainage of the subdivision.
B. Limitation of the amount of stormwater runoff. No development or subdivision shall cause adjacent landowners,
water courses, channels, or conduits to receive stormwater runoff from the proposed development site at a higher peak flow
rate or at higher velocities than would have resulted from the same storm event occurring over the site of the proposed
subdivision and/or development with the land in its previous condition. The range of storms considered shall be the 2-year
through 100-year event.
C. Stormwater Design Criteria. All stormwater facilities shall be designed to safely convey the 100-year storm. Where
these criteria cannot be met, provide details explaining the storm event for which the facility is designed and necessary
calculations and rationale to support the design. Facilities that do not convey the 100-year storm will be reviewed on an
individual basis.
D. Limitation of the velocity of stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff shall be managed so that the velocity of the flow
does not cause scour or erosion. (Reference the most recent edition of the U. S. Soil Conservation Service Handbook,
“Water Management and Sediment Control for Urbanizing Areas.”)
E. Stormwater detention basins required. Detention/retention facilities should only be used if no other means of storm
water conveyance is possible. Detention basins or equivalent management facilities shall be provided within the
development in order to properly limit surface runoff as set forth under this Article.
F. Timing of stormwater management facility construction. Where the development of a site could result in danger to
21-24
persons, land, or wildlife due to runoff during construction, the facilities for stormwater runoff control shall be constructed
prior to any earth moving or drainage construction on the site.
G. Compliance required for approvals. No application for subdivision or resubdivision shall be approved until such
time as the applicant shall have submitted detailed plans and specifications for the construction of stormwater management
facilities on the land to be developed.
H. Location within subdivision. All stormwater management facilities shall be constructed within the confines of the
proposed development, except in the case of approved regional stormwater detention facilities.
I. Stormwater management plan required. All applicants for development shall submit to the City Planner a stormwater
management plan prepared by an engineer or landscape architect licensed in the State of Wyoming and prepared to the level
of detail considered necessary by review from a City selected Engineer. Applicants whose development proposals do not
affect the grade or ground cover of the land, such as second story additions or development on existing impervious
surfaces, are exempt from this requirement. Applicants with development proposals that do affect the grade or ground
cover of the land, but appear not to significantly affect the rate of stormwater runoff to adjacent properties, may submit a
letter, in lieu of a stormwater management plan, demonstrating that the standards of this Article are met. The City Planner
may require the letter to be certified by an engineer or landscape architect licensed in the State of Wyoming if there is
reason to believe that calculations are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the regulations.
J. Storage capacity. All stormwater storage facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacity to maintain a postdevelopment
runoff rate from a development site that is equal to or lower than the pre-development runoff rate. The
stormwater storage facilities shall be designed for the range of storm events from the 2-year through 100-year storm events.
21. Method of calculation. The “Rational Method” shall be used to calculate peak flow rates. The “Modified-
Rational Method” shall be used to calculate volumetric requirements for drainage areas of ten (10) acres or less.
The “Soil Conservation Service” method shall be used to calculate volumetric requirements when the drainage
area is more than ten (10) acres. Rainfall depths and intensities for durations from 5 minutes up to 24 hours and
recurrence intervals from 2-year up to 100-year are provided in Tables 1 and 2. Calculations for sites known to
have greater precipitation shall increase these figures by an appropriate amount.
Table 1
Precipitation Depth – Duration
Depth In Inches
Recurrence
Interval
5-min 10-min 15-min 30-min 1-hr 2-hr 3-hr 6-hr 24-hr
2-year 0.18 0.23 0.27 0.39 0.61 0.70 0.78 0.96 1.44
5-year 0.24 0.31 0.37 0.53 0.83 0.94 1.05 1.26 1.92
10-year 0.29 0.37 0.44 0.64 1.00 1.12 1.23 1.50 2.30
25-year 0.36 0.46 0.55 0.79 1.24 1.38 1.50 1.80 2.88
50-year 0.42 0.54 0.64 0.92 1.45 1.60 1.74 2.04 3.12
100-year 0.47 0.61 0.72 1.04 1.64 1.80 1.95 2.28 3.60
Table 2
Precipitation Intensity – Duration
Intensity In Inches Per Hour
Recurrence
Interval
5-min 10-min 15-min 30-min 1-hr 2-hr 3-hr 6-hr 24-hr
2-year 2.10 1.36 1.07 0.77 0.61 0.35 0.26 0.16 0.06
5-year 2.86 1.84 1.46 1.05 0.83 0.47 0.35 0.21 0.08
10-year 3.45 2.22 1.75 1.27 1.00 0.56 0.41 0.25 0.10
25-year 4.28 2.76 2.18 1.57 1.24 0.69 0.50 0.30 0.12
50-year 5.00 3.22 2.54 1.84 1.45 0.80 0.58 0.34 0.13
100-year 5.66 3.64 2.88 2.06 1.64 0.90 0.65 0.38 0.15
21-25
L. Outlet control structures. Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible and shall operate
automatically. They shall be designed to limit discharges into existing or planned downstream channels or conduits so as
not to exceed the runoff of the site in its pre-development condition.
M. Spillway. Emergency overflow facilities are to be provided unless inflow is controlled to divert flows when the basin
is at full capacity.
1. Dry bottom basin. For basins designed without permanent pools:
Interior drainage. Provisions must be made to facilitate interior drainage to include providing natural grades to
outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage facilities, or the installation of
subsurface drains.
Multi-purpose features. Dry bottom basins may be designed to serve secondary purposes for recreation, open
space, or other types of use which will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding.
2. Wet basins. Wet basins shall not be considered for river, stream, or lake bank buffer protection. Wet basins require
a Reservoir Permit from the State Engineer’s Office. For basins designed with permanent pools:
Depth for fish. If fish are anticipated at least one-quarter (0.25) of the area of the permanent pool must have a
minimum depth of ten (10) feet.
. Facilities for emptying. For emergency purposes, cleaning, or shoreline maintenance facilities shall be provided, or
plans prepared, for the use of auxiliary equipment to permit emptying and drainage.
O. Safety considerations. Public access to wet basins shall be restricted by appropriately designed and constructed
perimeter fences or other approved safety provisions. If access is not restricted, the wet basin shall be constructed within
approach slopes of at least six to one (6:1) horizontal to vertical, but not more than four to one (4:1) sloping toward the
basin. A ledge shall be non-erosive material with a slope of ten to one (10:1) or flatter. The ledge shall be four (4) to six
(6) feet wide and slope gently toward the shore to prevent people or objects from sliding into deep water. There shall be a
freeboard of no less than twelve (12) inches above the high-water elevation on all retention basins. Alternate designs for
side slopes may be considered under special circumstances where good engineering practice is demonstrated. Figure 2,
Slope Requirement for Wet Stormwater Basins, presents this concept.
P. Cleaning of basins. Basins shall be designed to allow periodic cleaning and removal of sediments. Sediment traps
shall be designed to permit periodic cleaning and maintenance.
Q. Parking lot storage. Paved parking lots may be designed to provide temporary detention storage of stormwater on a
portion of their surfaces. Depths of storage shall not exceed six (6) inches.
R. Pollution abatement. Where a development will cause the introduction of new pollutants into the runoff water,
adequate provision shall be made for the storage, treatment, and removal of such pollutants.
S. Inspection of facilities. The developer’s engineer or landscape architect shall be required to inspect all drainage
facilities under construction and certify in writing, their compliance with approved plans. In addition, a registered engineer,
or their designated representative, employed by the City staff shall inspect all drainage facilities while under construction
and after completion of construction to ensure that stormwater control facilities are being properly maintained and provided
that such inspections shall be conducted during normal weekday working hours. In addition, the City may install
hydrological measuring devices in drainage facilities within any development. When facilities are not constructed
according to approved plans, the City has the explicit authority to compel compliance and require correction of any
situation which is not according to the approved plan. (R.O. 1243 § 1, 6/05).
ARTICLE 21. SUBDIVISIO IMPROVEMET AGREEMET (SIA)
Section 1. Purpose & Administration A Subdivision Improvements Agreement (SIA) is a written contract between
the City and the Applicant providing for conditions of approval for public and private improvements to be constructed as
part of the development. SIAs shall be signed by the Applicant prior to City Council approval of any subdivision.
A. It shall at a minimum, set forth construction specifications for required public improvements, provide dates for
completion of the improvements, and identify the terms and conditions for the acceptance of the improvements by the City
including the nature of the submittal of pertinent construction data of record. It shall also provide financial assurances as
necessary per this Chapter, to insure the proper and timely installation of improvements.
21-26
B. The improvements completion deadline for subdivisions that has listed lots for sale/lease shall be completed by the
subdivider within eighteen (18) months, unless an extension is granted by the City Council.
C. Subdivision plats approved in ordinance form by the City Council, registered with the Johnson County Courthouse, but
not listing lots for sale/rent shall not have an improvement completion deadline affixed to the SAI, but shall be required
within a SAI to notify the City at the time when lots are proposed for sale/lease. Upon notification, the SAI shall be
amended to include the required timeline for improvement construction and applicable financial surety for improvements.
D. Should the Applicant fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, without requesting an extension, the
City may, by resolution of the City Council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed
and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs at the time
the City Council passes said resolution.
E. The City’s standard Subdivision Improvements Agreement (SIA) may be amended by the City Council prior to the
application for a Preliminary Plat for a subdivision and shall address any individual aspects of a development that have
been allowed during the Sketch Plat review process. Amendments to the Subdivision Improvements Agreement (SIA) after
the document has been executed by both parties shall be dependent upon the approval of both parties to the agreement.
F. Subdivision Improvement Agreement (SIA) Template. Following is the template for the standard SIA:
1: Obligation of Owner It is the owners responsibility to contact adjacent property owners as to the development.
1.1 Surveying
1.2 Construction Sequence
1.3 Certification of Construction; Construction Oversight for Publicly Owned Infrastructure Repair Obligations;
Developer’s Warranty
1.4 Underground Utilities, Easements, and Streetlights
1.5 Storm-water Management
1.6 Retaining Walls
1.7 Water and Sewer
1.8 Street and Traffic Signs and Controls
1.9 Surety Required
1.10 Miscellaneous Requirements or Deviations from Subdivision Code Requirements Regarding Sale of Lots Prior
to Acceptance of Development Etc.
1.11 Open Space Requirements
2: Obligation of City It is the City’s responsibility to coordinate public relations for projects involving and SIA.
2.1 Construction Oversight for Publicly Owned Infrastructure
2.2 Submittal Required for Final Acceptance of Subdivision and City Adoption of Infrastructure
3: Specific Enforcement
4: Third-Party Beneficiaries
5: Amendment Process
6: otarized Signatures
ARTICLE 22. SIGIG AD RECORDATIO OF THE FIAL PLAT
A. The Mayor shall endorse approval of the plat after the assurances required by this ordinance, the City Council’s
approval, and any conditions appropriately established and the required documentation has been signed and approved.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or designated representative to file the plat with the County Clerk’s Office
within ten (10) days of the date of signature. Simultaneously with the filing of the plat, the applicant or designated
representative shall record such other legal documents as may be required.
C. Upon filing of the plat, the Developer shall furnish a copy of all filed documents to the City Planning Department for
City records keeping purposes. (R.O. 1350 10/2011)
21-27

CHAPTER 22
TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
§ 22-1. License required.
§ 22-2. Application for license; contents; fees.
§ 22-3. Approval or denial of license; renewal.
§ 22-4. Penalty.
SEC. 22-1. LICENSE REQUIRED. 1
No public taxicab stand, or any business engaged in the transportation of persons for hire in any motor vehicle or
otherwise, shall be allowed in the City of Buffalo, without the person to be engaged in any such business first
obtaining a license therefore from the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1955, § 53-1)
1. For state law authorizing the town to regulate, license and tax business, see
W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xii).
SEC. 22-2. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, CONTENTS, FEE.
The application for a license to engage in a public taxicab stand business, or the business of transporting persons
for hire by motor vehicle or otherwise, shall be made to the Council, showing the name of the person desiring to
engage in such business, together with his place of residence, his age, the number and type of vehicles to be used in
such occupation, location of his stand or head quarters in the City of Buffalo, and such other information as the
Council may reasonably require; provided that together with the application, the applicant shall tender to the City of
Buffalo the license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) annually for each vehicle to be used in such business, which
sum shall be refunded in the event the license is not granted. (Ord. 834, § 1)
SEC. 22-3. APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE; RENEWAL.
In passing on any application provided by this chapter the Council shall be the sole judge as to its merits and
reserves the right to reject the same provided; that no license shall be issued to any person under the age of 19
years, nor for a period longer than one year from the date of its acceptance. However, nothing begin contained in this
chapter shall prevent the Council from renewing any license from year to year upon the proper license fee therefore
or from issuing a license for less than one year and pro-rating the fee therefrom. (Ord. 834, § 2)
SEC. 22-4. PENALTY.
No one shall engage in the Public Taxi Cab stand business or the business of transporting persons for hire by
motor vehicle or otherwise within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo without having first obtained a license
permitting such activity from the City of Buffalo. Any persons, firm, or association violating this ordinance shall be
fined a sum of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord.
834, § 3)
22-1
CHAPTER 23
TRADING STAMPS OR SIMILAR DEVICES. 1
1. For similar state law, see W.S. 1977, § 6-9-201.
§ 23-1. Prohibited generally.
§ 23-2. Chapter inapplicable to certain coupons and similar devices.
§ 23-3. Penalties.
SEC. 23-1. PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
Section 23-1 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 977, § 1, 1/82)
SEC. 23-2. CHAPTER INAPPLICABLE TO CERTAIN COUPONS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
Section 23-2 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 977, § 1, 1/82)
SEC. 23-3. PENALTIES.
Section 23-3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1980, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 977, § 1, 1/82)
23-1
CHAPTER 24
TRAILERS AND TRAILER COURTS.
Article I. In General
§ 24-1. Definitions.
§ 24-2. Buffalo Municipal Tourist Park exempted from provisions of chapter.
§ 24-3. Nonconforming uses, etc.
§ 24-4. Nuisances.
§ 24-5. Use of trailer houses as dwellings on any lot.
Article II. Trailer Courts.
§ 24-6. Licensing regulations generally; fee.
§ 24-7. Plan to accompany application for license.
§ 24-8. Inspections; notice to correct unlawful conditions; suspension of license.
§ 24-9. Refusal to issue license; revocation; appeal.
§ 24-10. Registration of occupants.
§ 24-11. Drainage, lighting, etc.
§ 24-12. Trailer house spaces.
§ 24-13. Parking of motor vehicles prohibited in certain areas of streets and alleys.
§ 24-14. Repealed by Ordinance No. 675.
§ 24-15. Water supply.
§ 24-16. Sewage disposal.
§ 24-17. Garbage and refuse disposal.
§ 24-18. Insect and rodent control.
§ 24-19. Electricity.
§ 24-20. Plumbing.
§ 24-21. Fire protection.
§ 24-22. Communicable disease.
§ 24-23. Alterations and additions to trailer houses.
§ 24-24. Pets roaming at large.
§ 24-25. Additional regulations.
Article III. Mobile Home Park Development.
§ 24-26. Purpose and scope.
§ 24-27. Definitions.
§ 24-28. Plan submission procedure.
§ 24-29. Administration.
§ 24-30. Plans and specifications.
§ 24-31. Development standards.
§ 24-32. Improvements.
§ 24-33. Supervision.
§ 24-34. Animals and pets.
§ 24-35. Variances and waivers.
§ 24-36. Amendments.
§ 24-37. Interpretation.
§ 24-38. Appeals.
§ 24-39. Penalty.
24-1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL.
SEC. 24-1. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
City: Includes the designated agent, officer or other authorized representative of the City charged with the
inspection of trailer courts, enforcement of this chapter and the collection of all regulatory license fees.
Lot: Any vacant or unimproved parcel or tract of land upon which a trailer house is located or parked other than a
trailer court.
Trailer Court: Any plot of ground used exclusively for and licensed as a designated area which has complied with
the requirements of this chapter for the rental of trailer house space to persons to park and dwell in trailer houses.
Trailer house or trailer coach: Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance
upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, constructed in such a manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, and is so used or occupied, on wheels or
some other temporary or permanent foundation.
SEC. 24-2. BUFFALO MUNICIPAL TOURIST PARK EXEMPTED FROM PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER.
Section 24-2 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 24-3. NONCONFORMING USES, ETC.
This chapter, and any amendments thereof, shall operate to impose the restrictions provided for herein on any
trailer houses or trailer courts which may be located, erected or maintained after the passage of this chapter and of
such amendments thereof, and trailer houses which have been maintained and occupied at existing locations prior to
the effective date of this chapter on May 18, 1962, and of the amendment hereof which shall become effective
September 18, 1966, shall not be affected hereby; provided, that any trailer court which shall not have complied with
the requirements of this chapter and of the amendments hereof which shall become effective September 18, 1966,
shall be required to comply with this chapter and such amendments by not later than December 31, 1966. (Ord. 626,
§ 21; Ord. 631, § 2; Ord. 675, § 3)
SEC. 24-4. NUISANCES. 1
The City of Buffalo shall have the power under and by virtue of its police powers to declare any noncompliance or
violation of this chapter to be a misdemeanor and a nuisance, and shall issue notice to the violator failing to comply,
to abate such nuisance and if, within ten days after receipt of such notice the nuisance is not abated, the City of
Buffalo may institute such action as may be proper to abate such nuisance under the provisions of Chapter 15. (Ord.
626, § 20)
1. As to nuisances generally, see Chapter 15 of this Code.
SEC. 24-5. USE OF TRAILER HOUSES AS DWELLINGS ON ANY LOT.
Not more than one trailer house shall be parked and occupied as a dwelling unit on each fifty feet of front footage
of any lot in the City of Buffalo, and no such trailer shall be parked and occupied on a lot on which any other dwelling
or habitation is located.
No trailer house shall be placed on any lot in the City until application for a permit has been made to the Building
Inspector or other designated official so authorized by the City Council, and a permit issued by the designated agent.
The permit shall be issued only after the Building Inspector has examined the proposed location for such house trailer
and finds that it complies with the terms of the City ordinances. In addition to other requirements all such trailers shall
have wheels removed from such trailer house and shall be placed upon solid and continuous foundation of either
cement block, concrete or other material meeting Building Inspector’s regulations, and that the trailer complies with
the existing building ordinances with respect to construction, location and other requirements as provided by such
regulations. Payment for the above described permit shall be made in accordance with section 5-1.1 of this Code.
(Ord. 626, § 2; Ord. 631, § 1; Ord. 675, § 4; Ord. 715, § 1; Ord. 716, § 1; R.O. 1261 § 6, 6/06)
24-2
ARTICLE II. TRAILER COURTS.
SEC. 24-6. LICENSING REGULATIONS GENERALLY; FEE. 2
Section 24-6 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed.
2. For licensing regulations generally, see Sec. 24-29 of this Code.
SEC. 24-7. PLAN TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
A complete plan of the trailer court lay out shall accompany the application for a license. The following details
shall be shown on the plan:
a) The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
b) The location of the service building and any other proposed structures.
c) The location and width of roadways and walkways.
d) The location and size of water and sewer lines.
e) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed, or to be constructed, within the
trailer court, including sewage disposal facilities. (Ord. 626, § 4)
SEC. 24-8. INSPECTIONS; NOTICE TO CORRECT UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
The City of Buffalo is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of trailer
courts located within the City of Buffalo. Whenever, upon inspection of any trailer court, the City of Buffalo finds that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter, it shall give notice, in writing, to the
person to whom the license was issued; and, unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable
period of time, the license will be suspended. At the end of such period, the City of Buffalo shall re-inspect such
trailer court, and if it then finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, it shall give notice, in writing
to the person to whom the permit or license is issued that the license has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of
suspension, such person shall cease operation of such trailer court, and shall not resume operation until written
permission is obtained from the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 626, § 5)
SEC. 24-9. REFUSAL TO ISSUE LICENSE; REVOCATION; REPEAL.
The City of Buffalo may refuse the issuance of a license as required in this chapter; or, upon proper hearing before
the Council, it may revoke or suspend the license as justice may require. Any person aggrieved hereby may appeal
his cause to the District Court. (Ord. 262, § 20)
SEC. 24-10. REGISTRATION OF OCCUPANTS.
Every trailer court owner or operator shall maintain a register containing a record of all trailer houses and
occupants using the trailer court. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the court, and
shall be preserved for a period of six months. Such register shall contain:
1) The names and addresses of all trailer court occupants.
2) The make, model, and license number of each motor vehicle and trailer court.
3) The state, territory or county issuing the trailer license.
4) The date of arrival and departure of each trailer house.
(Ord. 626, § 17)
SEC. 24-11. DRAINAGE, LIGHTING, ETC.
The trailer court must be well drained, and not adjacent to swamps or marshes. The trailer court shall be
adequately lighted at night. (Ord. 626, § 6)
SEC. 24-12. TRAILER HOUSE SPACES.
Each trailer house space shall contain a minimum of one thousand square feet and shall be at least twenty-five
feet wide. The space shall abut on a driveway not less than twenty feet in width which shall have unobstructed
access
24-3
to a public street or highway. Trailer houses shall be parked so that there is at least fifteen feet clearance between
trailer houses and at least ten feet between any trailer house and any adjoining property line at least fifteen feet
between any trailer house and any building or structure. Sufficient area shall be provided on each trailer court for the
parking of at least one motor vehicle for each trailer house space. A separate area shall be provided on each trailer
court for recreational purposes, such area to be in a location not subject to traffic hazards and shall provide at least
one hundred square feet of open area for each trailer house space. (Ord. 626, § 6; Ord. 675, § 6)
SEC. 24-13. PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS OF STREETS AND ALLEYS.
It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any trailer house in any trailer court to park any motor vehicle owned
or controlled by him on any street or alley in the City in the space or area within which such trailer court in which such
person resides abuts on such street or alley. (Ord. 675, § 8)
SEC. 24-14. REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 675.
SEC. 24-15. WATER SUPPLY. 3
An adequate and safe supply of water under pressure shall be supplied to each trailer court. Each trailer house
space shall have a water supply outlet. An adequate supply of hot and cold water shall be provided at all times in the
service buildings. (Ord. 626, § 8)
3. For regulations as to water generally, see Chapter 27 of this Code.
SEC. 24-16. SEWAGE DISPOSAL. 4
Each trailer house space shall have installed on it and be equipped with a trapped sewer inlet to receive all trailer
house waste and sewage. No trailer house shall be permitted to be parked in any trailer court unless such trailer
house is properly equipped with proper facilities to discharge all waste from toilets, sinks, bathtubs, showers,
lavatories and laundry facilities into a public sewage system or into a private sewage system, and disposal plant shall
comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the City and of the regulations of the state department of public
health; provided, however, any such trailer court which has an adequate service building equipped with proper toilets
and lavatories may accept trailers on a temporary basis which are not equipped with sewage disposal facilities. (Ord.
626, § 9; Ord. 675, § 9)
4. As to regulations concerning sewers generally, see Chapter 27 of this Code.
SEC. 24-17. GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL. 5
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be in such manner as to avoid a health hazard or an odor
nuisance. Refuse containers shall be provided in adequate numbers within one hundred and fifty feet of each trailer
house. Garbage shall be collected at least twice a week. (Ord. 626, § 10)
5. As to garbage and refuse regulations generally, see Chapter 10 of this Code.
SEC. 24-18. INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.
Trailer courts shall be kept free of rubbish and maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. Harborage places
for rodents or other hosts of insect vectors shall be eliminated. Breeding places for flies and mosquitoes shall be
eliminated or controlled by other methods. (Ord. 262, § 11)
SEC. 24-19. ELECTRICITY.
All electrical wiring in trailer courts shall be done in compliance with Chapter 7. Each trailer house space shall be
provided with 110-volt electrical outlet. In the absence of other City wiring regulations, wiring shall be done in
accordance with the National Electrical Code. (Ord. 626, § 12)
24-4
SEC. 24-20. PLUMBING.
The plumbing in any trailer court shall be done in compliance with Chapter 18. In the absence of other City
plumbing regulations, plumbing shall comply with the provisions of the International Plumbing Code. (Ord. 626, § 13;
R.O. 1261 § 6/06)
SEC. 24-21. FIRE PROTECTION.
Every trailer court shall be kept free of flammable material at all times. Hose and portable fire extinguishers shall
be available and in good repair for use in fighting fires. Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators or other
equipment intended for that purpose. (Ord. 626, § 14)
SEC. 24-22. COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
It shall be the duty of all trailer court managers, owners or operators to report immediately to the City of Buffalo or
the City or County health officer all known or suspected cases of communicable diseases. (Ord. 626, § 18)
SEC. 24-23. ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO TRAILER HOUSES. 6
No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto or become a part of any trailer house. Skirting of trailer
houses is permissible, but such skirting shall not permanently attach the trailer house to the ground, provide a
harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard. The wheels of any trailer house shall not be removed, except
temporarily for repair. Jacks or stabilizers may be used under the trailer house to prevent movement on the springs
when the trailer house is parked and occupied. (Ord. 626, § 15)
6. For specific details regarding skirting, see Sec. 24-30 (Skirting) of this Code.
SEC. 24-24. PETS ROAMING AT LARGE.
Dogs, cats and other animals shall not be permitted to roam at large in trailer courts. (Ord. 626, § 15)
SEC. 24-25. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, all trailer courts and facilities shall be established,
constructed and maintained in compliance with all existing state laws or necessary rules and regulations promulgated
by the Council in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 626, § 16)
ARTICLE III. MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT.
SEC. 24-26. PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
This chapter is enacted to promote and encourage well planned mobile home parks by the establishment of
minimum standards for design and construction; to insure that new mobile home parks conform with the general plans
of the community; and to contribute to an attractive, orderly community environment with adequate municipal services
and safety standards. This chapter shall apply to any tract of land within the City of Buffalo which is developed for the
purposes of establishing or expanding a Mobile Home Park.
Mobile Home Parks which have been issued a valid license by the City of Buffalo to operate a Mobile Home Park
prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall not be required to conform to the requirements herein except as provided
in Section 24-29 (License Renewal) and 24-30 (Skirting) of this chapter. (Ord. 875, § 1)
SEC. 24-27. DEFINITIIONS.
Building Inspector: The authorized Building Inspector of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
License: A written document issued by the City Council of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming allowing a person to
operate and maintain a Mobile Home Park under the provisions of this chapter.
Lot Line: A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plan.
24-5
Mobile Home: A portable unit designed and built to be towed on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels,
connected to utilities, and designed without a permanent foundation for year-around living. A unit may contain parts
that may be folded, collapsed or telescoped when towed and expanded later to provide additional living space,
including any awning, cabana, ramada, storage structure, carport, fence, windbreak or porch attached and
established for the use of the occupant of the mobile home.
Mobile Home Park: A tract or contiguous tracts of land which has been so designated and improved that it
contains three or more mobile home lots for residential use.
Mobile Home Lot: A parcel of land for the placement of a Mobile Home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
Mobile Home Park Plan: A map or plat indicating the location.
Licensed Engineer: A person licensed as a professional engineer by the State of Wyoming.
Surveyor: A person duly registered as a land surveyor by the State of Wyoming.
Planning Commission: The City of Buffalo Planning and Zoning Commission.
Water Connection: All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the Mobile Home Park.
Sewer Connection: A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the sewer riser pipe to
the sewer collection system within the Mobile Home Park.
Water Riser Pipe: That portion of the water supply system serving the Mobile Home Park which extends vertically
to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each Mobile Home Lot.
Sewer Riser Pipe: That portion oF the sewer collection system serving the Mobile Home Park which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each Mobile Home Lot.
Park Roadway: A private way or street which affords principal means of access to abutting individual mobile
home lots and auxiliary buildings. (Ord. 875, § 2)
SEC. 24-28. PLAN SUBMISSION PROCEDURE.
Application: The applicant shall complete and submit to the City Clerk of the City of Buffalo an application which
sets forth the general information of the mobile home park and notify the City of the applicant’s intentions to create a
Mobile Home Park.
The City Clerk shall inform the applicant of the requirements of this article.
The applicant shall complete the required plans and specifications and submit these plans anD specifications for
the review of Utility Companies, Planning Commission, Building Inspector, City Council and other agencies of
municipal government as directed by the City Council. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit copies of
the plans and specifications for the Mobile Home Park to the appropriate State agencies.
The agency comments shall be submitted in writing to the City Council, Utility Companies and the applicant.
The City Council shall review the plans and specifications and may review comments by the municipal agencies
and,
a) grant the license for the mobile home park;
b) deny the license application; or
c) set forth terms and conditions which must be met before approval of the license can be granted.
24-6
The applicant shall be notified by written notice no later than fifteen (15) days after a decision by the City Council.
A denial by the City Council shall include, in writing, the specific reasons for the denial. A person may, within two (2)
months, re-apply for acceptance of a Mobile Home Park Plan.
If approved, the applicant shall be required to meet the requirements for obtaining a mobile home park license, as
set forth in Section 24-29 of this chapter.
Upon receipt by the applicant of a Mobile Home Park License issued by the City Clerk of the City of Buffalo, the
License holder shall be permitted to begin construction of the Mobile Home Park.
SEC. 24-29. ADMINISTRATION.
License: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, create or extend any Mobile Home Park within the City of
Buffalo, Wyoming, unless a valid license has been issued by the City Clerk in the name of the person for the specific
construction of the approved Mobile Home Park. The initial license for construction which shall be valid for the period
of one (1) year from date of issuance, shall be considered as the license for the initial year of operation. Thereafter
application shall be made for annual license renewal. Application for the initial license and the annual renewal of a
license issued after the date hereof (Editor’s note: date referred to is March 1, 1977) shall conform to all requirements
of this article. The license application shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
All applications for a Mobile Home Park license shall be accompanied by a Performance Bond in an amount equal
to twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated cost of improvements, or other satisfactory guarantee to the City
Council that the improvements set forth in the plans will be installed. All applications for a Mobile Home Park license
shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 plus $5.00 per mobile home lot within the proposed mobile home park.
License Renewal: All applications for an annual renewal of Mobile Home Park license shall be submitted to the
City Clerk. The City Clerk shall advise the Building Inspector of such a renewal request and the Building Inspector
shall report to the City Clerk any reasons which should prevent the City Council from issuing a license renewal.
Any person holding a valid license shall give notice in writing signed by the applicant, accompanied by a
Certification by the applicant as to the truth of the renewal application. The application shall contain:
1) the name and address of the renewal applicant,
2) location of the mobile home park,
3) the legal description of the mobile home park,
4) and any changes in the information of the approved mobile home park plan which had not been reported to the
City Clerk since the latest license issued.
When an application for an initial license has been filed in the office of the City Clerk for a Mobile Home Park
license, the City Clerk shall promptly publish, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City, a notice that such applicant has made application for a license and that public comments
concerning the issuance of such license shall be heard at a time and location stated in the notice, which shall be at a
special or regular meeting of the City Council. No license shall be issued until on or after the date set in the notice for
public hearing. Each applicant shall, at the time of filing his application, pay the City Clerk an amount sufficient to
cover the costs of publishing notice.
Any person whose application for issuance of a license under this chapter has been denied, may request within
three (3) days of denial, and shall be granted a rehearing on the matter before the City Council. (Ord. 1037, § 1,
6/86)
Inspection of Mobile Home Parks: The Building Inspector is authorized and directed to make such inspections as
are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Notice, Hearings and Orders: Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there exists a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall give notice of the violations to the person to whom the license
was issued. Such notice of violation shall:
24-7
1) be in writing,
2) include the reasons for its issuance,
3) allow a reasonable time period for compliance,
4) be considered properly delivered when sent by registered mail; and
5) contain an outline of remedial action which would be considered to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in compliance with the enforcement of any provision of
this chapter, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council. Such a hearing shall
be conducted according to the rules of procedure of the City Council.
Whenever the City Council determines that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the
public health, the City Council may without notice or hearing issue an order describing the existence of such an
emergency, and requiring that such action be taken as the City Council may deem necessary to meet the emergency.
Exemptions: Where the City Council finds that compliance with the provisions of this chapter would impose an
undue hardship, as decided by the sole discretion of the City Council, a temporary exemption may be granted by the
City Council without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. A temporary exemption shall not be considered
to be valid after a period of three (3) months from the date of issuance. Prior to consideration by the City Council of a
temporary exemption, a petition stating the specific reasons for the exemption shall be submitted to the City Council.
(Ord. 875, § 4)
SEC. 24-30. PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
Mobile Home Park Plan: Prior to construction a mobile home park, the developer of the mobile home park
(applicant) or his agent shall submit to the City Clerk at least two (2) weeks prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of
the City Council, six (6) copies of the proposed mobile home park plan which have been prepared in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. At the time of submission of this plan, the required filing fee shall be submitted to the
City Clerk.
Requirements of the Plan: The Mobile Home Plan shall be prepared by a licensed Engineer. The size of the plan
sheet shall not be smaller than twenty-one and one half inches (21 ½”) by thirty inches (30”). The scale of the plan
shall not be smaller than one inch (1”) equals forty feet (40’). The plan shall show the following information:
A) Name of the proposed mobile home park.
B) Name and address of the owner or owners of records.
C) Name and address of the developer.
D) Name and address of the designer of the plan.
E) Scale.
F) North arrow.
G) Certificate of Engineer and Land Surveyor.
H) Legal description of the property.
I) A legend which delineates any symbols used on the plan.
J) The area and dimensions of the mobile home park site.
K) The number, location and dimensions of all mobile home lots.
L) The location and widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, roadways, easements and recorded
section lines.
M) Topographical data with contours of two-foot (2’) contour intervals for predominant ground slopes within the
tract between level and five percent (5%) grade, and for predominant ground slopes within the tract exceeding five
percent (5%) grade, a minimum of five-foot (5’) contour shall be required.
N) The location and sizes of all existing and proposed water distribution lines, water main valves, water meters,
and fire hydrants.
O) The location and sizes of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines, manholes, invert elevations for each
manhole, and grades for each sewer line connecting the manholes.
24-8
P) The location of natural features, tree clusters, and permanent man-made structures within the boundaries of
the proposed mobile home park.
Q) The location of any adjoining street or alley, to include curb and gutter improvements.
R) The location of any existing building within thirty feet (30’) of the outside boundary of the proposed mobile
home park.
S) The location of the water and sewer utility connections outside of the mobile home park.
T) The location of solid waste collection sites.
U) The location of any proposed storm sewer systems and a general drainage layout plan.
V) The location of power, gas, telephone, television and other utility lines.
W) The location of any proposed street lighting fixtures and other lighting fixtures.
X) The location of any proposed open space or recreation areas.
Detailed Construction Plans and Specifications: Prior to constructing a mobile home park, the developer of the
mobile home park (applicant) or his agent shall submit to the City Building Inspector, at least two (2) weeks prior to
the regular scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission, six (6) copies of the proposed detailed construction plans
and specifications for the proposed mobile home park which have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of
this and other applicable City Ordinances.
Requirements of the Detailed Construction Plans and Specifications: The detailed construction plans and
specifications shall be prepared by an Engineer and Land Surveyor, registered in the State of Wyoming. The
following details shall be set forth on the plan sheet:
A) A typical mobile home lot at the scale of one inch (1”) equals ten feet (10’). This typical lot shall show the lot
dimensions; set backs from lot lines, streets, property boundary lines; location and dimensions of proposed parking
and walkways; location and dimensions of the proposed mobile home park; typical trailer dimensions; location, size
and material of the sanitary sewer line and the sewer riser; location, size and materials of the water line and riser; and
location of the power, gas, telephone and television lines.
B) A typical cross section of the proposed street and roads. This drawing shall show the type of material and
depths of material to be used in the construction of the streets and roads. This drawing shall also show the type of
curb and gutter to be installed.
C) Typical manhold cross-section.
D) Typical water – sewer crossovers.
E) Typical service connection.
F) Typical cross-section of a mobile home showing depths, sizes and type of material of service line and risers for
water, sewer, power, gas, telephone and televisions utilities.
G) Plan and profile sheets, to a scale of not less than one inch (1”) equals twenty feet (20’) for curb and gutter
improvements, water lines and sanitary sewer manholes and lines.
H) Where required storm drainage plans.
I) Certificate of Engineer and Land Surveyor. (Ord. 875, § 5)
SEC. 24-31. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
General: The following standards shall be considered as minimum design standards. Improvements shall be in
accordance with adopted engineering standards and specifications.
A) The minimum area for a mobile home park shall be three (3) acres.
B) Mobile Home Park shall not conflict with provisions of the City of Buffalo Zoning Ordinance. (Chapter 29)
24-9
C) No part of any Mobile Home Park shall be used for non-residential purposes. Nothing contained in this section
shall prohibit operation of service facilities intended for the benefit of the residents of the mobile home park.
D) Conditions of soil, ground water, slopes, drainage, topography and other natural features shall not create
hazards to the property, adjacent properties, or to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the mobile home
park. The site shall not be subject to flooding or erosion.
E) No greater number of occupied mobile homes shall be allowed than there are mobile home lots available. At
no time shall more than one mobile home be located upon one mobile home lot.
STREETS AND ROADWAYS.
General: The arrangement, width, grade and location of all through streets shall conform to the City of Buffalo
Transportation Plan, where such a plan exists. The City Council may require pavement designs by a Wyoming
Registered Engineer in cases where subsurface conditions are questionable. Pavement designs, construction
specifications and certification shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.
Extent of required Street and Roadway Improvements: All streets and roadways shall be paved with a smooth,
hard and dense surface which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. The
surface shall be maintained free of cracks and depressions and its edges shall be protected by sound construction
methods.
Minimum Pavement Design: The following general standards shall be minimum standards for streets and
roadways:
Arterial Streets.
Wearing Surface – Seal Coat and Chips
Pavement Structure – 2 ½” Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete or Concrete Equivalent
Base Course – 6” well-graded gravel base, maximum 2” aggregate
Residential Streets.
Wearing Surface – Seal Coat and Chips
Pavement Surface – 1” Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete or Concrete Equivalent
Base Course – 6” well-graded gravel base, maximum 2” aggregate
Specifications for materials, mixing and construction shall comply with the adopted standards of the City of
Buffalo.
Mobile Home Park Roadway.
Pavement – 2” Asphalt Surface
Base Course – 6” Base gravel, maximum 2” aggregate
Concrete.
Where Portland Cement concrete is used, it shall not be less than five inches (5”) thick on a prepared
subgrade constructed in accordance with accepted practices, with expansion joints where driveways and walkways
abut each other or the curb. The concrete to be used shall consist of a minimum 5 sacks cement mix, the watercement
ratio shall not exceed 0.52, and the maximum aggregate size shall not exceed 1 ½”.
Pavement Widths: Mobile home park roadway pavement widths shall not be less than twenty-eight feet (28’),
not including the curb and gutter.
Grades: Street and Roadway grades shall have suitable alignment and gradient for traffic safety, surface and
drainage characteristics, and proper adaption of the utility systems. Grades of all streets and roadways shall be
sufficient to insure adequate drainage, but shall not exceed a twelve percent (12%) grade.
24-10
Lighting: Street and roadway lighting shall be designed with consultation of the power utility company and
installed by the developer. Potentially hazardous locations, such as major intersections shall be properly illuminated.
Easements: Easements, where required, shall be provided for utilities and water courses and shall be at least
sixteen feet (16’) wide.
Curb and Gutter: Curb and gutter shall be a minimum four inches (4”) in height produced from materials of
asphaltic concrete or Portland Cement concrete of the same specifications as detailed in Minimum Pavement Design
above.
MOBILE HOME LOT.
Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a Mobile Home lot area shall be 3,500 square feet. The minimum lot width
shall be 35 feet.
Spacing: The minimum distance between mobile homes shall be fifteen feet (15’). The minimum setback
distance from the roadway distance between any mobile home and any other structure within the mobile home park,
or any property line bounding the mobile home park, shall be fifteen feet (15’) except that there will be no minimum
distance between any mobile home and an accessory building or structure which occupies the same mobile home lot
as the mobile home.
Mobile Home Stand: A mobile home stand shall be improved to provide adequate support for the placement
and installation of the mobile home. A crushed gravel bed four inches (4”) to six inches (6”) deep shall be considered
acceptable.
Driveways: A minimum four inch (4”) to six inch (6”) deep gravel driveway shall be installed to provide access
and parking to each mobile home lot. The minimum width of each driveway shall be ten feet (10’), and shall provide
space for off-street parking to accommodate two (2) vehicles.
Skirting: All mobile homes shall have a skirting of a rigid type material, such as masonry, masonite, metal or
wood, but such skirting shall not permanently attach the mobile home to the ground or create a fire hazard. Such
skirting must be in place within sixty (60) days after the mobile home is set on the mobile home lot.
It shall be the duty of the person to whom the license for the mobile home park is issued to see that the skirting
is in place and in compliance with this section.
Non-conforming Skirting: Mobile homes in mobile home parks which do not conform to the skirting
requirements of this section but which lawfully existed and were in operation on the effective date of this Ordinance
(Editor’s note: date referred to is March 1, 1977) shall within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this Ordinance
be made to conform as required by the first two paragraphs of this section.
Storage Structure: Not more than two individual storage structures may be located or maintained on one
mobile home lot.
UTILITIES AND SERVICES.
Water and Sanitary Sewer: All mobile home parks and mobile home lots shall be connected to the City of
Buffalo Municipal Water and Sanitary Sewer system.
All water and sewer utility installation and construction shall conform to the requirements of the International
Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City of Buffalo. (R.O. 1261 § 6 6/06)
Storm Sewer / Drainage: All surface and underground drainage systems shall be installed to adequately
remove all natural drainage of the mobile home park. All such systems shall be in compliance with the requirements
of the City Council. Where connection with an existing storm sewer system is feasible, that system shall be utilized
so as to provide complete drainage of the mobile home park.
24-11
Solid Waste Collection: Each mobile home lot shall be served with City of Buffalo Solid Waste Collection
services, these services may be either:
1) A two (2) yard solid waste collection bin shall be provided as specified in City Ordinance No. 855 to be
located within 100 feet from each mobile home lot.
2) A solid waste collection stand shall be provided, adjacent to the mobile home roadway or street not
closer than 20 feet from any property line bounding the Mobile Home Park. Such individual stands and containers
shall conform to the requirements of City Ordinance No. 855.
Electrical, Street Lighting, Telephone and Other Utilities: All utilities shall be underground whenever
feasible and completed prior to street paving, if to be installed under the paving surface. The developer must comply
with the requirements of the National Electrical Code and the trenching requirements of Pacific Power and Light
Company.
OPEN SPACE – RECREATION.
No less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site area shall be reserved for recreational use or open space,
generally provided in a central location. Where lot areas are substantially above minimum standards and provided for
sufficient outdoor recreation for individual units, an exemption may be granted by the City Council to this requirement.
(Ord. 875, § 6)
SEC. 24-32. IMPROVEMENTS.
If sewer and water facilities are not available adjacent to the proposed mobile home park, it shall be the
responsibility of the developer to extend such lines in a manner satisfactory to the City Council. Where such lines
may serve potential additional areas, the City Council may make such a determination and partially finance or make
arrangements as needed to assist in financing such construction.
All lot corners shall be set with one-half inch ( ½” ) iron bars, two feet (2’) long, or equivalent.
The developer shall perform all work required by this chapter in connection with the demolition, moving, altering,
or conversion of any structure or facility, including underground facilities within the mobile home park.
Hookups to water and sewer utilities shall be prohibited until all the requirements of this chapter have been met to
the satisfaction of the City Building Inspector or the City Council. (Ord. 875, § 7)
SEC. 24-33. SUPERVISION.
The licensee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home
park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be
responsible, with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this chapter to which the licensee is subject. (Ord.
875, § 8)
SEC. 24-34. ANIMALS AND PETS.
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, or other pet or animal shall permit it to run at large or commit any
nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park. (Ord. 875, § 9)
SEC. 24-35. VARIANCES AND WAIVERS.
The City Council may grant a variance or waive the strict interpretation of the requirements of this chapter, where
in the opinion of the City Council the mobile home park developer can demonstrate that by reason of exceptional
topography or other physical conditions, the strict compliance would cause undue hardship. (Ord. 875, § 10)
24-12
SEC. 24-36. AMENDMENTS.
From time to time the City Council may amend this Mobile Home Park Ordinance. (Editor’s note: Ordinance
referred to is No. 875.) Before any amendment shall be made to this Ordinance, the same shall have been submitted
to the Planning Commission for its recommendations. (Ord. 875, § 11)
SEC. 24-37. INTERPRETATIONS.
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter the following regulations shall govern:
Provisions and Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this chapter shall be regarded as the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Buffalo. This
chapter shall be therefore regarded as remedial, and shall be liberally construed to further its underlying purposes.
Application of Overlapping Regulations: Whenever both a provision of this Ordinance (Ord. 875), or any provision
of any other law, ordinance, resolution, or applicable regulation of any kind contain any restrictions covering any of
the same subject matter, whichever restriction imposes a higher standard shall govern.
Existing Permits and Private Agreements: This Ordinance (No. 875), is not intended to annul:
1) Any permits or licenses issued before the effective date of this Ordinance. (March 1, 1977)
2) Any easement, covenant or other private agreement. (Ord. 875, § 12)
SEC, 24-38. APPEALS.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the City of Buffalo or any administrative personnel of the City may file with
the City Council a written request for a hearing of the same, setting forth the reasons for which the applicant feels that
the regulations have been unjustly administered or enforced. Such a request shall be submitted to the City Council.
(Ord. 875, § 13)
SEC. 24-39. PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not less
than $5.00 and not more than $100.00, to which costs shall be added. (Ord. 875, § 14)
24-13
CHAPTER 25
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE PERMITS
Article I. Transient Merchants. 1
1. For state law authorizing the town to license, tax and regulate businesses, see
W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103 (xii). For authority of the town specifically in connection
with this chapter, see W.S. 1977, § 33-20-210.
§ 25-1. Definitions.
§ 25-2. Bonds.
§ 25-3. Service of process.
§ 25-4. Prohibited practices.
§ 25-5. Wholesalers and non-profit organizations exempted.
§ 25-6. Association with local dealers, etc.
§ 25-7. Licenses.
§ 25-8. Violations.
§ 25-9. Right of appeal from decision not to issue or revocation.
§ 25-10. Expiration.
§ 25-11. Bond.
§ 25-12. Service of process.
§ 25-13. Records to be kept by City Clerk.
§ 25-14. Loud noises, etc.
Article II. Religious or Charitable Permits.
§ 25-15. Intent and purpose.
§ 25-16. Definitions.
§ 25-17. Charitable and religious solicitations; Permit required; Exemptions.
§ 25-18. Application for permit; Requirements.
§ 25-19. Investigation by Clerk of applications.
§ 25-20. Issuance of permit; Conditions.
§ 25-21. Fee for religious and charitable solicitations permit.
§ 25-22. Expiration of permit.
§ 25-23. Permit form.
§ 25-24. Permit nontransferable.
§ 25-25. Agents and solicitors.
§ 25-26. Appeal.
§ 25-27. Revocation of permits; Hearing; Decision.
§ 25-28. Notification of suspension or revocation to the Chief of Police.
§ 25-29. Prohibited practices.
§ 25-30. Penalties.
ARTICLE III. VENDOR EVENT PERMITS.
(Ord 1382 4/2016)
§ 25-50. Purpose
§ 25-51. Findings and Intent.
§ 25-52. Definitions.
§ 25-53. Vendor Event Permit – When Required.
§ 25-54. Vendor Event Permit – Application Procedure – Filing Period.
§ 25-55. Permits – Notice to City and Other Officials.
§ 25-56. Permits – Conditions of Issuance – Grounds for Denial of Application.
§ 25-57. Permit – Appeal Procedure. 25-1
§ 25-58. Duties of Permittee.
§ 25-59. Permit – Revocation Conditions.
§ 25-60. Parking Restrictions on Vendor Events – Signs.
§ 25-61. Repealer.
§ 25-62. Severability.
(Ord. 1382, 4/2016)
SEC. 25-1. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
a) ‘Solicit’ and ‘Solicitation’ shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities, occurring away
from the seller’s principal place of business:
1) Selling or offering for sale, or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods or services of any
kind, character or description, primarily for personal, family or household purposes.
b) ‘Temporary or transient merchant, peddler, canvasser or solicitor’ shall include all persons not having a
permanent place of business in the City engaged in selling or offering for sale any foods, goods or merchandise of
whatever nature, in any open space, from a temporary stand, under tents, from a vehicle on property not owned by
such person, by door-to-door solicitation, or inside any permanent building or structure. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-2. BONDS.
Before any license is granted to engage in any business regulated by this chapter, the applicant for such license
shall file with the Municipal Clerk, a bond running to the municipality in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000),
executed by the applicant, as principal, and a surety upon which service of process may be made in the state, such
bond conditioned on the applicant complying fully with all of the provisions of this chapter and all of the provisions of
this Code and State law, regulating and concerning the business for which the applicant seeks a license and the
payment of license fees, and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of such laws
together will all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person for damage growing out of any
misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether such
misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents, or employees,
either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated
with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in
the name of the municipality to the use of the municipality or aggrieved person, as the case may be. (Ord. 1048, § 1,
12/86)
SEC. 25-3. SERVICE OF PROCESS.
Before any license shall be issued for engaging in any business regulated by this chapter, such applicant shall file
with the Municipal Clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the Municipal Clerk his true and lawful agent with
full power and authority to acknowledge service or notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to
any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under such license and the bond given as
required by this chapter, or for the performance of the conditions of such bond or for any breach thereof, which
instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that such applicant for license consents and agrees that service of
any notice or process may be made upon the agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if
personally served upon the person applying for the license under this chapter, according to the law of this State, and
waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately
upon service of process upon the Municipal Clerk, as herein provided, the Municipal Clerk shall send to the licensee
at his last known address, by registered mail, a copy of such process. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-4. PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
a) It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant, peddler, solicitor or canvasser, to ring the doorbell or knock on
the door of any residence, dwelling, apartment or other premises whereon a sign bearing the words ‘No Peddlers’, or
other words similar import is painted or affixed or exposed to public view, or to attempt to gain admittance thereto;
provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any solicitor or canvasser who knocks at any door, or
rings any bell at the invitation or with the consent of the owner, an agent of the owner, or an occupant of the premises
at which he so applied for admission.
25-2
b) No person shall engage in solicitation upon any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other
residence after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence.
c) No person shall solicit upon any premises, apartment, residence or dwelling, other than upon prior invitation of
the occupant of any such premises, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., local time, of any day.
d) No person engaged in solicitation shall, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer or donor, fail to
verbally identify himself and the purpose of the solicitation.
e) No person engaged in solicitation shall misrepresent the purpose of his solicitation or use any false, deceptive
or misleading misrepresentation to induce a sale, or use any plan, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the true
status of the person making the call. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-5. WHOLESALERS AND NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS EXEMPTED.
No license shall be required of drummers, traveling salesmen or other persons engaged in soliciting or taking
orders exclusively from the trade of established wholesale or retail dealers, for the delivery of goods, wares or
merchandise by wholesale, nor shall a license, under this ordinance, be required of wholly non-profit organizations.
(Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-6. ASSOCIATION WITH LOCAL DEALERS, ETC.
Persons engaged in any business regulated by this chapter shall not be relieved from complying with provisions of
this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by
conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-7. LICENSES.
a) It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, peddler, solicitor or canvasser to solicit within the City of Buffalo
without first obtaining a license therefore in compliance with the provisions of this article.
Applicants for a license under this article shall file with the Municipal Clerk a sworn application in writing which
shall give the following information:
1) The name and description of the applicant.
2) The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship.
5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
6) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are
manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed and the
proposed method of delivery.
7) The applicant must furnish proof of identity, including a legal photographic identification. If the applicant
does not have a driver’s license, passport or other legal photographic identification, a photograph of the applicant and
one set of fingerprints shall be taken by the Buffalo Police Department prior to the issuance of a license. This shall be
done during regular business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., at a cost of five dollars ($5.00).
8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation
of any municipal law, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore.
9) If the Clerk finds that all information stated on the application and service of process form is true, and there
is no need to further investigate the applicant, the Clerk shall grant the license.
25-3
b) Investigation of applicant; issuance; records.
1) The Clerk may, in his / her discretion, refer the application to the Chief of Police, who shall cause
investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of
the public good.
2) If the applicant’s character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall
endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the Municipal
Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued.
3) If the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on the application his approval, and return the application to the Municipal Clerk, who shall, upon
payment of the prescribed license fee, issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the
Municipal Clerk and shall show the name and address of the licensee, the class of license issued and the kinds of
goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the period for which the same shall be
operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used. The Municipal Clerk
shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued.
c) Fees.
License fees shall be: 1 –7 days $ 25.00
8 – 30 days $ 50.00
31 – 365 days $100.00
The fee must be paid to the Clerk in cash, money order or cashier’s check. If the applicant has more than one
person engaged in the business of peddling or uses more than one motor truck, wagon or other vehicle in such
business of peddling, the license fees shall be paid for each of such persons, motor truck, wagon or vehicle used in
such business; and provided, that if any person has more than one person engaged in the business of soliciting or
canvassing, the foregoing license fee shall be paid for each person engaged in such business.
d) Minimum term; expiration.
The Municipal Clerk shall not issue any license hereunder nor accept any license fee for less than one day. A
license issued for one day shall expire at 12:00 midnight, of the date of issuance of such license. A license issued for
one week shall expire at 12:00 midnight on the seventh day after issuance. A license issued for one month shall
expire at 12:00 midnight, on the thirtieth day after issuance, counting both first and last days. An annual license may
be issued for the calendar year, commencing on January 1, and expiring on December 31, of any such year.
e) Exhibition.
All persons soliciting under the provisions of this Ordinance shall exhibit their license upon the request of a
law enforcement agent or a potential customer.
f) Transfer.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred.
g) Revocation.
1) Licenses issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be revoked by the governing body after
notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
i) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
ii) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business.
iii) Any violation of this chapter.
iv) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
v) Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
25-4
h) Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Municipal Clerk in the denial or revocation of
a license as provided in this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor and City Council. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Mayor and City Council, within fourteen days after notice of the action complained, a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Mayor and City Council shall set a time and place for a
hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in
this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Mayor and City Council on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-8. VIOLATIONS.
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for each violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-9. RIGHT OF APPEAL FROM DECISION NOT TO ISSUE OR REVOCATION.
Section 25-9 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-10. EXPIRATION.
Section 25-10 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-11. BOND.
Section 25-11 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-12. SERVICE OF PROCESS.
Section 25-12 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-13. RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY CITY CLERK.
Section 25-13 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
SEC. 25-14. LOUD NOISES, ETC.
Section 25-14 is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1008, 9/83)
ARTICLE II. RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE PERMITS.
SEC. 25-15. INTENT AND PURPOSE.
The Town of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, finds and declares that the provisions of this Ordinance were enacted
for the following reasons:
a) To prevent fraudulent and deceptive schemes of solicitation by those who reap personal profit from solicitations
made in the name of needed and worthy charitable and religious organizations.
b) To prevent distrust and suspicion of worthy religious and charitable organizations caused by fraudulent and
deceptive solicitation practices.
c) To provide a non-discriminatory, non-prohibitory method of issuing permits to anyone desiring to solicit for
religious or charitable contributions on residential property within the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
25-5
SEC. 25-16. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Ordinance:
a) ‘Solicit’ and ‘solicitation’ shall mean a request, made by one individual to another individual, directly or
indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that
such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious
purpose as those purposes are defined in this Ordinance. These words shall also mean and include the following
methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation
that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as herein defined:
1) Any oral or written request;
2) The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon,
device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal
is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or
referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection
with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go to be
donated to any charitable or religious purpose.
A ‘solicitation’ as defined herein shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making
the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to this Section.
b) ‘Charitable’ shall mean and include the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent,
educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.
c) ‘Religious’ and ‘religion’ as used herein shall not mean and include the word ‘charitable’ as herein defined, but
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.
d) ‘Contributions’ shall mean and include the words alms, food, clothing, money, subscription, property or
donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.
e) ‘Person’ shall mean any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock
association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.
f) ‘Promoter’ shall mean any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote,
manage, supervise or organize a campaign of solicitation. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-17. CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.
a) No individual over 16 years of age shall conduct solicitations for charitable or religious contributions on the
premises of an apartment, dwelling or residence within the City limits of Buffalo, Wyoming, without a permit, issued by
the Clerk.
b) A permit will not be required for charitable religious solicitations conducted on premises other than a residence,
dwelling or apartment. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-18. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.
a) An application for a permit to solicit as provided by Section 25-17 of this Ordinance shall be made to the City
Clerk upon forms provided by the City of Buffalo. Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the City Clerk at
least five (5) days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; PROVIDED, HOWEVER,
that the City Clerk may, for good cause shown, allow the filing of an application less than five (5) days prior to the
effective date of the permit applied for. The application herein required shall contain the following information, or in
lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished:
1) The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit;
25-6
2) The purpose of which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised
thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;
3) The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation
and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;
4) An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations;
5) The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of
such solicitation;
6) The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any
person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons;
7) The names of all individuals who will be conducting the solicitation.
b) If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in
fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the Clerk in
writing thereof within twenty-four hours after such change. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-19. INVESTIGATION BY CLERK OF APPLICATIONS.
The Clerk shall examine all applications filed under Section 25-18 of this Ordinance, and shall investigate further
any application and the applicant as the Clerk deems necessary to meet the requirements of Sec. 25-18. (Ord. 1007,
9/83)
SEC. 25-20. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
a) The Clerk shall issue a permit to solicit for religious or charitable purposes when he / she finds the following
facts to exist:
1) That all of the statements made in the application are true;
2) That the solicitation will not be a fraud on the public;
3) That the solicitation is prompted by a desire to finance the charitable or religious cause set forth in the
application, and will not be primarily conducted for private profit; and
4) The fee required by Section 25-21 has been paid.
b) The Clerk shall file in his / her office for public inspections a statement of his / her finding of facts and his / her
decision upon each application. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-21. FEE FOR RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS PERMIT.
Before a permit is issued there shall be paid to the Clerk of the City of Buffalo the sum of One Dollar ($1.00) as a
permit fee and the sum of twenty cents (20¢) for each copy of the permit that is desired. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-22. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
No permit may grant the right to solicit longer than one (1) year.
SEC. 25-23. PERMIT FORM.
a) Permits issued under this Ordinance shall bear:
1) The name and address of the person to whom the solicitation is to be made;
25-7
2) The number of the permit;
3) The date the permit is issued;
4) The date of expiration; and
5) A statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the City of Buffalo, the Clerk, or any
other officers, employees or agents of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-24. PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.
Any permit issued under this Ordinance shall be nontransferable. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-25. AGENTS AND SOLICITORS.
All persons soliciting for charitable or religious contributions at a residence, apartment or other dwelling shall
possess a copy of the permit, and the copy must be shown, upon request, to all persons solicited; or, upon request, to
any Police Officer of the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-26. APPEAL.
Within five (5) days after receiving written notification that an application has been denied, the applicant may file a
written request for a public hearing before the City Council of the Town of the City of Buffalo. The written request
shall state exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the Clerk based the denial. Upon proper filing of a request,
the Clerk shall fix a time and place for hearing, and shall notify the applicant. The hearing shall be held within ten (10)
days after the request is filed. At the hearing the applicant may present evidence in support of his application and
exceptions. Any interested person may, in the discretion of the City Council, be allowed to participate in the hearing
and present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the
hearing the City Council shall render a written report either granting or denying the application for a permit. In this
report the City Council shall state the facts upon which its decision is based, and its ruling upon the exceptions filed to
its original findings of fact upon the application. This report shall be filed in the Clerk’s office for public inspection and
a copy shall be served by registered mail upon the applicant and all parties to the hearing. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-27. REVOCATION OF PERMITS; HEARING; DECISION.
Whenever it shall be shown, or whenever the Clerk has knowledge, that any person to whom a permit has been
issued under this Ordinance has violated any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or that any promoter, agent or
solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the Clerk shall immediately suspend the
permit and give the permit holder written notice by registered, special delivery, mail of a hearing to be held within ten
(10) days of such suspension to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. This notice must contain a
statement of facts upon which the Clerk has acted in suspending the permit. At the hearing before the City Council,
the permit holder, or any other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which
the Clerk suspended the permit, and any other facts which may aid the City Council to decide whether the Ordinance
has been violated. If the City Council finds the permit was properly revoked, a written statement of facts supporting
the revocation shall be made available to the applicant or any interested parties. If the City Council finds that the
permit was improperly revoked, within five (5) days a written statement canceling the suspension of the permit shall
be delivered to the permit holder. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-28. NOTIFICATION OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE.
The Chief of Police shall be notified forthwith by the Clerk of the suspension or revocation of any permit issued
under this Ordinance. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
25-8
SEC. 25-29. PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
a) No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for religious or charitable purposes by
misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall
make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution
for any purpose in the City of Buffalo, or in any application or report filed under this Ordinance.
b) No person shall solicit upon any dwelling, residence, apartment or other premises, other than upon prior
invitation of the occupant of any such premises, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., local time, of any day.
c) No person shall engage in solicitation upon any dwelling, apartment, residence or other premises without a
prior invitation from the occupant thereof, if such premises is posted against such solicitation by means of a notice
prominently displayed, upon which is printed the legend: “No Solicitors” (or words of similar import). For the purposes
of this paragraph, a dwelling house, apartment, residence or other premises shall be deemed to be posted against
solicitation if there is exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near the main door to any
residence located thereon, a sign at least three inches by four inches (3” x 4”) in size which bears the above legend in
letters at least one-third inch (1/3”) in length.
d) No person shall engage in solicitation upon any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other
residence after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence. (Ord.
1007, 9/83)
SEC. 25-30. PENALTIES.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or filing, or causing to be filed, an application for a
permit or certificate under this Ordinance containing false or fraudulent misstatements, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00). Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1007, 9/83)
ARTICLE III. VENDOR EVENT PERMITS.
SEC. 25.50. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for the issuance of a vendor event permit from the City in order
to regulate events with vendors occurring in or upon a City street, alley, public park, public building, sidewalk or
parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public within the City in the interest of public health, safety and welfare and
to create provisions for revocation.
SEC. 25.51. FINDINGS AND INTENT.
A. This chapter is enacted to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provisions shall be
liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.
B. It is expressly the purpose of this chapter and any procedures adopted hereunder to provide for and promote
the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any
particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this
chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder.
C. It is the specific intent of this chapter and any procedures adopted hereunder to place the obligation of
complying with the requirements of this chapter upon the permittee, and no provision is intended to impose
any duty upon the City, or any of its officers, employees or agents. Nothing contained in this chapter or any
procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability
on the part of the City, its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of
permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission
in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder by
the City , its officers, employees or agents.
SEC. 25.52. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section.
A. “Applicant” means any person or organization seeking a permit from the City to conduct or sponsor an event
with vendors within the City. An applicant must be eighteen (18) years of age or older. 25-9
B. “Parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public” means a parking lot for a business on private property
where the owner of the private property or business invites or allows the public access to the vendor event.
C. “Permittee” means any person or organization to whom or which has been issued by the City a vendor event
permit.
D. “Person” means any individual, organization, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or
corporation.
E. “Public building” is property owned by the City for public purpose.
F. “Public parks” are those areas designated and owned by the City for public purpose.
G. “Residents of property,” for this chapter only means all occupants collectively at any street address facing a
closure area for a vendor event occurring in or upon a City street, alley, sidewalk, public building, public park
closure or a parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public. Each street address facing a closure area for a
vendor event occurring in or upon a City street, alley, sidewalk, public building, public park, or a parking lot
open to unrestricted used by the public is entitled to one (1) objection.
H. “Service building” means a structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required by this
chapter.
I. “Vendor event” means a preplanned and temporary single unrestricted gathering, event or series of related
daily unrestricted gatherings recurring or other event within the City of an entertainment, cultural, recreational,
educational, political, religious or sporting nature, or of any other nature which include vendors as defined by
this Code.
J. “Vendor event permit” means a permit as required by this chapter for a vendor event occurring in or upon a
City street, alley, sidewalk, public building, public park, or a parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public.
K. “Unrestricted” means open to the general public.
SEC. 25.53. VENDOR EVENT PERMIT – WHEN REQUIRED.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any vendor event in or upon a City street, alley,
sidewalk, public building, public park, or parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public or overnight
camping at a vendor event, unless a vendor event permit has been obtained from the City.
B. This chapter shall not apply to:
1. Events which do not include vendors;
2. Regularly scheduled school events and parades, which use existing parking, traffic controls and public
safety support; and
3. A governmental agency.
SEC. 25.87. VENDOR EVENT PERMIT – APPLICATION PROCEDURE – FILING PERIOD.
A. A person seeking to hold a vendor event in or upon a City street, alley, sidewalk, public building, public park or
a parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public, shall file an application for vendor event permit with the
City Clerk or designee on a form provided by the City.
B. An application for a vendor event permit shall be filed with City Clerk not less than thirty (30) days before the
date on which vendor event is to be held.
C. The application for a vendor event permit occurring in or upon a City street, alley, sidewalk, public building,
public park, or a parking lot open to unrestricted used by the public, shall set forth the following information:
25-10
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such vendor event and an
alternate contact person;
2. If the vendor event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name,
address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and/or of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization;
3. If the vendor event if designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant,
the applicant for such permit shall file with City a communication in writing from the person proposing to
hold the vendor event authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;
4. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be present and in charge of the vendor
event on the day(s) of the event;
5. The date and time (starting and ending) when the vendor event is to be conducted;
6. The nature/purpose of the vendor event;
7. Location of the event, including its boundaries;
8. Estimated number of participants in the event;
9. Estimated number of spectators and vehicles expected;
10. The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and/or structures which will be used at the
vendor event;
11. Description of any equipment which will be used at the vendor event including, but not limited to, soundamplifying
systems, use of tents or canopies, or power washers for cleaning of surfaces before, after or
during the event;
12. A list of all vendors, the type of items to be sold including, but not limited to, open burning or open flame
cooking shall be provided to the City no later than 48 hours prior to the vendor event. Vendors listed by
the vendor event permit applicant shall not be subject to vendor permitting described in Section 25-1-a
through 25-30 of this Chapter. The City reserves the right to suspend the vendor request for recurring
events.
13. Whether monitors and/or security guards will be employed at the vendor event;
14. Parking requirements for the vendor event;
15. Provisions for clean-up during and after the vendor event, including, but not limited to, removal of trash
and private trash receptacles;
16. Any medical aid stations;
17. Potential for pollutants that could affect the City’s storm water system;
18. Additional information required for parades, races and other events occurring along a route:
i. The route to be traveled or closed, the starting point and the termination point;
ii. The assembly point for the event, the time at which units of the parade or other event will begin
to assemble;
iii. Whether the parade or other event will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be
traversed; and
25-11
iv. Any other special circumstances that should be disclosed to the City that could affect the health,
safety, and welfare of residents of the City.
D. The City, where good cause is shown therefore, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder
which is filed less than thirty (30) days before the date such vendor event permit occurring in or upon a City
street, alley, sidewalk, public building, public park, or parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public, is
proposed to be conducted.
E. There shall be a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) non-refundable processing fee for a vendor event permit
application. Recurring events shall submit one (1) non-refundable processing fee for the vendor event permit
annually.
F. In the event the application does not require either a street closure or financial expenditure, including additional
police or fire resources, the City Clerk may approve the application without requiring presentation to the
Council.
SEC. 25-55. PERMITS – NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS.
Prior to the issuance of a vendor event permit, the City shall send a copy thereof to the following and receive
approval by:
A. Police Chief;
B. Public Works Director;
C. Fire Chief, and;
D. City Clerk.
If the City Council has not received approval from the above-described individuals prior to the Council addressing
the vendor event permit; the City will assure that the individual has no objections and proceed with consideration of
applications.
SEC. 25.56. PERMITS – CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE – GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
A. The City shall issue a vendor event permit for a vendor event occurring in or upon City street, alley, sidewalk,
public building, public park or on any parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public for a vendor event as
provided for in this chapter unless it finds, from a consideration of the application and/or from such other
information and recommendations and/or conditions obtained from the City police department, City fire
department and/or City public works, that:
1. The conduct of the vendor event permit will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other
traffic contiguous to its route;
2. The conduct of the vendor event will require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City
to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the City;
3. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the vendor event in or upon a
street, alley, sidewalk, public building, public park or on any parking lot open to unrestricted use by the
public will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas
contiguous to such assembly areas;
4. The conduct of such vendor event will interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment and emergency
vehicles en route to a fire;
5. The size, nature or location of the vendor event is reasonably likely to cause a clear and present danger of
injury to persons and properly and/or would disrupt public peace;
6. Information contained in the application for a vendor event permit or supplemental information requested
from the applicant is found to be false in a material detail;
25-12
7. The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information
or documents required;
8. Another vendor event permit has been received prior in time or has already been approved for the same
time and place requested by the applicant or so close in time and place to that requested by the applicant
that the issuance of both permits would cause undue traffic congestion or cause the City police or fire
departments to be unable to meet the needs for police or fire services for both events;
9. The location of the vendor event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work
scheduled to take place upon City streets; or
10. The vendor event will violate a City Code or State statute.
B. When the grounds for denial of an application for a vendor event permit within the City per subsection (A) of
this section, may be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, and/or the route or location of the event
from that named by the applicant, the City may, instead of denying the application, conditionally approve
upon the applicant’s acceptance of conditions for the vendor event permit. The conditions imposed shall
provide the only such modification of the applicant’s proposed vendor event as are necessary to achieve
compliance with subsection (A) of this section. The applicant desiring to accept an alternate vendor event
permit shall, within three (3) days after receiving notice of the action of the City, file a written notice of
acceptance with the City. Said alternate vendor event permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall
have the effect of, that particular type of permit under this chapter.
C. The City may condition the issuance of a vendor event permit by imposing time, place and route of the event
and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety of persons and
property and the control of traffic. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event;
2. Requirements concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parades or other events occurring
along a route;
3. Requirements concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the
event to only a portion of a street;
4. Requirements for the use of traffic cones, barricades or other traffic-control device;.
5. Requirements for provision of first aid and/or sanitary facilities;
6. Requirements for use of vendor event monitors and providing notice of vendor event conditions to event
participants;
7. Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, recreational trailers, animals or structures at the
vendor event and inspection and approval of floats, structures and decorated vehicles for the fire safety
by the City fire department;
8. Provision for solid waste collection and disposal, cleanup, restoration, water, and sewage;
9. Restrictions on use of amplified sound;
10. A requirement that notice to be given to the residents of property along the affected street(s), alley(s),
sidewalk(s), park(s), public building(s), and/or parking lot open to unrestricted use by the public.
Notification shall be by U.S. Mail or publication in a newspaper of general circulation. The City shall
specify all requirements for Notice at the time of considering the permit application;
11. A requirement that any applicant or authorized officer of the sponsoring organization possess or obtain
public liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of
bodily injury and property damage arising from the event. If insurance coverage is required as a
condition of issuance of a vendor event permit, the City shall determine the amount of insurance
required, based upon the considerations routinely taken into account by the City in evaluating loss
exposures, including, but not limited to, whether the vendor event poses a substantial risk of damage or
25-13
injury due to the anticipated number of participants, the nature of the vendor event and activities
involved and the physical characteristics of the proposed site. Such insurance shall name on the policy
or by endorsement as additionally insured, the City, its officers, employees and agents. A certificate of
insurance coverage must be filed with the City no less than five (5) days before the date of the vendor
event unless the City changes the filing deadline, in which event such documents shall be provided
prior to the event.
12. A requirement that the applicant or authorized officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, sign an
agreement for the permittee to reimburse the City for any costs incurred by it in repairing damage to
City property which are determined by the City to have been
proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, his or her officers, employees or
agent, or any person who was under the permittee’s control. Any such agreement may also provide
that the permittee shall defend the City against, and indemnify and hold harmless, the City, its officers,
employees, and agents from all causes of action, claims or liabilities occurring in connection with the
permitted even, except those which occur due to the City’s sole negligence; and
13. Compliance with any relevant law.
SEC. 25.57. PERMIT CONSIDERATION AND APPEAL PROCEDURE.
The City shall act upon the application for a vendor event permit within five (5) days after the filing thereof or the
next regularly scheduled council meeting following the application date. If the City disapproves the application for
failure to meet the conditions as outlined in this chapter, the City shall state the reason for the denial or stipulate
additional conditions. The applicant shall have the right to appeal to City council the denial of the vendor event permit
or a condition of the vendor event permit. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the City setting forth the grounds for
the appeal within three (3) business days after receipt or personal delivery of a notice of denial or permit condition.
The City Council shall review the appeal prior to the requested date for the vendor event either at the next scheduled
meeting of City Council or at a special meeting to review the appeal. The City Council’s decision shall be final and not
subject to further appeal.
SEC. 25.58. DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
A. A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all terms, directions and conditions of the vendor event permit
and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
B. The permittee shall ensure that the person in charge of the vendor event is familiar with all the provisions of the
permit and carries the vendor event permit for a vendor event upon his or her person during the duration of
vendor event.
SEC. 25.59. PERMIT – REVOCATION CONDITIONS.
The City shall have the authority at any time to revoke or terminate a vendor event permit for a vendor event
issued under this chapter upon violation of the standards for issuance as set forth in this chapter and/or conditions
placed on the issuance of the vendor event permit, or if the continuation of vendor event presents a clear and present
danger to the participants or the public.
SEC. 25.60. PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON VENDOR EVENTS – SIGNS.
The City shall have the authority, when reasonable necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a
highway or an alley, or any part thereof constituting a part of the vendor event. The City shall have signs posted to
such effect, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person
shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter.
SEC. 25.61. REPEALER.
All ordinances or part of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SEC. 25.62. SERVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance or application thereof to any
person or circumstances is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of the ordinance.
25-14

CHAPTER 26
TREE CUTTERS.
Chapter 26 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1984, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 1292, 9/07)
26-1
CHAPTER 27
WATER AND SEWERS. 1
1. For state law authorizing the town to establish a system of drainage, sanitary
sewers and water mains and to provide and regulate the construction, repair and
use of sewers and drains, see W.S. 1977, § 15-1-103.
As to pollution of streams, see Sec. 16-29 of this Code. As to plumbing
regulations generally, see Chapter 18. As to depositing filthy, etc., water on
sidewalks, see Sec. 20-9. For regulations concerning water supply in trailer
courts, see Sec. 24-15. As to sewage disposal in trailer courts, see Sec. 24-16.
Article I. In General.
§ 27-1. Street paving – Water and sewer connections to be made prior thereto.
§ 27-2. Same – Same – Notice to abutting owners; failure to obey notice.
Article II. Water
Division 1. Generally.
§ 27-3. Provisions of chapter, etc., part of water contract; cutting off and turning on water generally.
§ 27-4. Application for water.
§ 27-5. Shutting off water for repairs, etc.
§ 27-5.1. Termination of service.
§ 27-5.2. Utility termination procedure.
§ 27-6. Charge for resuming service.
§ 27-7. Water charged to property owner.
§ 27-8. Turning on water into service pipes.
§ 27-9. Water register.
§ 27-10. Use restricted to authorized consumer; extension of pipes, etc.
§ 27-11. Excavations in streets for making water taps, etc.
§ 27-12. Charges and specifications for tapping water system.
§ 27-12.1. Water tap fees.
§ 27-12.1. (a) Water line fire tap.
§ 27-12.2. City to furnish tap, corporation etc.
§ 27-13. Further specifications for service pipes.
§ 27-13.1. Compaction requirements.
§ 27-14. Licensed plumber to make tap, etc.
§ 27-15. Inspection and approval of plumbing work.
§ 27-16. Interference with water mains, etc.
§ 27-17. Installation of water meters by City.
§ 27-18. Commercial business required to install approved and operable meter prior to receiving City water
service.
§ 27-19. Cost and approval of meter.
§ 27-20. Protection of service pipes from freezing.
§ 27-21. Fire hydrants.
27-1
Division 2. Water Rates.
§ 27-22. Repealed.
§ 27-23. Time of payment of water rents; turning off for nonpayment.
§ 27-24. Monthly water rates.
§ 27-25. Meter rates.
§ 27-26. Special rates.
Division 3. Restrictions on use of Water.
§ 27-27. Outdoor uses during certain times and in certain sections of City.
§ 27-28. Specific instances.
§ 27-28A. Water conservation.
§ 27-28B. Tampering with water meters.
§ 27-29. Consumers outside City limits.
§ 27-30. Penalties.
Article III. Sewers.
Division 1. In General.
§ 27-31. Supervision.
§ 27-32. Repealed by Ordinance No. 671.
§ 27-33. Certain occupied premises to be connected with public sewer; cesspools, etc., prohibited; failure to
obey notice to connect, etc.
§ 27-34. Permit to connect with sewer – Required.
§ 27-35. Same – Application, fee, etc.
§ 27-35.1. Sewer tap fees.
§ 27-36. Specifications for connections with public sewer.
§ 27-36.1. Wastewater facilities replacement fund.
§ 27-37. Rainwater leaders not to be connected.
§ 27-37A. Wastewater from air-conditioning systems.
§ 27-38. Entering manholes, etc., interfering with sewers, etc., prohibited.
Division 2. Sewer Rates.
§ 27-38.1. Definitions.
§ 27-38.2. Bi-monthly sewer usage fee.
§ 27-38.3. Same – Trailer court spaces.
§ 27-38.4. Temporary discontinuance of use of sewer by commercial users.
-
Article IV. Water and Sewer Permits Generally.
§ 27-39. Issuance.
§ 27-40. Denial.
§ 27-41. Revocation.
§ 27-42. Penalties.
§ 27-43. Maintenance.
§ 27-44. Sewer and water register.
§ 27-45. Replacement of service.
§ 27-46. Severability.
§ 27-47. City standards by resolution.
27-2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL.
SEC. 27-1. STREET PAVING – WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE PRIOR THERETO.
Section 27-1 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-2. SAME – SAME – NOTICE TO ABUTTING OWNERS; FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE.
Section 27-2 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
ARTICLE II. WATER.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 27-3. PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER, ETC., PART OF WATER CONTRACT; CUTTING OFF AND TURNING
ON WATER GENERALLY.
Section 27-3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-4. APPLICATION FOR WATER.
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring sewer or water extension, or both, within the City of Buffalo
shall make application to the City Building Inspector for service.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each lot benefited
by the proposed utility extension.
Upon the determination by the Building Inspector that the herein prescribed standards have been complied with
and the payment of the appropriate “tap” fee or fees, service shall be approved. (Ord. 841, § 3)
SEC. 27-5. SHUTTING OFF WATER FOR REPAIRS, ETC.
Section 27-5 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-5.1. TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
The City of Buffalo reserves the right to terminate either sewer or water service, or both, for repairs, extensions, or
nonpayment of user fees. (Ord. 841, § 6)
SEC. 27-5.2. UTILITY TERMINATION PROCEDURE.
1) Intent and Purpose.
a) To ensure timely and complete payment of all utility charges and surcharges arising from utility services.
b) To regulate termination of utility services to customers for nonpayment of utility charges and surcharges.
c) To provide full and adequate notice to a customer of a termination of utility service to that customer and of
the procedure to follow to avoid termination.
d) To provide customers with a fair and reasonable opportunity, prior to termination, to dispute the correctness
of utility charges and surcharges.
e) To standardize the contents of the utility bill, the notice of termination and other notices sent to customers.
f) To regulate termination of utility services to customers for nonpayment of utility charges and surcharges.
2) Definitions. As used in this ordinance:
a) “Customer” shall mean the owner, over seventeen (17) years of age, of a building, structure or residence,
who receives utility service from the City.
27-3
b) “City” shall mean the City of Buffalo.
c) “Utility Service” shall mean the service of providing water, garbage or sewer service through the authority of
the City of Buffalo.
d) “Rental Property” shall mean any structure wherein a tenant has an exclusive right of occupation or use of a
house, apartment or other structure for a period of not less than ten (10) days.
3) Application for Residential Utility Service.
a) Any customer who receives service after the passage, approval and adoption of this ordinance shall
complete and submit to the City a “Utility Service Application and Agreement”. The application and agreement shall
request the following information:
1) The name and signature of the applicant;
2) The address to be supplied utility service;
3) The prior address of the prospective customer;
4) The desired date for commencement of utility service; and
5) Any other information deemed necessary by the City Clerk.
b) The application and agreement form shall also contain the following:
1) Written assurance to the prospective customer that the customer shall receive upon written request, a
copy of this ordinance and all regulations promulgated under it.
2) Written acknowledgment by the prospective customer that he / she is responsible for the timely and
complete payment of all utility charges and surcharges arising from utility service supplied to the residence identified
in the application and agreement form.
c) Utility service shall not be supplied to any prospective customer if that person has any outstanding and
unpaid utility charges or surcharges arising from prior utility service.
4) Utility Bill. A utility bill shall be mailed every month to every customer for utility service supplied during the time
period shown on the utility bill. Each utility bill shall contain the following information:
a) The utility charge and surcharge due;
b) The date of the utility bill;
c) The date when complete payment is due to the City, which shall be ten (10) days from the date of the utility
bill; and
d) The account number assigned to the customer. (RO 1381 §27 4/16)
5) Customer Dispute.
a) At any time before the date of termination of utility service for nonpayment of the amount(s) shown on a
utility bill, a notice of rejection or a notice of termination, a customer may dispute the correctness of all or part of the
amount(s) shown in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. A customer shall not be entitled to dispute the
correctness of all or part of the amount(s) if all or part of the amount was the subject of a previous dispute under this
Section.
b) The procedure for residential customer disputes shall be as follows:
1) Before the date of termination, the customer shall notify the City, in writing, that he disputes all or part of
the amount(s) shown on a utility bill, a notice of rejection or a notice of termination, stating as completely as possible
the basis for the dispute.
27-4
2) If the City determines that the present dispute is untimely or that the customer previously disputed the
correctness of all or part of the amount(s) shown, the City shall mail to the customer a notice stating that the present
dispute is untimely or invalid. The City shall then proceed as if the customer had not notified the City of the present
dispute.
3) If the City determines that the present dispute is not untimely or invalid under this Action, the City, within
three (3) days after receipt of the customer’s notice, shall arrange an informal meeting between the residential
customer and an official of the City.
4) Based on the City’s records, the customer’s allegations and all other relevant materials available to the
official, the official shall resolve the dispute, attempting to do so in a manner satisfactory to both the City and the
customer.
5) Within five (5) days of completion of the meeting, the official shall mail to the customer a copy of his
decision resolving the dispute.
6) Utility Service Termination Procedure.
a) If by the payment date shown on a utility bill or a notice of rejection, the City has not received complete
payment of the amount(s) shown on the bill or the notice, the City shall mail to the customer a notice of termination at
least thirty (30) days after the payment date.
b) The notice of termination shall contain the following:
1) The amount to be paid;
2) The date of the notice of termination;
3) The date of termination, which shall be at least ten (10) days from the date of the notice of termination;
4) Notice that unless the City receives complete payment of the amount shown prior to the date of
termination, utility service shall be terminated;
5) Notice that in lieu of paying the entire amount shown, the customer, prior to the date of termination, may
notify the City that he disputes the correctness of all or part of the amount shown, if all or part of the amount shown
was not the subject of a previous dispute.
c) If, prior to the date of termination:
1) The City has not received complete payment of the amount shown on the notice of termination; or
2) The customer has not notified the City that he disputes the correctness of all or part of the amount
shown on the notice of termination;
then the City shall terminate utility service provided to the customer on the date of termination.
d) If the City receives payment of the entire amount shown on the notice of termination prior to the date of
termination, such payment shall be considered a timely and complete payment for purposes of this ordinance.
7) Limitations on Termination of Utility Service.
a) The City shall terminate utility service for nonpayment of utility charges and / or installments and
surcharges only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday. No terminations shall be
permitted on a legal holiday or on the day before a legal holiday.
b) The City shall not terminate utility service for nonpayment of amounts less than twenty dollars ($20.00).
27-5
8) Reinstatement of Utility Service. In the event of termination of utility service in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance, the City shall reinstate utility service to the customer within twenty-four (24) hours of the City’s
receipt of complete payment of the amount whose nonpayment prompted the termination. Such payment shall not be
considered a timely payment for purposes of this ordinance. The City shall charge a $20.00 fee to reinstate utility
service.
9) Termination of Service to Rental Property. Before the City terminates service to a customer owning rental
property housing one or more tenants, the City shall notify all the tenants of the customer’s failure to pay.
10) Computation of Time. In computing any time period under this ordinance, the first day of each period shall
not be counted. The last day of each time period shall be included unless the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday. If the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the time period shall run until the next day
that does not fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded from the computation.
11) Separability. The provisions of this ordinance are separable and if any provision, clause, sentence,
subsection, word or part thereof is held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person or
circumstance, such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, subsections, words or parts of this ordinance or their application to other
persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this ordinance would have been
adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provision, clause, sentence, subsection, word or part had not been
included therein, and if such person or circumstance, to which the ordinance or part thereof is held inapplicable, had
been specifically exempt therefrom.
12) Validity. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. The invalidity of any
section, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance
which can be given effect without such invalid part of parts. (Ord. 1005, 8/83)
SEC. 27-6. CHARGE FOR RESUMING SERVICE.
See 27-5.2, Section B of the Buffalo City Code, 1964. (Ord. 1005, 8/83)
SEC. 27-7. WATER CHARGED TO PROPERTY OWNER.
The water and sewer users fee shall be assessed against the property upon which the service is furnished.
All accounts for water and sewer shall be kept in the name of the owner of the property and not in the name of the
tenant; the owner shall be responsible to the City of Buffalo for the payment of water and sewer users fee.
In the event of non payment of the users fee for water or sewer, or both, the City Clerk is instructed in addition to
termination of service to proceed with collection of any delinquent amount as provided by Section 27-5.2.
SEC. 27-8. TURNING ON WATER INTO SERVICE PIPES.
Any person, firm, or corporation is prohibited from turning water into any service pipe, except on the order or
permission of the City Building Inspector or his duly authorized agent. This shall not prevent any licensed plumber
from admitting water to pipes for test purposes only. (Ord. 841, § 8)
SEC. 27-9. WATER REGISTER.
Section 27-9 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-10. USE RESTRICTED TO AUTHORIZED CONSUMER; EXTENSION OF PIPES, ETC.
Section 27-10 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-11. EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS FOR MAKING WATER TAPS, ETC.
Section 27-11 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
27-6
SEC. 27-12. CHARGES AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TAPPING WATER SYSTEM.
Section 27-12 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-12.1. WATER TAP FEES.
a) Any person, firm, corporation or partnership desiring to obtain water from the City of Buffalo shall pay to the
City Building Inspector a ‘Tap Fee’ for each tap so obtained. All tap fees for sewer and water taps shall be paid at the
same time the Building Permit Fees are collected. The schedule of tap fees for each tap up to six inches (6”) shall be
as follows:
Tap Size Tap Fees
(inches) (Dollars)
¾” --------------------------------- $ 1,500 (2005)
¾” --------------------------------- $ 2,500 (2006)
1” --------------------------------- $ 2,650
1 ¼” --------------------------------- $ 3,150
1 ½” --------------------------------- $ 3,750
2” --------------------------------- $ 4,500
3” --------------------------------- $ 8,000
4” --------------------------------- $11,000
5” --------------------------------- $22,300
6” --------------------------------- $32,100 (Ord. 1250, § 7,19/2005)
b) For water taps larger than one inch (1”), material and labor costs incurred by the City while installing the tap
shall be charged in addition to the scheduled tap fee.
c) For water taps larger than six inches (6”), the fee for installation shall be prorated from the above tap fee
schedule according to the cross sectional area of the tap installed.
d) For any person, firm or corporation not in the City limits, water tap fees shall be two (2) times the rate set out in
the above tap fee schedule for each tap installed.
e) Any person, firm or corporation who desires to obtain City water and who also has a water well system shall be
required to completely disconnect any well water line(s) from any water line(s) connected to the City system. This
disconnection shall be verified by a City employee before use of the City water shall be allowed. (Ord. 993, 10/82)
SEC. 27-12.1. (a) REQUIREMENTS FOR A WATER LINE FIRE TAP.
The following requirements shall be met for property owners desiring a water line fire tap in addition to the other
water service provided to the property owner. In order to obtain a water line fire tap, the property owner must meet
the following requirements:
a) There shall be separate curb stops for both the fire and the domestic water lines. All curb stops are to be
outside the property line and will be located on City property or in a City right-of-way.
b) Each domestic tap is to be located on the fire line ahead of the fire line curb stop.
c) If recommended by the Water Commissioner, larger size fire lines may require hot taps as determined by the
Water Commissioner so that City service does not have to be shut down.
d) All costs of the taps, curb stops and line shall be paid for by the property owner.
e) There will be an additional $250.00 fee for each fire line in addition to the full price for the domestic tap.
f) All costs of labor, material, and inspection by the City are to be paid for by the property owner.
g) Meters will not be required on the fire line unless as determined as necessary by the Water Commissioner, and
there shall be a meter located on the domestic line.
27-7
h) Each property owner is to provide and install at his own expense on the fire line a backflow preventer to be
approved by the Water Commissioner.
i) All work done on public property shall meet the requirements of the Wyoming Public Works Standard
Specifications latest edition.
j) All work done on private property shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the International Plumbing
Code. (Ord. 1061, § 1, 9/8; R.O. 1261 §6 6/06)
SEC. 27-12.2. CITY TO FURNISH TAP, CORPORATION ETC.
In all water installations the City of Buffalo shall furnish the corporation cock. The curb stop, curb box, meter and
remote reader, meter pit, backflow preventer, and all fittings shall be approved by the City as to type, quality, and
name brand; all of which are to be furnished by the property owner. Approved compression fittings shall have a
stainless steel insert.
The contractor shall be responsible for all excavation and installation except that the City shall make the actual tap
to the water main. The plumber shall make the connection at the corporation cock in the water main and install the
copper or PE pipe with the curb stop being located within the street, but within five feet (5’) of the property line. From
the curb stop the plumber shall install the meter and remote, the meter and remote shall be placed where specified by
the City. After completion of the meter and remote installation, the City shall be notified so the work my be inspected.
(Ord. 1145, § 1, 1/96) (R.O. 1285, § 2, 7/07)
SEC. 27-13. FURTHER SPECIFICATIONS FOR SERVICE PIPE.
Section 27-13 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-13.1. COMPACTION REQUIREMENTS.
Any trench or excavation opened on or in any street, avenue, alley or thoroughfare within the City of Buffalo, must
be backfilled and the backfill material placed over and around the pipe to a depth of twelve inches above the pipe
shall be compacted to not less than 90% of the maximum dry density as determined by the AASHO T99 or AASHO
T147 methods. When the trench or excavation is in an oiled or surfaced street, alley, avenue or thoroughfare, the top
(1’) one foot shall be compacted to a density of not less than 95% of the maximum dry density as determined by
AASHO T99 methods. (Ord. 841, §15)
SEC. 27-14. LICENSED PLUMBER TO MAKE TAP, ETC.
Section 27-14 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-15. INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF PLUMBING WORK.
Section 27-15 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-16. INTERFERENCE WITH WATER MAINS, ETC.
Section 27-16 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-17. INSTALLATION OF WATER METERS BY CITY.
Section 27-17 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
27-18. COMMERCIAL BUSINESS REQUIRED TO INSTALL APPROVED AND OPERABLE METER PRIOR TO
RECEIVING CITY WATER SERVICE.
Section 27-18 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
27-8
SEC. 27-19. COST AND APPROVAL OF METER.
Section 27-19 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-20. PROTECTION OF SERVICE PIPES FROM FREEZING.
Section 27-20 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-21. FIRE HYDRANTS.
All fire hydrants installed in the City of Buffalo for fire protection are hereby declared to be public property. It shall
be unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department during fires or the water or street
superintendent, to open any hydrants or attempt to draw water from the same or, at any time to uncover or remove
any protection from any hydrants, or in any manner to interfere with the same. No person authorized to open such
hydrants shall delegate his authority except for purposes strictly connected with the fire department. (Ord. 841)
Division 2. Water Rates.
SEC. 27-22. REPEALED.
SEC. 27-23. TIME OF PAYMENT OF WATER RENTS; TURNING OFF FOR NONPAYMENT.
Section 27-23 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
SEC. 27-24. MONTHLY WATER RATES.
The monthly rates of the use of water from the City of Buffalo water system shall be as follows:
a) For residential and commercial purposes within the City limits of Buffalo, Wyoming, a minimum charge of
Thirty-Nine and 75/100 Dollars ($39.75) monthly. For residential or commercial use beyond the City limits of Buffalo,
Wyoming, the minimum charge shall be Seventy-Nine and 50/100 Dollars ($79.50) monthly.
b) Multiple unit facilities, such as apartments and other buildings consisting of more than one unit shall be
charged a minimum rate of Thirty-Nine and 50/100 Dollars ($39.50) monthly for the first unit and a reduced rate of
Twenty-Five and 25/100 Dollars ($25.25) monthly for each additional unit.
c) Mobile home parks shall be charged a minimum rate of Thirty-Nine and 75/100 Dollars ($39.75) monthly for
the first unit, a reduced rate of Twenty-Five and 25/100 Dollars ($25.25) monthly for each additional occupied unit
and Four and 00/100 Dollars ($4.00) monthly for each additional vacant unit. The owner of the Mobile Home Park
shall report in writing to the City the number of vacancies on March 15th, July 15th and November 15th of each year
hereafter in order to receive the vacant unit rate. (Ord. 1257, § 04, 18/06; R.O. 1297 1, 2/08, RO 1381 § 27 4/16)
This ordinance shall become effective on July 1, 2004. (Ord. 1257, § 04, 18/06; R.O. 1297 1, 2/08, 27-13)
SEC. 27-25. METER RATES.
Each individual water service line shall be metered in accordance with this Chapter. The minimum charge
required in Section 27-24 of this Code shall entitle the owner of the unit or units Ten Thousand (10,000) gallons of
water for the one-month billing period and Five Thousand (5,000) gallons per monthly billing period for each
additional unit which is part of a multi-unit facility.
The water rate to be paid by the holder of any unit in excess of the entitlement provided for by the minimum
charge described in Section 27-24 shall be as follows, with the additional provision that each water user beyond the
City limits shall pay double the charge for gallons above entitlement:
27-9
GALLONS ABOVE ENTITLEMENT RATE
Next 10,000 Gallons ------------------------------- $0.50 per 1,000 Gallons
Next 10,000 Gallons ------------------------------- $0.60 per 1,000 Gallons
Next 10,000 Gallons ------------------------------- $0.70 per 1,000 Gallons
Next 10,000 Gallons ------------------------------- $0.95 per 1,000 Gallons
Next 10,000 Gallons ------------------------------- $1.20 per 1,000 Gallons
Next 10,000 Gallons ------------------------------- $1.35 per 1,000 Gallons
Next 10,000 Gallons ------------------------------- $1.50 per 1,000 Gallons
Next 10,000 Gallons ………………………. $1.65 per 1,000 Gallons
Over 100,001 Gallons ………………………. $1.80 per 1,000 Gallons
This ordinance shall become effective on July 1, 2004. (Ord. 1245, § 3, 06/05, RO 1381 § 27 4/16)
SEC. 27-26. SPECIAL RATES.
There shall be a Twenty Dollar ($20.00) charge for water shut-offs other than for the purpose of repair and a
Twenty Dollar ($20.00) charge for the resumption of water service. Requests for on and off service shall be made in
writing to City Hall. (Ord. 1079, § 3, 10/89)
SEC. 27-27. OUTDOOR USES DURING CERTAIN TIMES AND IN CERTAIN SECTIONS OF CITY.
a) Effective immediately, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons using municipal water supply for lawn
irrigation or other outdoor use:
i) All residences which have a even number for their street address shall only use water for lawn irrigation or
outdoor uses on even days. All residences with street addresses which have an odd number shall only use water for
lawn irrigation or other outdoor uses on odd days. A day is defined as a day commencing at 12:01 a.m. and ending at
12:00 p.m. on the same day.
ii) In the event that a month has 31 days, the 31st day of the month shall be split with residences having even
numbered street addresses watering from 12:01 a.m. until noon and residences having odd numbered street
addresses watering from noon until midnight of that day.
b) Any provisions which are related to the use of sprinkler systems are hereby repealed. (Res. 1173, 7/01)
SEC. 27-28. SPECIFIC INSTANCES.
It shall be unlawful for any water user in the City of Buffalo to use water from the municipal water supply for any
purpose in any of the following ways:
a) During Fires: To continue the use and consumption of water for irrigation or such other purposes during fires
for which the alarm has been sounded and to which the fire department has responded, when the existence of a fire
is known to the user or consumer.
b) Leakage or Wastes: To permit the service pipe, stops and all water appurtenances to be in bad repair, causing
leakage or waste which may be prevented by having all such water apparatus in good repair.
c) Use of Hose without Nozzle: To use a hose for any watering purpose without applying a one-fourth inch spray
or nozzle.
d) Use of Water for Building Purposes: To permit or cause to permit the use of water for any purpose in any
building or structure without a proper and sufficient stop and waste in the service pipe where the pipe enters the
building, located where it may be conveniently shut off.
e) Use of Water from other Property: To use and consume water for irrigation or other purposes on property from
the taps provided for adjacent or adjoining property.
f) Use Prohibited During Certain Times and in Certain Sections of City: To use and consume water for irrigation
and other outdoor uses during those periods for which restrictions to such use have been imposed by the Mayor and
Council, due to emergency or otherwise. (Ord. 924, § 2)
27-10
g) Selling of City Water Prohibited: It is prohibited to sell any City water off of the site for which the water service
is provided except that sales of water that has been further treated or distilled by the water customer may be sold in
separate containers of five gallons or less and further provided that such sales may only be carried out in properly
zoned areas. (Ord. 1196, § 1, 8/00)
SEC. 27-28A. WATER CONSERVATION.
a) Purpose: In order to conserve the water supply of the City of Buffalo; to meet the needs and demands of the
citizens of the City; and to eliminate waste in the use of such water, it shall be and is hereby made unlawful for any
person, firm, corporation or entity of any nature, to use water contrary to and in violation of the following provisions.
This ordinance shall be known as and referred to as the Water Conservation Ordinance of the City of Buffalo.
b) Definitions:
1) Outdoor watering shall mean the irrigation with water of lawns, shrubs, flowers, trees, gardens and other
outdoor vegetation for personal, private, commercial or governmental purposes; the filling or adding of water to public
or private swimming pools; the washing down with water of buildings, machinery, vehicles and appliances for
personal or private purposes, and other similar practices and acts.
2) Ultra low-flow shall mean, in the case of faucets and showerheads, devices which substantially restrict the
flow of water, while only providing sufficient water of the purpose intended, and in the case of water closets or toilets,
shall mean devices which restrict the use of water per flush to 1.6 gallons or less.
3) For the purposes of this ordinance, water user, customer and water service account shall be synonymous.
4) For the purpose of this ordinance, residential water user, in addition to meaning private residential water
user, shall also mean residents of apartments, duplexes, and other like multiple resident facilities, but shall not include
hospitals, nursing homes, or other similar uses.
c) Regulations:
1) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to allow substantial amounts of water to escape and / or drain
from private property onto public property including, but not limited to, public sidewalks, rights-of-way, streets, alleys,
and highways, provided that substantial shall mean an amount sufficient to cause a discernible flow of water reaching
the street, gutter, or other drainage system.
2) That from and after the effective date of this ordinance, no building permit shall be issued for any new
construction in the City of Buffalo unless and until it is adequately shown to the Building Inspector for the City of
Buffalo that said construction shall include ultra low-flow showerheads, faucets, toilets, and similar appliances.
d) Penalties: Any person accused of violation of this ordinance shall be charged in the Municipal Court of the City
of Buffalo, and shall upon conviction thereof, for the first conviction, not be fined, but shall receive a warning as to the
effect of subsequent convictions; for a second violation, not less than $-0- nor more than $25.00; and for a third or
subsequent conviction, not less than $25.00, nor more than $50.00. (Ord. 1148, § 1, 3/96)
SEC. 27-28B. TAMPERING WITH WATER METERS.
a) It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open, manipulate, interrupt, break, destroy,
impair the accuracy or usefulness of any water meter installed in the City’s water system unless such person is an
authorized representative of the City of Buffalo.
b) It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or refuse to allow authorized representatives of the City of Buffalo
during reasonable business hours to inspect, read or repair said water meter.
c) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section 27-28B shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum
not less than $25.00 and not more than $250.00, to which costs shall be added. In addition to the criminal penalties
set forth herein, for any violation of the Section 27-28B, the Mayor and City Council may order the water of the user to
be turned off until satisfactory action has been instituted to prevent the recurrence of such violations. (Ord. 1171,§ 1,
5/98)
27-11
SEC. 27-29. WATER AND SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS.
1) Except as provided herein, water and/or sewer service shall not be provided to locations outside the City limits.
2) Nothing herein shall preclude extending water or sewer service outside the City limits, on any terms negotiated,
to property owners or their successors who have transferred or granted to the City any right-of-way, easement or
other property right utilized for construction, operation or maintenance of utility service.
3) Nothing herein shall cause the termination of existing water or sewer service, outside the City limits, on the
effective date of this ordinance, provided such service is lawfully established on such date, nor shall herein preclude
service, outside the City limits, to any governmental entity.
4) At its absolute discretion, the Mayor and Council may authorize water and sewer service to locations outside
City limits. Any such service shall be subject to the following conditions, in addition to all other requirements of law,
and a violation of the following conditions shall be cause for the immediate discontinuance of such service.
(a) All water and sewer charges shall be as set forth in Section __________________l
(b) All such service shall be subject to shut-off, upon 10 days’ notice, in the event, because of a water
shortage, an adequate supply of water is not available for City residents. The Mayor and City Council
reserves, at its absolute discretion, authority to declare a water shortage;
(c) All water or sewer systems shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council. No additions,
extension, additional services or sub-service lines shall be added without consent of the Mayor and
City Council. The Mayor and city Council reserve the right to approve or disapprove such additions at
its absolute discretion. No person receiving City water or sewer service shall sell such service to
another, except as such service may run with the land;
(d) That the owner of any such property served, and his successor’s, shall execute a statement of intent
to annex, and a consent to annexation; and cooperate fully with annexation when the same becomes
legal and practicable. All contracts for such water or sewer service shall e subject to biennial review
to the legality and practicability of annexation;
(e) All line, service lines, fixtures and appurtenances used to connect to the City system, shall conform to
and meet City standards and specifications, both with regard to original installation and replacement
parts;
(f) That any applicant for water or sewer service outside City limits, shall first make application to the
City Planning Commission and that said commission shall review said application and make its
recommendation to the Mayor and City Council.
5) This ordinance shall not affect any existing agreements for water service connections for properties beyond
the corporate boundaries of the City of Buffalo, which were entered into between the City of Buffalo and property
owners prior to the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord 1134, 6/95; RO 1362, 5/13)
SEC. 27-30. PENALTIES.
Any person violating Sections 27-27 and 27-28 of this chapter or any rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder shall be issued a water regulation citation stating thereon the violation for which the citation shall be
issued. The water user shall be ordered to appear before the Police Justice at the time and place stated on the water
regulation citation to answer to the charges as may be set forth upon the citation. The Police Officer, or other
delegated official issuing the citation shall notify the City Clerk the fine indicated on the citation, which shall be
Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for the first violation of that year; Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the second violation of that
year; and One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each separate violation thereafter of that year. For the purposes of this
section, second and subsequent violations shall be considered to accrue in the calendar year in which they occur,
and they shall not continue to accrue in subsequent years. In the event such water user shall fail, refuse or neglect to
pay the fine in the aforesaid manner for any such violation, or any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, or
shall have paid the fine, as herein prescribed, for three or more violations, such water user shall, upon conviction of
the offense for that which a water regulation citation was issued, be fined in a sum not to exceed Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00).
27-12
Upon the payment of a fine for three violations of this division, or all necessary rules and regulations thereunder,
or upon conviction before the Police Justice for two violations during the year, as is provided in this section, the Mayor
and Council may order the water of the user to be turned off until satisfactory action has been instituted to prevent the
recurrence of such violations. The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may order the water turned off and refuse
to have it turned on until a good and sufficient bond has been filed with the City Clerk in the sum of Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00) after three or more violations of this division, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The
condition of the bond shall be that if within two years from the posting of the same with the City Clerk, the water user
shall again be in violation of any of the provisions of Section 27-27 and 27-28 of this Chapter or any accompanying
rules or regulations necessarily a part of such sections, it shall be forfeited to the City of Buffalo. (Ord. 1129, 8/94)
ARTICLE III. SEWERS
Division 1. In General.
SEC. 27-31. SUPERVISION.
The construction, repair, maintenance and inspection of all sewers, cellar drains leading into sewers and all
interior plumbing of every nature, whether public or private, shall be under the supervision and control of the Water
and Street Superintendent and the Inspector, as provided in Chapter 18. (R.O. 1955, § 38-1)
In all sewer service installations the plumber shall be responsible for all excavation, and installation, the City shall
furnish the saddle and make the tap into the main sewer line. (Ord. 841, § 12)
Plumbers are prohibited from making any sewer service taps into any City sewer line without prior approval from
the City Building Inspector. (Ord. 841, § 13)
SEC. 27-32. REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 671.
SEC. 27-33. CERTAIN OCCUPIED PREMISES TO BE CONNECTED WITH PUBLIC SEWER, CESSPOOLS, ETC.,
PROHIBITED; FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE TO CONNECT, ETC.
All occupied lots, or parts of lots, or lands in the City of Buffalo, within one hundred feet (100’) or less of the public
sewer, shall be connected by private drain connections with the public sewer, in the manner provided by this article,
and no privy vault or cesspool shall be maintained, kept or contained thereon. If the owner of the property coming
within the purview of this section neglects or refuses to make such connection, the City Inspector shall notify such
owner, or his agent, in writing, to make, or cause to make, such connections. If the owner or agent within thirty days
(30) from the service of such notice shall fail or neglect to comply with such notice, such owner or agent shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in Section 14-13. Every thirty (30) days of such
neglect or refusal after service of such notice shall constitute a distinct and separate offense; provided, however, that
where the weather conditions will not permit the work to be done within the thirty (30) days, or where the drainage is
such that it is impossible or impractical to make the connections herein contemplated, then this section shall not
apply.
Cesspools shall not be constructed on property abutting on sanitary sewers, after the date that public sewers are
constructed and completed and in operation on contiguous streets, or within a distance of two hundred feet (200’)
from such property; provided, that the vertical location of such public sewer is such as will permit the drainage into the
sewer of the sewage from such property. After such connections are made with the public sewer, the old cesspools
or privy vaults shall be cleaned of all contained sewage or refuse, and filled with clean sand or gravel.
SEC. 27-34. PERMIT TO CONNECT WITH SEWER – REQUIRED.
Before commencing the construction, modification or repair of any sewer, drain or cesspool, or any plumbing
intended to connect with any sewer, a written permit therefore shall first be obtained from the City Clerk. (R.O. 1955,
§ 38-2)
SEC. 27-35. SAME – APPLICATION, FEE, ETC.
Section 27-35 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 841)
27-13
SEC. 27-35.1. SEWER TAP FEES.
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership desiring sewer service from the City of Buffalo, shall pay to the City
Building Inspector prior to the City making a sewer tap a ‘Tap Fee” of One Thousand Five Hundred dollars
($1,500.00) in the year 2005 with the cost increasing to Two Thousand Five Hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in the year
2006.
Special Use fees shall be as follows:
Apartment Building ---------- $1,500.00 plus $50.00 per unit (2005)
Apartment Building ---------- $2,500.00 plus $50.00 per unit (2005)
Mobile Home Parks ---------- $1,500.00 plus $75.00 per unit (2005)
Mobile Home Parks ---------- $2,500.00 plus $75.00 per unit (2006)
Motels and Hotels ---------- $2,500.00 plus $75.00 per unit (2005)
Motels and Hotels ---------- $2,500.00 plus $75.00 per unit (2006)
(Ord. 1250, § 7, 19/2005)
SEC. 27-36. SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONNECTING WITH PUBLIC SEWER.
Private sewer connections shall be designated by Mayor and Council; and, insofar as regards quality of materials
used, methods of construction, excavation, protection of open trenches, backfilling, etc., and in all other matters
insofar as they are applicable, the specifications on file in the office of the City Clerk, under which specifications the
main sewage system of the City of Buffalo was constructed in 1911, shall apply to the construction of all connections
with the sewer, with the following restrictions:
a) Private sewers may be connected with the main street sewers only at such points where branches or Y’s have
been located. The location of all existing Y’s shall be obtained from the City Clerk. The private sewer must be laid
absolutely straight in both line and grade, from the main sewer, or in case of a very deep main sewer, from a point
directly vertical over the main sewer, connected therewith by a riser and ninety degree bend, to the cellar or
basement of the building where a manhole shall be provided to give direct access to the end of the connection for
cleaning; provided, that when the location of a building is such that it is impractical to run such sewer in a direct line, a
manhole must be placed at the point where the change of direction is to be made so that access may be had to each
run of the sewer. Such manholes shall conform to the specifications for manholes given in paragraph b) of this
section.
b) Every separate building shall have a separate and independent connection with the sewer; provided, however,
that when in the opinion of the water and street superintendent it is deemed permissible to connect two or more
buildings or a line of apartments with the same sewer connection, the main drain or lateral shall terminate in a
manhole not less than two and one half feet (2 ½’) in diameter at the bottom; the inverts of the several connections
shall be carefully formed and joined by smooth, curved channels in the concrete bottom or foundation thereof, and the
top thereof shall have a tight cast-iron cover.
c) No private sewer connections shall be of a size less than four inches (4”) internal diameter, and such
connections shall, in every case, be of sufficient size properly to accommodate the property they are intended to
serve.
d) No private sewer connections shall be laid on a lesser grade than two percent (2%), or one foot (1’) fall in fifty
feet (50’) length, except in exceptional circumstances by special permission of the water and street superintendent,
and, in all instances where it can be obtained, the minimum grade for such private connections shall be two and one
half percent (2 ½%) grade must be maintained and a three percent (3%) grade is preferable. (R.O. 1955, §38-3)
e) For all users not within the City limits who connect to the City sewer utility following the passage, approval and
adoption by the Mayor and City Council of this Ordinance, the City hereby requires that a water meter be installed and
operated, at the user’s expense, to enable the City to determine an equitable service charge. (Ord. 1006, 8/83)
27-14
SEC. 27-36.1. WASTEWATER FACILITIES REPLACEMENT FUND.
A reserve fund called the Wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund is hereby established within the wastewater
utility fund for the purpose sufficient funds to be expended for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories and
appurtenances during the useful life (20 years) of the wastewater treatment facilities necessary to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such facilities are designed and constructed. The reserve fund called the
Wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund established within the wastewater utility fund as an interest-bearing account
shall be funded by a deposit of $20,000 per year obtained from the wastewater utility fund at the end of each fiscal
year. (Ord. 1006, 8/83)
SEC. 27-37. RAINWATER LEADERS NOT TO BE CONNECTED.
Rainwater leaders shall not be connected with any private or public sewer. (R.O. 1955, § 38-4)
SEC. 27-37A. WASTEWATER FROM AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or to operate any open loop heating or cooling system, including water
cooled refrigeration equipment, which discharges waste water directly into the City sewage system, without using a
device which cools and recirculates water for reuse prior to its discharge to the City sewage system. (Ord. 1170,
5/98)
SEC. 27-38. ENTERING MANHOLES, ETC., INTERFERING WITH SEWERS, ETC., PROHIBITED.
Entrance into manholes or flush tanks or interfering in any way with the sewers or any appurtenances thereto or
connections thereto, for any purpose whatsoever, except by the water and street superintendent or other persons
duly authorized, shall be unlawful. (R.O. 1955, § 38-1)
Division 2. Sewer Rates.
SEC. 27-38.1. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them:
Single Family Unit: The toilet facilities, regardless of number, used by a single family for family purposes.
Multi-Family Unit: Toilet facilities used by private families in a community building.
Mobile Home Unit: The number of sewer hookups maintained in a commercial mobile home park. If the mobile home
is occupied under the terms of Section 24-5 of this code (as a single family – permanent structure on a single City lot)
it shall be considered a single-family unit.
Overnight Campground Unit: The number of toilets and sewer hookups within a commercial operation where mobile
homes, motor homes, pickup campers, or camp trailers are permitted to park upon payment of a daily fee.
Commercial Unit: The number of toilets maintained by any commercial enterprise or business for public or private
use by guests or customers which may be maintained in the business as part of the service offered by such business.
Industrial Use Unit: A sewer hookup from an industrial location from which effluent originates that contains industrial
wastes, and other matter which differs in composition from effluent from residential units.
Unit: Toilet, does not include urinals. (Ord. 826, § 3)
27-15
SEC. 27-38.2. MONTHLY SEWER USAGE FEE.
The monthly sewer usage fees that shall be paid by the users of the City sewage system are as follows:
Amount Per Monthly Period
A) Single Family Dwelling Units & Apartments Per Unit --------------------------- $ 20.60
B) Mobile Home Unit Per Unit ----------------------------------------------------------- $ 20.60
C) Overnight Campground Unit --------------------------------------------------- $ 4.90
Each additional unit – whether occupied or not --------------------------- $ 1.90
D) Commercial Units ---------------------------------------------------------------------- $ 20.60
Water Consumption in excess of 5,000 gallons per
Monthly period, per 1,000 gallons ------------------------------------- $ 3.30
E) Motel & Hotel Operators Per Unit --------------------------------------------- $ 8.30
Water Consumption in excess of 2,500 gallons per
Monthly period, per 1,000 gallons ------------------------------------- $ 3.30
(Ord.1246, §1, 06/05; R.O. 1299 1, 2/08; R.O. 1338 12, 15/09; R.O. 1360 2, 19/13)
F) Industrial Use.
No Industrial unit shall be connected to the City sewer system until the following has been accomplished:
1) Approval of the proposed installation, floor plan, zoning requirements and location of the proposed facility
by the City Building Inspector, City Plumbing Inspector, the City of Buffalo Planning and Zoning Board, and the Board
of Adjustment of the City.
2) Approval of the City Council of the proposed installation following the receipt of the recommendations of the
City Plumbing and Building Inspectors, the City Planning and Zoning Board and the Board of Adjustment.
3) The monthly usage fee established by the City Council. (Ord. 826, § 4)
SEC. 27-38.3. SAME – TRAILER COURT SPACES.
Section 27-38.3 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 826)
SEC. 27-38.4. TEMPORARY DISCONTINUANCE OF USE OF SEWER BY COMMERCIAL USERS.
Section 27-38.4 of the Buffalo City Code, 1964, is hereby repealed. (Ord. 826)
ARTICLE IV. WATER AND SEWER PERMITS GENERALLY.
SEC. 27-39. ISSUANCE.
Water and sewer permits shall not be issued by the City Clerk without written authorization and approval of the
Council, or its delegated representative, who, by the nature of his duties and office with the City of Buffalo, would be
responsible for the inspection and supervision of water and sewer connections to property.
It shall be unlawful for the Council or its delegated representatives to issue a water and sewer permit and
commence water and sewer service to any property in the City of Buffalo:
1) If there has been a failure to obtain a building permit as may be provided for by Chapter 5.
2) If a building permit has been obtained in violation of this Chapter or Chapter 5, providing for the issuance of
building permits.
3) If the value of the property for which a building permit has been obtained has been willfully misrepresented to
be lower than or disproportionate to a fair and reasonable estimate of the actual value thereof.
4) If the building permit has actually been obtained for a structure upon any premises which shall not be defined
as a building for which a building permit would ordinarily be issued or authorized under any ordinance.
5) If the Board of Adjustment has issued an order against any property owner under the Zoning Ordinance and
such order has not been vacated or set aside for compliance therewith. (Ord. 646, § 1)
27-16
SEC. 27-40. DENIAL.
The Council or its delegated representative shall deny the issuance of a water and sewer permit, if, by the
issuance thereof, it would be inconsistent with or in violation of any ordinance relating to building and zoning
restrictions, the unlawful occupancy and use of a trailer house upon property, or failure to comply with any ordinance
which imposes restrictions upon the use, occupancy or other regulation of property. (Ord. 646, § 2)
SEC. 27-41. REVOCATION.
The Council shall issue notice to revoke any water or sewer permit to any person who has obtained such water
and sewer permit in violation of this article or any other ordinance, to which the issuance thereof would be
inconsistent with or opposed to the intent and reasonable interpretation of this article.
a) Such person shall have not less than ten days nor more than thirty days to show cause, if any there be, at the
time and place designated in the notice, why such water and sewer permit should not be revoked and water and
sewer service forthwith terminated. The notice shall provide in concise and simple language the nature and reason
for revocation and the applicable ordinance violated.
b) The Council shall forthwith revoke the water and sewer permit and terminate the water and sewer service if
such person shall fail to appear at the hearing or fail to offer any showing why such revocation should not be ordered.
c) Any person receiving such notice may appear and be heard in person or by attorney and such hearing shall be
conducted informally.
d) In the event the Council shall order revocation of the water and sewer permit and termination of water and
sewer service after due and regular hearing, the person affected thereby shall have the right to appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction at which the issues shall be heard and determined de novo. (Ord. 646, § 4)
SEC. 27-42. PENALTIES.
Any person convicted of an offense under this chapter in addition to all other remedies herein set forth shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned in the City Jail not to
exceed ten days. (Ord. 841, § 17)
SEC. 27-43. MAINTENANCE.
The City of Buffalo shall assume no responsibility for maintenance of sewer or water service lines to or from the
property. (Ord. 841, § 17)
SEC. 27-44. SEWER AND WATER REGISTER.
The City Clerk shall keep a sewer and water register in which the City Clerk shall enter the location of the tap and
curb box, the lot and block numbers of the property served, the owner’s name to which the service shall be charged
and a complete record of amounts collected for sewer and water users fees paid together with dates services were
turned on and off. It shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector to furnish the City Clerk with all necessary
information, measurements and location to make a complete record of each tap and service pipe. (Ord. 841, § 5)
SEC. 27-45. REPLACEMENT OF SERVICE.
Any replacement of an existing water tap or sewer tap within sixty (60) days after service is terminated shall be
assessed at cost of labor and materials. (Ord. 841, § 11)
SEC. 27-46. SEVERABILITY.
Should any paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be effected thereby. (Ord. 841, § 18)
SEC. 27-47. CITY STANDARDS BY RESOLUTION.
The City of Buffalo for the protection and welfare of the general public, to facilitate water and sewer maintenance,
repair, and to standardize types of construction and installations, shall by resolution of the City Council establish
minimum standards. (See Resolution 844)
27-17
Such standards as adopted shall be available to any contractor and the general public at the City Clerk’s office
and the City Building Inspector’s office. (Ord. 841, § 16)
27-18
APPENDIX – WATER AND SEWERS.
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION AND SANITARY SEWER
CONSTRUCTION.
Editor’s note: Section 27-47 of this Code established by Ordinance 841, Section 16,
which states the Council shall establish minimum standards for the protection and
welfare of the general public, to facilitate water and sewer maintenance, repair, and
to standardize types of construction and installations by resolution. Resolution 844
establishes Minimum Standards for Water and Sewer.
This appendix is a reprint of that resolution except for a few changes in capitalization,
the correction of typographical errors and the addition of an index for the convenience
of the user.
General.
§ 1-1. Scope.
§ 1-2. Definitions.
§ 2. Installation according to standards, warranty and maintenance.
§ 3. Installation at cost of developer.
§ 4. City may participate.
§ 5. Permits for construction.
§ 6. Plans and specifications.
§ 7. Inspection of construction; notification of commencement-suspension of work; certification of materials.
§ 8. Installation to conform with State standards.
§ 9. Warranty.
§ 10. Water distribution.
Water Distribution.
A. Design.
§ 10A-1. General.
§ 10A-2. Flow.
§ 10A-3. Water pressure.
§ 10A-4. Layout.
§ 10A-5. Minimum pipe size.
§ 10A-6. Valves.
§ 10A-7. Fire hydrants.
§ 10A-8. Service connections.
B. Materials.
§ 10B-1. General.
§ 10B-2. Cast-iron pipe.
§ 10B-3. Ductile-iron pipe.
§ 10B-4. PCV pipe.
§ 10B-5. Pipe fittings.
§ 10B-6. Valves and boxes.
§ 10B-7. Butterfly valves.
§ 10B-8. All valves.
§ 10B-9. Valves boxes.
§ 10B-10. Fire hydrants.
27-18
§ 10B-11. Polyethylene wrap.
§ 10B-12. Adhesive tape.
§ 10B-13. Copper service pipe fittings.
C. Minimum Construction Requirements.
§ 10C-1. Excavation and backfill.
§ 10C-2. Installation of water mains.
§ 10C-3. Pressure and leakage tests.
§ 10C-4. Sterilization of pipe.
Sanitary Sewers.
A. Design.
§ 11A-1. Design.
§ 11A-2. Design flows.
§ 11A-3. Minimum size.
§ 11A-4. Velocity of flow.
§ 11A-5. Depth.
§ 11A-6. Alignment and location.
§ 11A-7. Clearance.
§ 11A-8. Manholes.
§ 11A-9. Sewer connections.
§ 11A-10. Roof or foundation drains.
B. Materials.
§ 11B-1. Pipe.
§ 11B-2. Manholes
C. Minimum Construction Requirements.
§ 11C-1. Excavation and backfill.
§ 11C-2. Installation of sewers.
§ 11C-3. Infiltration and exfiltration.
GENERAL.
SEC. 1-1. SCOPE.
These regulations shall apply to the design and construction of all public water distribution and sanitary sewerage
facilities installed within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming. This resolution is enacted for the
purpose of safe guarding the best interests of the public, the landowner, the subdivider, and the investor by the
establishment of adequate standards for the installation and maintenance of water and sewer piping.
27-19
SEC. 1-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this resolution, the following terms, phrases, words, and their definitions shall have the
meaning given in this Section. When inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense shall include the future
tense, words in the singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular.
1) Abbreviations: Whenever the following abbreviations are used in this resolution, they are to be construed the
same as the respective expression represented:
AASHO: American Association of State Highway Officials
ASTM: American Society for Testing Materials
ASA: American Standards Association
AWWA: American Water Works Association
GPM: Gallons Per Minute
FSSC: Federal Standard Stock Catalog
NBFU: National Board Fire Underwriters
PSI: Pounds per Square Inch
2) Alley: A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to adjoining property.
3) Building: To include all structures erected within the City of Buffalo.
4) Building Inspector: The person authorized and empowered by the City Council to issue building permits and
inspect construction.
5) City: City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
6) Easement: A specific use authorized by a property owner appurtenant to the land.
7) Existing Facilities: Existing utilities.
8) Installation Permit: Authorization for the installation of sewer or water lines, or both, issued by the Building
Inspector.
9) Licensed Engineer: A person licensed as a professional engineer by the State of Wyoming.
10) Lot: A parcel, piece, or portion of land designated by either metes and bounds, registered land survey,
auditor’s plat, or other means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for purpose of sale,
lease or separation thereof.
11) Lot Line: The property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the right-of-way
of a proposed public right-of-way, the line of such right-of-way shall be the lot line.
12) Planning Commission: The City of Buffalo Planning and Zoning Commission.
13) Service Connection: The location at which the individual service lines intersect with the main distribution or
collection lines.
14) Service Line: The service line is that portion of the installation which leads from the lot to the main distribution
or collection lines.
15) Surveyor: A person duly registered as a land surveyor by the State of Wyoming.
16) Utility: Those services provided to the general public for a fee characterized by telephone, electrical, natural
gas, television, water and sewer services.
SEC. 2. INSTALLATION ACCORDING TO STANDARDS, WARRANTY AND MAINTENANCE.
All water distribution and sanitary sewer facilities shall be installed according to these regulations and when
27-20
completed and approved by the City, shall become the property of the City of Buffalo to maintain after a one (1) year
warranty period.
EXCEPTION: The water service from the corporation cock to the property and the sewer line from the main to the
property shall be the property owner’s responsibility for maintenance.
SEC. 3. INSTALLATION AT COST OF DEVELOPER.
The subdivider or developer shall install at their cost according to these regulations, all water distribution mains,
sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances to, in and through his subdivision except as otherwise provided in these
regulations. The sewer and water mains shall always be designed so that the system may be readily extended.
SEC. 4. CITY MAY PARTICIPATE.
The City may participate in bearing the cost of larger mains for future development. The extent of the City
participation shall be the difference in the cost of materials between the minimum size (water lines six (6) inch, sewer
lines eight (8) inch) and the larger size required.
If the district, subdivision or development under one ownership is of such size that mains larger than the minimum
are required by this resolution. The entire cost of such oversized mains shall be borne by the subdivider, developer
or district.
SEC. 5. PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION.
Water distribution and sanitary sewerage facilities coming within the scope of these regulations shall be
constructed only after a permit for construction has been issued by the City. The permit for construction will not be
issued until plans and specifications covering the proposed construction have been submitted to the City and
reviewed by the City Engineer, Building Inspector, and Planning Commission.
SEC. 6. PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
Three complete copies of plans and specifications covering the proposed construction consisting of a detailed
layout of the area to be served by the proposed construction, including any contiguous or adjacent areas which might
be affect, together with sufficient details, and supplemental drawings, as may be requested for complete review of the
proposed construction,
Before a permit for construction shall be issued by the City, the final plans and specifications shall be approved by
the State of Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality.
Separate plans shall be submitted for the water distribution facilities and for the sanitary sewerage facilities. Plans
for water distribution shall show the exact location of all water mains with respect to property lines and the proposed
location of valves and fire hydrants. Plans for sanitary sewers must include profiles of each individual sewer line, and
both the invert and top elevation of each manhole. All plans must show the location and elevation of existing facilities
to which the proposed construction will connect; together with the location of other existing utilities. Specifications
covering the materials to be used and construction requirements shall accompany the plans when presented for
approval.
Plans shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 1” equals 100’. Plans shall preferably be prepared on 20” x 30”
Plan and Profile sheets. Detail or supplemental drawings to accompany plans shall be drawn on 8 ½” x 14”, 11” x 17”
or 17” x 22” size sheets.
Datum: All elevations shown on plans or drawings shall be referred to the elevation above mean sea level as
established by the City Engineer as the City Datum Plan. An assumed elevation, or arbitrary designation of an
elevation not corresponding to correct City Datum Plan, will not be acceptable.
Engineer: All designs, plans and specifications submitted for approval shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Wyoming.
27-21
“As Constructed” Drawings: Within 30 days after completion of construction, one reproducible copy and two sets
of prints of “as constructed” drawings shall be submitted for the permanent records of the City.
Engineering Surveys: All engineering surveys required for the planning, design and construction of the proposed
facilities, including detailed layout and staking for installation, shall be the responsibility of the person, firm, or
corporation requesting or receiving the permit for construction. Such surveys shall be made by a professional
engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Wyoming..
SEC. 7. INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION; NOTIFICATION OF COMMENCEMENT – SUSPENSION OF WORK;
CERTIFICATION OF MATERIALS.
a) All construction coming within the scope of these regulations shall be inspected for compliance and
conformance with the approved plans and specifications. The inspection shall be performed continually throughout
the construction under the direction of an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Wyoming and acceptable to the
City. The costs of inspection and other related work shall be borne by the subdivider or developer.
b) The City shall be notified a reasonable time in advance before actual construction is started in order that
inspection may be arranged. The engineer selected for the inspection shall have authority to order the suspension of
construction or any work not complying with the requirement of the resolution, or the approved plans and
specifications.
c) Materials installed, or work performed not in compliance with this resolution or the approved plans and
specifications, shall be removed, replaced, or placed in compliance with the resolution and all approved plans and
specifications before the construction will be accepted by the City and before the connection to the existing facilities
will be permitted. No installed materials shall be covered or backfilled until the work has been inspected and
approved. At the completion of the work the City shall be provided with a mylar copy of the “as constructed” plans
showing the location of all installed materials including service lines and a copy of the specifications for the project.
The engineer for the project shall be responsible to certify to the State DEQ that the work was completed according to
the approved plans and specifications.
d) A manufacturer’s certificate of compliance with requirements set forth in the plans and specifications shall
accompany each shipment of materials and a copy shall be submitted to the inspecting engineer. (Ord. 1161, § 1,
6/97)
SEC. 8. INSTALLATION TO CONFORM WITH STATE STANDARDS.
All water and sewer installations shall be in conformity with this resolution as well as state regulations.
SEC. 9. WARRANTY.
The person, firm, or corporation in whose name the Permit for Construction has been issued shall warrant or
guarantee the work covered by the permit for construction for a period of one (1) year from the date of final
completion of the work against defects in workmanship and materials, including settlement of backfill, and shall make
all needed repairs arising out of such defective workmanship or materials or both.
WATER DISTRIBUTION.
A. DESIGN.
SEC. 10A-1. GENERAL.
The water distribution system for any subdivision or addition to be served by the existing municipal water supply
system shall be designed such that it can deliver the required design flow to the subdivision or addition, or to any
portion thereof served by an individual street main, with the resulting residual pressure at any point to be not less than
40 psi.
Conformity to Long-Range Plan: The design of the water distribution system serving any subdivision or addition
27-22
shall conform to the long-range water distribution system plan adopted by the City and shall incorporate in the layout
the principal transmission and feeder mains provided for in the long-range plan, or those portions thereof that are
within the boundaries of the area being developed.
SEC. 10A-2. DESIGN FLOW.
The design flow to be used for the sizing of the feeder and street mains shall be the calculated maximum domestic
daily water demand based on the anticipated number of service connections (allowing for future areas to be served in
the case of feeder mains) plus the required fire flow.
a) Maximum Daily Demand: The maximum domestic daily water demand shall be based on an allowance of
375 gallons per day. In computing maximum daily demand it should be computed as four persons per connection,
the maximum daily demand per service connection will be 1,500 gallons per day or 1.04 gallons per minute.
This maximum daily demand per service connection is based on an area having 500 service connections, or more.
For a lesser number of service connections, the above maximum daily demand shall be multiplied by the following
diversity factors:
No. of Services Diversity Factor
50 or less 1.50
100 1.30
250 1.20
500 1.00
Straight-line interpolation shall be used for a number falling between those listed.
b) Fire Flow: The required fire flow to be added to the maximum domestic daily water demand to obtain the
design flow for sizing of water mains shall be as follows:
Type of Construction Fire Flow
Residential 1,000 gpm
School (residential area) 1,250 gpm
Institutional (hospital, nursing home, etc.) 1,500 gpm
Commercial 1,750 gpm
c) Peak Hourly Demand: For use in determining the variation in operating water pressures, as subsequently
specified, the anticipated peak hourly demand shall be the computed maximum domestic daily water demand
multiplied by a factor of 2.0.
SEC. 10A-3. WATER PRESSURE.
The minimum static water pressure to be provided at the street main shall be 40 psi. The maximum static water
pressure shall not exceed 100 psi.
The normal maximum variation in water pressure at any point between the static pressure and the operating
pressure during peak hourly demands (not including fire flow) shall not exceed 35 psi.
SEC. 10A-4. LAYOUT.
The layout of the water distribution system for any subdivision or addition shall consist of a closed-loop grid
system, with no dead ends or stub mains. Water mains serving cul-de-sacs or dead end streets must loop back to
the closest street main.
Where a subdivision is being developed, it shall be planned such that each stage of development will be served by
a closed-loop section to be installed prior to any lot being served by the municipal water system.
Feeder or other water mains shall be provided with the required tees, crosses, and valves, as designated by the
City Water Distribution Plan, to facilitate connections to the main in the future.
27-23
a) Location: All water mains, valves, hydrants, and other water supply appurtenances shall be installed within the
public dedicated streets and alleys or, if approved by the City, in dedicated public easements having unrestricted
access at all times, with the easement of being a covenant running with the land prohibiting the construction of
fences, structures, that would restrict, interfere, or hinder access for maintenance, repair, or replacement of the
utilities.
All water mains shall be installed within the streets, alleys or easements, at the exact location, with respect to the
street or property lines as designated by the City Engineer. On curved streets, the water mains shall be laid on a
curve, at a designated distance from the respective property lines. No water mains, or water main appurtenances
except service lines shall be installed under curbs, gutters, or sidewalks; or on private property.
SEC. 10A-5. MINIMUM PIPE SIZE.
The minimum size for any public water main shall be 6 inches, including lines to fire hydrants.
SEC. 10A-6. VALVES.
Valves shall be provided at the end of each street main, and at intermediate points along the main so that not over
one block will be placed out of service in the event repairs are required. Maximum distance between valves in a
residential area, on both street mains and feeder mains shall be 800 feet. Maximum spacing of valves on street
mains and feeder mains in a commercial area, or a commercial area with an adjacent residential area, shall be 500
feet.
At points where water mains intersect, at least two valves will be installed at each tee intersection, and at least
three valves at each cross intersection.
All valves shall be uniformly installed on property lines extended, unless otherwise designated by the City.
SEC. 10A-7. FIRE HYDRANTS.
All fire hydrants shall be installed in locations so that each hydrant will serve an area of not greater than 130,000
square feet; the distance between hydrants shall be not greater than 400 feet. A fire hydrant shall be located at each
street intersection with the intermediate hydrants evenly spaced along each street. Additional hydrants may be
required by the City where access to a hydrant may be blocked, or excessive lengths of hose lines required.
Hydrants shall be installed back of the street curb at the location designated by the City. Intermediate hydrants
along a street shall be located on the extensions of lot lines.
SEC 10A-8. SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
Individual water service lines will be required for each lot or residential to be served. Dual service to more than
one residence, or more than one lot, from a single service line connected to the street main will not be permitted.
In all subdivisions, water service lines shall be extended to the curb stop at each lot, prior to the installation of
curbs, gutters, or street paving.
B. MATERIALS.
SEC. 10B-1. GENERAL.
All water mains shall be constructed of either cast iron pipe, ductile-iron pipe or PVC Pipe, with the pipe, fittings,
valves, and other underground appurtenances to be protected against exterior corrosion by a polyethylene protective
wrap, or where previously approved by the City Building Inspector, by the use of a sand envelope backfill.
SEC. 10B-2. CAST-IRON PIPE.
Cast-iron pipe shall be designed for 150 psi working pressure, with half-thickness cement lining, meeting the
requirements of AWWA Standard C106 for Cast-Iron Pipe Centrifugally Cast in Metal Molds, or AWWA Standard
C108 for Cast-Iron Pipe Centrifugally Cast in Sand-lined Molds. Pipe shall be furnished with the single gasket pushon
joint.
27-24
SEC. 10B-3. DUCTIBLE-IRON PIPE.
Ductible-iron pipe shall be designed for 150 psi working pressure, with half-thickness cement lining, meeting the
requirements of AWWA Standard C151 for Ductible-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast in Metal Molds, or Sand-lined Molds.
Pipe shall be furnished with the single gasket push-on joint.
SEC. 10B-4. PVC PIPE.
PVC pipe shall conform to ASTM D2241-SDR21, 200 P.S.I. and shall be made from clean virgin, NSF approved
class 12454-A.P.V.C. compound conforming to ASTM resin specifications D 1784. Pipe shall be supplied with push
type joints using a rubber ring conforming to ASTM D 1869 joints to be assembled with a nontoxic lubricant.
SEC. 10B-5. PIPE FITTINGS.
Pipe fittings for either cast-iron, ductible-iron pipe or PVC shall meet the requirements of AWWA Standard C111
for Cast-Iron Pressure Fittings. Except where otherwise specified by the City, fittings shall be equipped with
mechanical-joint couplings conforming to ASA Standards for a Mechanical Joint for Cast-Iron Pressure Pipe and
Fittings on PVC.
SEC. 10B-6. VALVES AND BOXES.
Gate valves shall be iron-body, bronze-mounted, double-disc, parallel-seat, valves meeting the requirements of
AWWA Standard C500 for Gate Valves for Ordinary Water Works Service.
SEC. 10B-7. BUTTERFLY VALVES.
Butterfly valves shall conform to AWWA C504 for rubber seated butterfly valves for ordinary water works service.
SEC. 10B-8. ALL VALVES.
Either gate or butterfly shall have nonrising stems, and furnished with “O-ring” packing. Valves shall be provided
with a standard two inch square operating nut, and shall open counterclockwise. All valves shall be equipped with
mechanical-joint ends. Flange-ends for hydrant auxiliary valves shall meet the requirements for ASA Class 125 Cast-
Iron Pipe Flanges, with bolt holes straddling centerlines.
SEC. 10B-9. VALVE BOXES.
For both main line and hydrant auxiliary valves shall be a standard cast-iron, two-piece, screw-type adjustable
valve box, or correct size for the valve, designed for a five foot backfill of the pipe.
SEC. 10B-10. FIRE HYDRANTS.
All fire hydrants shall be the Mueller A-24015 AWWA improved type with six inch flanged inlet, two 2 ½” hose
nozzles, national standard hose threads, one 4” pumper nozzle with national standard hose threads, 5 ¼” main valve
and standard pentagon operating nut, or an approved equal.
Hydrants shall be designed for a top of the pipe depth of five feet. Each hydrant shall be installed with a 6 inch
flange X mechanical-joint auxiliary gate valve, meeting the standards herein specified.
SEC. 10B-11. POLYETHYLENE WRAP.
Polyethylene wrap for corrosion-protection of water mains shall be at least eight mil thickness polyethylene film in
flat tubes manufactured of virgin polyethylene as produced from DuPont Alathon Resin, or approved equal. Flat tube
widths shall be such as furnished for pipe with mechanical-joint bells. In addition to the wrap required for the pipe,
sufficient material shall be provided for corrosion-protection of fittings, valves and hydrants.
SEC. 10B-12. ADHESIVE TAPE.
Adhesive tape for the holding in place of the polyethylene wrap shall be a 2-inch Polyken No. 900, Scotchrap No.
50, or approved equal. Tape shall bond securely to both metal and polyethylene film surfaces.
27-25
SEC. 10B-13. COPPER SERVICE PIPE FITTINGS.
Copper service pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM Standard Specifications B88 for seamless Copper
Water Tube, Type K. Fittings shall be equal to Mueller H-15430 (Copper tube nuts) and H-154000 (three part union).
Corporation cocks shall be in all-bronze cock with Mueller thread inlet and copper service pipe outlet, equal to Mueller
H-15000. Curb valves shall be Ford ball or Mueller Oviseal or approved equal.
C. MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
SEC. 10C-1. EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL.
a) General: Trenches and excavations shall be kept free from water during excavation, fine grading, pipe laying
and jointing. Where the trench bottom is unstable because of the presence of water, and in all cases where the static
ground water level is above the bottom of the trench, the ground water shall be lowered by means of pumps or sand
points to keep the trench free from water and the bottom stable.
The bottom of the trench, at pipe grade, shall be free from rock, boulders, or hard lumps, and graded to provide a
uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe on solid and undisturbed soil at all points between bell holes.
b) Trench depths: Trenches for water mains shall be excavated to provide a minimum depth of 5 feet to the top
of the pipe, unless otherwise directed by the City Building Inspector. Greater depths may be required beneath
existing utilities, and in making connections to existing mains.
c) Compaction Requirements: Any trench or excavation opened on or in any street, avenue, alley or
thoroughfare within the City of Buffalo, must be backfilled and the backfill material placed over and around the pipe to
a depth of twelve inches above the pipe shall be compacted to not less than 90% of the maximum dry density as
determined by the AASHO (T99) Method. The remainder of the backfill material shall be placed in such a manner
that uniform compaction of not less than 90% of the maximum dry density as determined by AASHO T99 or AASHO
T147 methods. When the trench or excavation is in an oiled or surfaced street, alley, avenue or thoroughfare, the top
(1’) one foot shall be compacted to a density of not less than 95% of the maximum dry density as determined by
AASHO T99 method.
SEC. 10C-2. INSTALLATION OF WATER MAINS.
a) Grade and Alignment: Grade of water mains shall be as established in the field to provide a minimum depth
of five feet. Alignment of water mains shall be as shown on the plans.
b) Handling Pipe and Fittings: Handling, unloading from trucks, and installation of all pipe, fittings, valves,
hydrants, and other materials shall be by such methods as will insure their final installation in a sound and
undamaged condition.
c) Installing Pipe and Fittings: Cutting of cast-iron, ductile-iron or PVC pipe shall be done in such manner as to
avoid damage to the pipe and leave a smooth cut at right angles to the axis of the pipe. Where using a push-on joint,
the cut end shall be tapered about 1/8 inch back from the end at an angle of 30 degrees. The interior of all pipe shall
be cleaned of all foreign material before being installed and shall be kept clean until the work has been inspected and
accepted. When pipe laying is stopped at the end of a day’s work, or for any other reason, the open end of the line
shall be kept sealed with a watertight plug.
During installation, each pipe length and fitting shall be carefully inspected for defects. Defective pipe and fittings
shall be either rejected, or salvaged by cutting off the damaged portion.
1) Making-Up Push-On Joints: In making up the single rubber gasket push-on joint, the gasket and gasket
seat shall be wiped clean and the gasket placed in the bell with the large round side of the gasket first, so it will spring
into place in the bell head. The gasket shall be lubricated with a thin film of vegetable lubricant. The joint shall be
pulled together by the use of Choker slings or by the use of a bar used as a lever against the bell end of the pipe.
2) Making-Up Mechanical Joints: In making up mechanical joints, it is important that the entering spigot is
centered in, and that the gland or follower ring is parallel to the face of the connecting bell. Deflections in the pipe
joint shall be made after the bolts have been slightly and uniformly tightened. Final tightening shall be done using a
27-26
ratchet wrench, or impact wrench, with a torque of between 60 and 90 ft. lbs. bringing the following gland towards the
bell face evenly by alternate tightening of the bolts. The face of the pipe that will be in contact with the gasket, shall
be clean before assembling the joint.
d) Installing Valves and Valve Boxes: Valves and boxes shall be set plumb, with each valve box placed directly
over the valve, and with the top of the box adjusted to be flush with the finished grade. After the valve box has been
placed and thoroughly compacted around the valve and box to the full trench depth. After installation is completed,
each valve shall be checked with a valve key to determine if the key can be readily set on the operating nut.
e) Installing Fire Hydrants: Before installing each hydrant shall be checked to see that the hydrant valve is
clean, and the hydrant is in operating condition. Prior to setting, a pit at least 2 feet square and 2 feet in depth shall
be dug below the centerline of the hydrant and filled with coarse gravel or crushed rock. The hydrant, auxiliary gate
valve and box, shall be set plumb and braced into position until backfilled, with the elevation of the hydrant being set
as directed. After bracing and after application of polyethylene corrosion-protection wrap, a concrete thrust block
shall be installed back of the hydrant, with additional gravel placed to a depth of about 1 foot over the top of the pipe,
completely surrounding the hydrant and auxiliary gate valve. The remaining backfill shall be placed and thoroughly
compacted around the hydrant barrel to the full trench depth.
f) Polyethylene Wrap: Polyethylene corrosion-protection wrap shall be installed on all water mains, fittings,
valves and hydrants; with the wrap being installed in accordance with the pipe manufacturer’s recommendation. The
wrap installation shall be substantially as follows:
1) After picking up a length of pipe with pipe tongs or sling, a length of polyethylene tube, cut approximately 2
feet longer than the pipe, shall be slipped on the spigot end, bunching up the tube accordion-fashion between the
tongs and the spigot end.
2) After lowering the pipe into the trench and making up the joint, the tongs, or sling, shall be removed and
hooked into the bell end, raising the pipe sufficiently to permit the tube to be slipped along the full length of the pipe.
Enough of the tube shall be left bunched up at each end to provide an overlap at the joint of about 1 foot.
3) To make the overlap joint, the tube is pulled over the bell, folded over the adjacent spigot, and wrapped
with 3 turns of the 2 inch adhesive tape, sealing the tube to the pipe. The tube on the adjacent pipe shall then be
pulled over the first wrap and taped in place behind the bell.
4) The resulting wrap on the barrel of the pipe will be loose. Excess material shall be then pulled snugly
around the bottom of the pipe and folded over at the top, with the folds held in place by strips of adhesive tape applied
at 3 to 4 foot intervals along the pipe.
5) Valves shall be wrapped by bringing the tube on the adjacent pipe over the bells and sealing them with
tape. The valve body is then wrapped with a flat sheet of the film (cut from the tube material), passed under the
valve bottom and brought up around the body to the stem and fastened with tape.
6) Hydrants shall be protected by slipping a section of the tube over the hydrant, encasing it from the inlet
valve to ground level. The bottom of the hydrant need not be wrapped.
All fittings that require concrete thrust blocks shall be wrapped before placement o the thrust block.
1) Alternate Corrosion Protection: As an alternate to the polyethylene wrap corrosion protection, and for
use in locations specifically approved by the City, a sand envelope backfill may be used for corrosion protection. For
this type of installation, the trench shall be excavated not less than 6 inches below the specified pipe subgrade, and
the trench backfilled to the pipe subgrade elevation with sand, in which the pipe is bedded. After installation, sand
backfill shall be placed to not less than 12 inches over the top of the pipe. The remainder of the trench shall be
backfilled with excavated materials, as previously specified. At valve and hydrant locations, the sand backfill shall be
placed to within 1 foot of the surface of the ground, completely surrounding the valve box or hydrant. Sand backfill
material shall be a non-cohesive-pit-run sand or sand-gravel, with not over 10 percent clay or silt.
g) Concrete Thrust Blocks: Concrete thrust blocks shall be cast in place back of each hydrant, back of each
tee, back of each bend of 11 ¼ degrees or greater, and at such other locations as shown on the approved drawings.
27-27
Each block shall have a minimum bearing area of not less than four square feet against the undisturbed side or end of
the trench or excavation. Forming of thrust blocks shall be subject to approval of the City before actual placement of
concrete.
h) Service Connections: All service connections from the street main to the water meter (regardless of the
location of the meter) shall be constructed of copper water tube or service pipe, using copper water tube flared
fittings. Minimum size of any service shall be ¾ inch. All service lines shall be installed to provide a minimum depth
of no less than 5 feet.
The City will furnish the corporation cock and make the main tap; and will furnish, for installation by the installer,
the copper water tube and fittings from the street main to the curb stop adjacent to the property line, meter, remote
reader and wire for meter hook-up.
SEC. 10C-3. PRESSURE AND LEAKAGE TESTS.
Before final acceptance of the work by the City, the water mains, between valved sections, shall be filled and
tested for leakage at a pressure of 200 psi for a period of not less than 4 hours. Leakage must not exceed 25 gallons
per inch of diameter per mile of length per 24 hours. Where the leakage is in excess of this amount, the installer shall
locate and repair any leaks until the pipe line or main line meets the leakage limitations. Test pump, pipe
connections, pipe taps, and similar facilities shall be furnished by the installer. Test gauges will be provided by the
City.
SEC. 10C-4. STERILIZATION OF PIPE.
All water lines shall be thoroughly flushed to remove all foreign material prior to chlorination of the lines. The
flushing and sterilization of the pipe lines shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the Wyoming State
Department of Environmental Quality.
The chlorine dosage shall be at least 50 PPM and the chlorinated water shall be retained in the pipe lines not les
than 24 hours or as directed by the City after which time the chlorine residual in the pipe line shall be not less than 10
PPM. In the event that the residual is less than 10 PPM, the entire disinfection procedure shall be repeated until the
10 PPM residual is obtained.
After a pipe line has been properly chlorinated it shall be flushed to remove the highly chlorinated water. All blowoffs,
pressurizing pump, corporation stops and chlorine shall be provided by the permittee.
SANITARY SEWERS.
A. DESIGN.
SEC. 11A.-1. DESIGN.
All sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be designed to carry the design flows established in each situation by
the City after evaluation of the area served and anticipated future expansion.
SEC. 11A-2. DESIGN FLOWS.
Where actual flow measurements are not available, or where data from existing water usage or sewage flows are
not applicable, trunk or main sewers shall be designed on the basis of an average per capita flow of not less than 250
gallons per day, and lateral and sub-main sewers shall be designed for an average per capita flow of not less than
400 gallons per day. If design flows are based on sewer gauging of flow measurements, or on an analysis based on
water usage records or similar data, an outline of the design procedure used shall be presented with the plans and
specifications submitted for approval.
SEC. 11A-3. MINIMUM SIZE.
No public sanitary sewer shall be less than 8 inches in diameter. Minimum size for a house connection shall be 4
inches. Minimum size of connection for commercial or institutional service shall be in accordance with the
International Plumbing Code standards. (R.O. 1261 §6 6/06)
27-28
SEC. 11A-4. VELOCITY OF FLOW.
All sewers shall be designed and constructed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to give mean velocities, when flowing
full, of not less than 2.0 feet per second, based on Manning’s formula using a value for “n” of 0.013. The following
shall be the minimum slopes to be provided:
Sewer Slope in Feet per Foote
8” 0.0040
10” 0.0028
12” 0.0022
14” 0.0018
15” 0.0016
16” 0.0014
18” 0.0012
Upon approval by the City, slopes slightly less than those required for the 2.0 feet per second velocity when full
may be permitted. Such decreased slopes will only be considered where the depth of flow will be not less than 0.4 of
the diameter for the design average flows, and where computations of the depth of flow in such pipes at minimum
average and peak rates of flow are submitted showing the basis of design.
Maximum slopes for vitrified clay or PVC pipe shall be 0.20 for 8 inch, 10 inch, and 12 inch sizes, and 0.12 for
larger sizes. Cast-iron pipe shall be used where steeper grades are required; or drop manholes provided to reduce
the slopes to the maximum specified.
House connections shall be installed on a minimum slope of 0.020.
SEC. 11A-5. DEPTH.
Sanitary sewers shall be designated to permit floor drains from basements to be connected, unless in subdivisions
or areas in which non-basement houses are constructed. In no case shall sanitary sewers be designed for a depth of
cover of less than 36 inches over the top of the pipe. Where shallower depths are approved by the City concreteencased
pipe with or without insulation, as the City may direct, shall be used. Allowance for loads on the sewer pipe
shall be made because of width and depth of trench, concrete cradles or concrete encasements shall be installed
where required to increase the supporting strength of the pipe.
SEC. 11A-6. ALIGNMENT AND LOCATION.
Sewers shall be designed for uniform slope and alignment between manholes. When sewers are installed in
alleys they shall be installed along the centerline of the alley. Where installation is within the dedicated public
streets, the manholes shall be located so that the required horizontal clearance from water mains can be maintained,
and no portion of the sewer main will be under curb, gutter or private property. The centerline of manholes shall not
be closer than 6 feet from the flow line for any gutter. On any individual street, the sanitary sewer shall be located on
one side or the other of the street water main, with unavoidable crossings of the water main to be made at
approximately 90 degrees to the water main.
SEC. 11A-7. CLEARANCES.
Sanitary sewers shall be located to maintain a horizontal clearance of not less than 10 feet from any water main,
with a minimum vertical clearance of 1 foot (between outside of the pipes), with the sewer to be installed below the
water main. Where the required vertical clearance cannot be obtained, or where the sewer must cross above the
water main (regardless of clearance), the sewer pipe shall be constructed of pressure rated water pipe with
mechanical joints or slip on joints as set forth in this resolution for a distance of 10 feet on each side of the water
main. Sanitary sewers shall have a minimum clearance of 6 inches (between outside walls of the pipe) from gas
mains, storm drains, and other utilities.
SEC. 11A-8. MANHOLES.
Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all changes in grade, size or alignment; at all intersections
and at distances not greater than 400 feet apart. Lampholes will not be accepted as substitutes for manholes. Drop
27-29
manholes shall be provided for a lateral sewer entering a manhole at an elevation of 24 inches or more above the
manhole invert. Where sewers change in size at a manhole, the tops of the sewers shall be placed at the same
elevation.
A 0.1 foot drop shall be provided through manholes to allow for transition losses, except where approved by the
City.
SEC. 11A-9. SEWER CONNECTIONS.
House connections to any public sanitary sewer shall be made only by the use of a Y-branch or approved type of
cut in saddle. Saddles, if used, shall be of a type that will not project into the sewer or otherwise interfere with flow in
the pipe or the use of sewer cleaning equipment. Connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be made only after
the necessary permit to do so has been obtained from the office of the Building Inspector. House connections shall
be installed in accordance with applicable sections of this resolution. All cut in taps to existing sewers will be made by
the City.
In all subdivisions, house sewer connections shall be extended to the property line of each lot from the lateral or
street sewer prior to the installation of curbs, gutters and street paving.
SEC. 11A-10. ROOF OR FOUNDATION DRAINS.
No roof drains, foundation drains or sub-drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
B. MATERIALS.
SEC. 11B-1. PIPE.
All sanitary sewers, including house or service connections, within the public streets, alleys or easements, shall be
constructed of vitrified clay, cast-iron or PVC pipe or other materials approved by the City.
a) Vitrified Clay Pipe: Vitrified clay pipe, and fittings, shall meet the requirements of ASTM Tentative
Specifications for Extra Strength Clay Pipe. Designation C200.
b) Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints: All vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall be furnished with a factory-fabricated joint
meeting the requirements for ASTM Specifications for Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints having Resilient Properties,
Designation C425, for either Types 1, 2 or 3 material combinations.
c) Cast-Iron Pipe: Cast-iron sewer pipe shall be Class 150 pipe meeting the requirements previously specified
for cast-iron pipe for water mains.
d) PVC Pipe: PVC pipe shall conform to ASTM D3034-73, SDR-35; fittings and accessories shall have bell and
spigot identical to that of the pipe, with rubber ring joints.
SEC. 11B-2. MANHOLES.
All manholes shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete with an eccentric cone top section, 48 inch inside
diameter. The precast manhole sections shall meet the requirements of ASTM Standard Specification for Reinforced
Concrete Manhole Sections, Precast, Designation C478, with concrete for the sections being made using Type V
Portland cement. The precast sections shall be installed on a concrete base slab. In fabricating the precast sections,
allowance shall be made for thickness of the vitrified clay pipe, as the base slab on which the bottom precast section
shall be formed to the elevation of the outside bottom of the pipe. The bottom precast section shall be fabricated with
a flat base. Blocked out openings shall be provided in the sections for the incoming and outgoing sewer pipe, or, as
an alternate, such openings may be cut in the field.
a) Manhole Steps: Manhole steps shall be cast-iron steps equal to the Clow F-3650 step. Wrought iron or steel
steps will not be accepted. The steps shall be placed 90 degrees from the direction of Flow of the sewer in a vertical
line.
b) Manhole Rings and Covers: Manhole rings and covers shall be the “Comco” No. 250C Rings and covers, or
27-30
approved equal, with the total weight of ring and cover to be not less than 275 pounds. The ring shall be provided
with an interior retaining lip, and shall have a net height of 5 ½ inches.
c) Manhole Base Slab: Slab may be pre-cast or poured in place and must be at least 6” in thickness and 6’ in
diameter.
d) Concrete: Concrete for manhole base slabs and interior concrete fill shall be mixed in the following
proportions, based on a 1 yard batch.
Cement type V 470 to 564 lb. (5-6) sack
Water 239 to 284 lb.
Fine Aggregate 1192 to 1310 lb.
Coarse Aggregate 1463 to 1755 lb.
Air Entraining Agent As required to entrain
7% plus or minus 2% air
Water amount above is based on an allowance of 2 percent moisture in the aggregates.
Water content shall be adjusted in the field to obtain a maximum slump of 3 inches.
e) Mortar and Grout: Grout for filling of the joints in the precast concrete manhole sections, and for grouting in
of pipe through the walls of a manhole, shall consist of 1 part by volume of Type V Portland cement to 2 ½ parts by
volume of fine aggregate, with sufficient water to make a workable mix that can be packed into the openings to be
grouted. Mortar for grouting of the manhole ring and cover shall consist of the same mix with the addition of ¼ parts
by volume of hydrated lime.
C. MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
SEC. 11C-1. EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL.
a) General: Trenches and excavations shall be kept free from water during excavation, fine grading, pipe laying
and jointing. Where the trench bottom is unstable because of the presence of water, and in all cases where the static
ground water level is above the bottom of the trench, the ground water shall be lowered by means of pumps or sand
points to the extent necessary to keep the trench free from water and the bottom stable.
b) Trench Bottom: The bottom of the trench, at pipe grade, shall be clean and free from rock, boulders, or hard
lumps, and graded to provide a uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe on solid and undisturbed soil
at every point between bell holes. Bell holes of sufficient size to permit proper making up of joints, shall be provided
at each joint.
c) Trench Depths: All trenches for sewers shall be excavated to not less than 4 inches above the specified
grade elevation, with the remainder of the excavation to be done by hand at the time the pipe subgrade is prepared,
and immediately prior to installing the pipe. The bottom of the trench, at pipe subgrade, shall be shaped to fit the
outside surface of the bottom quadrant of the pipe, and to the grade required, in such manner that the pipe shall have
a continuous bearing on undisturbed soil for the full length of the pipe, except for such distance as required for bell
holes. The subgrade shall be so shaped and graded that the spigot end of the pipe will be accurately centered in the
adjacent pipe socket when laid without raising or lowering of the pipe after installation in the trench.
d) Special Bedding: Where the subgrade is unstable so as to prevent proper placing and bedding of the pipe,
the installer shall excavate the trench not less then eight (8”) inches below the specified pipe grade, the full width of
the trench and fill with gravel, or other approved non-cohesive material, not less than eight inches (8”) above the pipe
in which the pipe shall be bedded.
e) Trench Width: The minimum trench width for sewers at the center of the pipe shall not be less than 12 inches
greater than the nominal diameter of the pipe, to permit the proper making-up of joints. In order that the backfill
weight will not exceed the allowable loading on the pipe the maximum trench width at a point 1 foot above the top of
the pipe shall not exceed 3 foot for sewer up to 10 feet in depth.
f) Excavation for Manholes: Excavation for manholes shall be of such dimensions as to allow for the forming of
the concrete base, the installation of the pre-cast concrete manhole sections, and the grouting-in and making of
27-31
connections to the manhole barrel. Finish excavation for the base slabs shall not extend below the exact grade of the
bottom of the concrete base.
g) Backfill: Trenches shall be backfilled immediately after the pipe installation has been approved for backfilling.
All backfill material shall be carefully placed to avoid displacement or damages to the pipe or adjacent structures.
Backfill from the bottom of the trench to approximately 1 foot over the top of the pipe shall be placed by hand, taking
particular care to completely fill under the pipe haunches. This portion of the backfill, for the full width of the trench,
shall be thoroughly compacted by either pneumatic or mechanical compaction equipment.
SEC. 11C-2. INSTALLATION OF SEWERS.
A) General: The laying of pipe shall be commenced at the lowest point, so that the spigot ends point in the
direction of flow. Pipe shall be laid with ends abutting, and true to line and grade. They shall be fitted and matched
so that when laid they will form a sewer with a smooth and uniform invert.
B) Handling: Trenches shall be kept free from water during jointing. The interior of the pipe, and the outside of
the spigot, shall be kept clean during laying operations. Pipe shall be lowered into the trench by such methods as will
avoid damage and unnecessary handling in the trench.
C) Pipe Laying: Sewer shall be laid continuously through manhole locations and the manhole constructed later.
Pipe sections within the manholes shall not be broken out until after the manhole has been set and the interior
concrete fill has hardened. Where, due to change in alignment, a portion of the manhole invert may be made of
concrete formed to match the semicircular section of the sewer pipe.
D) Grade and Alignment: The grade and alignment of sewers shall be determined and maintained by the use of
a line parallel to the grade and line of the sewer, this line to be supported above the ground surface on batter boards.
Not less than three batter boards shall be kept in position at all times as a check on the accuracy of the grade line.
Equivalent methods of maintaining grade and alignment may be used, if approved by the City.
E) Jointing Vitrified Clay Pipe: The factory-fabricated joint shall be installed in strict accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
F) Jointing of Cast-Iron Pipe: Cutting of cast-iron pipe shall be done in such manner as to avoid damage to the
pipe and leave a smooth cut at right angles to the axis of the pipe. The cut end shall be tapered 1/8 inch back at an
angle of 30 degrees. The gasket and gasket seat shall be wiped clean and the gasket placed in the bell, the large
round side of the gasket first, so it will spring into place in the bell.
The surface shall be lubricated with a thick film of vegetable lubricant. The joint shall be pulled together by the
use of choker slings, or by the use of a bar used as a lever against the bell end of the pipe.
PVC: The PVC pipe shall be cut square and the edge beveled back, a minimum of 1/8” back at an angle of 30
degrees. In making up the push-on type of joint, the gasket and gasket seat shall be wiped clean and the gasket
placed in the bell, the large round side of the gasket first, so it will spring into place and lubricated with a thick film of
vegetable lubricant furnished with the pipe. The joint shall be pulled together by the use of choke slings, or by the
use of a bar used as a lever against the bell end of the pipe.
H) Installation of Manholes: Manholes shall be constructed in accordance with City Standard Manhole
drawings. The concrete manhole base shall be formed and placed prior to the setting of the manhole barrel sections,
unless otherwise approved by the City. In forming the concrete base at manholes having an invert drop, the base
shall be formed to the elevation of the bottom of the downstream pipe, with the upstream pipe being blocked up to the
invert drop elevation specified. After the manhole sections have been installed, all joints shall be grouted in and
pointed up, and the interior concrete fill placed and floated to a smooth surface. After the concrete has hardened, the
pipe within the manhole shall be broken out flush with the concrete fill and the walls of the manhole, and pointed up to
form a smooth continuous invert channel through the manhole. If the manhole is installed in ground water the
manhole shall be externally coated with a bituminous material approved by the City.
SEC. 11C-3. INFILTRATION AND EXFILTRATION.
All sanitary sewers shall be constructed such that infiltration of ground water into any section of the sewer,
including house or sewer service connections, or exfiltration of sewage from the sewer, shall not exceed 250 gallons
per inch of diameter per mile of sewer in 24 hours. The completed sewers, after compaction, or any section thereof,
shall be subject to infiltration or exfiltration tests at the cost of the installer.
27-32
CHAPTER 28.
WILLOW GROVE CEMETERY.
§ 28-1. Authorized cemetery to City.
§ 28-2. No other cemetery permitted.
§ 28-3. All burials to be in Willow Grove Cemetery.
§ 28-4. Duties of City Clerk generally.
§ 28-5. Burial or removal permits – required; contents.
§ 28-6. Same – disposition; cost of issuing.
§ 28-7. Same – record to be kept; information to be available.
§ 28-8. Applications for and purchase of lots or graves.
§ 28-9. Form of cemetery lot deed.
§ 28-10. Cemetery records.
§ 28-11. Willow Grove Cemetery Board – established; composition; compensation; term.
§ 28-12. Same – vacancies in office; removals.
§ 28-13. Same – duties, power and authority generally.
§28-14. Same – further duties.
§ 28-15. Same – price of lots, etc.; perpetual care.
(This Chapter repealed by Ordinance 968, § 1, 9/81)
SEC. 28-1. AUTHORIZED CEMETERY OF CITY.
Section 28-1 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-2. NO OTHER CEMETERY PERMITTED.
Section 28-2 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-3. ALL BURIALS TO BE IN WILLOW GROVE CEMETERY.
Section 28-3 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-4. DUTIES OF CITY CLERK GENERALLY.
Section 28-4 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-5. BURIAL OR REMOVAL PERMITS – REQUIRED; CONTENTS.
Section 28-5 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-6. SAME – DISPOSITION; COST OF ISSUING.
Section 28-6 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-7. SAME – RECORD TO BE KEPT; INFORMATION TO BE AVAILABLE.
Section 28-7 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-8. APPLICATIONS FOR AND PURCHASE OF LOTS OR GRAVES.
Section 28-8 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-9. FORM OF CEMETERY LOT DEED.
Section 28-9 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
28-1
SEC. 28-10. CEMETERY RECORDS.
Section 28-10 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-11. WILLOW GROVE CEMETERY BOARD – ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION;
TERM.
Section 28-11 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-12. SAME – VACANCIES IN OFFICE; REMOVALS.
Section 28-12 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-13. SAME – DUTIES, POWER AND AUTHORITY GENERALLY.
Section 28-13 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-14. SAME – FURTHER DUTIES.
Section 28-14 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
SEC. 28-15. SAME – PRICE OF LOTS, ETC; PERPETUAL CARE.
Section 28-15 of the Code of the City of Buffalo, 1964, is hereby repealed.
28-2
1
CHAPTER 29
ZONING ORDINANCE
Table of Contents:
ARTICLE TITLE PAGE
29-1 TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT 2
29-2 ADMINISTRATION 2
29-3 PROCEDURES, AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES 3
29-4 DEFINITIONS 9
29-5 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 13
29-6 R–1 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 13
29-7 R–2 - MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL 14
29-8 R–3 - HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL 14
29-9 RMS - RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION 15
29-10 MHC - RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY 15
29-11 B–1 - NEIGHBORHOOD “LIGHT” COMMERCIAL 18
29-12 B–2 - COMMUNITY “HEAVY” COMMERCIAL 18
29-13 B–3 - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT 19
29-14 I-1 – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 19
29-15 I-2 – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 20
29-16 PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT Commercial/Residential 20
29-17 AREA, SETBACK, DENSITY AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 21
29-18 GENERAL BUILDING AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 23
29-19 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 26
29-20 TELECOMMUNICATIONS 27
29-21 RENEWABLE/ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS 31
29-22 SIGN ORDINANCE 33
29-23 HOME OCCUPATIONS 34
29-24 NON-CONFORMING USES 36
29-25 ENFORCEMENT & PENALTIES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE 37
PLANNING & ZONING FEE SCHEDULE:
ZONING REQUEST FEE
A. ANNEXATION PETITION $300 and $45.00 per Acre
B. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS $200
C. SPECIAL USE PERMITS $400
D. REZONING $300 and $45.00 per Acre
E. LOT SPLIT (Commercial or Residential) $400
F. LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT $150
G. VACATION OF STREET/ALLEY/R-O-W $325
H. VARIANCE $ 95 Residential/$325 Others
I. SIGN PERMITS *Fee based on valuation of Sign & Support. $ 35 Minimum Fee*
The fees described above are due when application is made and are non-refundable. The applicant is
required to pay these fees to cover the City's expenses incurred during the application process. Fees not
listed above for other types of applications will be found in Article 21 – Subdivision Ordinance.
29-1
2
ARTICLE 1: TITLE, PURPOSE & INTENT
Section 1. Title This Ordinance shall be known as the "City of Buffalo Zoning Ordinance” except as referred to and
cited herein, where it shall be known as “this” or “the” Ordinance.
Section 2. Purpose The regulations and restrictions hereinafter provided were created in accordance with the City of
Buffalo Comprehensive Master Plan, duly adopted and approved and are intended to create orderly, harmonious, and
economically sound development. These regulations and restrictions are designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare; to secure adequate light, space and safety from fire and other dangers, to conserve property values; to
prevent undue congestion of structures, streets, land and population; to preserve schools, parks, and other public necessities;
to divide the City into zoning districts which restrict and regulate the location and use of structures and land, whether for
residential, commercial, industrial, or other specified uses.
Section 3. Application of the Zoning Ordinance
A. All property within the City limits, except that property exempted by law, is governed by this ordinance according to
the zoning district in which it is located.
B. No building or land shall be used, occupied, erected, moved, or altered unless it complies with the regulations specified
for the zoning district in which it is located. No building shall exceed the height, accommodate a greater number of
families, occupy a greater percentage of land area, or have smaller yards or setbacks than specified for the zoning district in
which it is located. No part of a yard, off-street parking space, or other open space required for a building shall be included
as part of a yard, off-street parking space or other open space required for another building.
Section 4. Authority and Jurisdiction This Ordinance is enacted for the purpose of establishing and carrying into
effect the powers, duties and privileges conferred upon the City of Buffalo in, under and by Act of the Wyoming Statues
Annotated, together with acts mandatory thereof and supplementary thereto.
Section 5. Interpretations and Conflicts It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, or abrogate and annul
any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of
this Ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and
likewise not in conflict with this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties, except that if this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction this Ordinance shall control.
Section 6. Severability If any part of this Ordinance or a Permit issued as a part thereof is declared unconstitutional,
unenforceable or invalid, the validity of the remaining parts shall not be affected since it is the intent of the City of Buffalo
to pass each part separately and independently of every other part.
ARTICLE 2: ADMINISTRATION OF ZONING ORDINANCE
Section 1. Organization The administration of this Ordinance is hereby vested in the P & Z Staff, the P & Z
Commission and the Buffalo City Council.
Section 2. Administration The P & Z Staff shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. In
performing their duties, they shall:
A. Receive, review and analyze all zoning applications and research and prepare all zoning case descriptions which apply
to this Ordinance, which are to be heard by the P & Z Commission and/or City Council.
B. Make final determinations on all boundary adjustments and summary plats where two or more lots are consolidated into
one lot of record, under single ownership, and where summary plat does not change or alter any public rights-of-way or
easements.
C. Report determinations concerning all cases heard by the P & Z Commission to the City Council.
D. Receive and file copies of written requests for appeals by person(s) aggrieved with cases heard by the P & Z
Commission and any other matters relating to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, and transmit same to
the City Council.
E. Cause inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, and where there are violations, initiate action and follow-through to secure compliance.
29-2
3
F. Coordinate and administer all site plan reviews for new residential-commercial, commercial and industrial construction
to determine if construction complies with the provisions of this and other City ordinances and City Building Codes.
G. Maintain permanent records of all current and past comprehensive master plans, zoning ordinances, maps, zone
changes, special uses, variances, conditional uses, amendments to this ordinance, non-conforming uses, appeals, and
applications, to include the recording of zoning district amendments and special uses on the official zoning map.
H. Decide or make recommendations on all other matters under this Ordinance upon which the P & Z Staff is required to
act upon on a daily basis.
I. Provide such technical assistance as may be required by the P & Z Commission or the City Council in the exercise of
their respective duties.
J. Provide public information services relative to matters arising out of this Ordinance.
Section 3. P & Z Commission The P & Z Commission, being duly appointed, shall:
A. Receive, hear, and make final determinations on all major, minor and condominium subdivision preliminary plats, lot
splits, summary plats, zone changes, variances and special use and conditional use permit applications.
B. Receive, hear, and make recommendations to City Council on all major, minor and condominium subdivision final
plats, annexations, and amendments to this Ordinance which come before them in the manner prescribed by the procedures
established herein and report determinations and/or make recommendations to City Council.
C. Receive and hear all written requests for appeals by any person(s) aggrieved with the P & Z Staff’s decision concerning
and related to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
D. Instruct the City Planner, from time to time, to make or initiate studies and draft reports concerning issues arising from
this Ordinance and from other planning and zoning practices.
Section 4. City Council The City Council, being duly elected, shall:
A. Receive recommendations from the P & Z Staff and P & Z Commission on all cases required to be heard by them,
including major, minor and condominium subdivision final plats, annexations and requests for amendments to this
Ordinance, so Council can hear and make determinations upon same in the manner prescribed by the procedures established
by this and other City ordinances and City Code.
B. Receive and hear all written requests for appeals by any person(s) aggrieved with the P & Z Commission’s decision
concerning and related to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
C. Instruct the City Planner, from time to time, to make and initiate studies, draft reports, create strategic and/or master
plans concerning issues arising from this ordinance and from any and all other planning and zoning practices.
ARTICLE 3: PROCEDURES, AMENDMENTS & CHANGES
Section 1. Procedures - Generally Applications for requested amendments to this Ordinance, annexations, zone
changes, special uses, plats and variances shall be made and reviewed according to the following:
A. Requested Amendments to this ordinance, annexations, zone changes, special uses, plats and variances may be initiated
and applied for by City Council, the Planning & Zoning Commission and/or staff or any person owning property in the City
limits.
B. Applicants shall first confer with the P & Z Staff, which shall initially review the proposed request and provide the
approved application forms and methods prescribed by this Ordinance for making application.
C. The applicant shall complete and submit the approved application forms, with help from the P & Z Staff as required,
along with the required application and processing fee by the required deadline which is the first Monday of each month.
D. The P & Z Staff shall schedule a plan review for the application with all departments and external entities affected by,
or having authority over anything regarding the application. Plan reviews shall be concluded within 10 business days after
application deadline to allow time to prepare the case for advertising prior to the P & Z Commission meeting for that
month.
E. The P & Z Staff are required to advertise all required cases a minimum of fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the date
of the P & Z Commission meeting for that month. 29-3
4
F. The P & Z Staff are required to deliver all cases, the meeting agenda and minutes from the previous P & Z Commission
meeting to all commissioners at least 48 hours in advance of the P & Z Commission meeting date and time.
Section 2. Procedures - Public Hearings
A. All P & Z Commission meetings serve as Public Hearings, where the cases are heard publicly and where determinations
are made on those cases by the P & Z Commission. All cases heard by the P & Z Commission shall only become effective
after a public hearing has been held in which all interested parties and/or citizens have had an opportunity to be heard.
B. Since all P & Z Commission meetings constitute Public Hearings, notice of the time and place of all P & Z Commission
meetings (Public Hearings), and all cases to be heard at that hearing, shall be published by the P & Z Staff a minimum of
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper with general circulation within the City limits.
C. For Major and Minor Subdivisions, Annexations, Zone Changes, Special Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits,
notice of public hearing shall be mailed, to be received a minimum of one week prior to the public hearing, via certified
mail - return receipt requested, by the applicant, to the property owners as shown by the records of the County Assessor, of
lots or land within three hundred (300) feet of the area under consideration, excluding public rights-of-way. The applicant
shall place one (1) sign, as approved by the P & Z Staff, on the subject property, clearly visible from the most traveled
street or highway abutting said property, that shall be easily readable and clearly legible by all vehicle operators on that
street or highway.
Section 3. Procedures - Protests to Proposed Zoning Cases
A. Any person(s) taking exception to a proposed zoning case may file a written protest with the City Clerk prior to the
public hearing(s) for a zoning case, wherever the case is to be considered.
B. The written protest shall list the name(s), addresses and signatures of property owners supporting the protest; whether or
not the protestor's property is within the 300 foot notification area, along with any reasons why the property owners take
exception.
Section 4. Procedures - Voting Requirements
A. Approval of a proposed zoning case heard by the P & Z Commission shall require a favorable vote from the majority of
the commission members present at the meeting.
B. Written protests against a proposed zoning case from property owners within the 300 foot notification area whose sum
of property area exceeds 20 percent of the total area within the 300 foot notification area will require a four-fifths vote (four
of the five member Commission or a super-majority), to approve the proposed zoning case. If at least four commissioners
are not present at the meeting to form the super-majority, the case shall be postponed until the next regularly scheduled
meeting. If the zoning case is appealed to City Council, only a majority vote from City Council is required to approve or
deny the case.
C. Decisions by the Commission on zoning cases heard by them shall be final and effective after 12:00 noon on the second
business day following the day of the Commission meeting. This allows for any appeals to be submitted after the meeting.
D. An appeal of a Commission decision to the City Council shall stay the effective date of the decision until a decision on
the appeal is made by the City Council at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
E. A zoning case denied by the Commission and/or City Council cannot again be applied for within one year from the date
of the final denial, unless the new request is determined to be substantially different from the original request submitted to
the P & Z Staff. Substantially different means changes in scope, size, property usage, zoning, design, number of buildings,
etc.
Section 5. Procedures - Appeals
A. Generally. Any person(s) aggrieved with a decision of the P & Z Commission, or by a determination made by City
staff in the enforcement of this ordinance may appeal the decision or determination in the following manner.
B. Appeal of a City Staff Decision or Determination.
1. Any person(s) aggrieved with a determination made by City staff in the enforcement of this Ordinance may
appeal the decision to the P & Z Commission.
2. Any person(s) must file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk's Office within thirty (30) calendar days
following the determination made by City staff.
29-4
5
3. The notice of appeal shall concisely explain why the appeal is being made.
4. The appeal shall be heard by the P & Z Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting
5. In deciding on the appeal, the P & Z Commission shall consider the appellant’s written appeal and the
determination as it was presented to the aggrieved person(s).
6. A decision to deny/approve the appeal shall require a majority vote by the P & Z Commission.
7. Any person(s) may appeal the decision of the P & Z Commission to the City Council through subsection C
below.
C. Appeal of a P & Z Commission Decision.
1. City staff or any person(s) must file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk's office prior to 12:00 noon
on the second business day following the decision.
2. Prior to 5:00 p.m. on the second business day following the date of the decision, copies of the appeal shall be
mailed by the appellant to all persons supporting the decision. Notice to City shall be filed at City Clerk's office.
3. The notice of appeal shall concisely explain why the appeal is being made.
4. The appeal shall be heard by City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
5. In deciding on the appeal, City Council shall consider the appellant’s written appeal and the case, exactly as it
was presented to the P & Z Commission, without modifications.
6. Appeal decisions made by the City Council shall only be required to be made by majority vote of City Council.
7. The City Council may deny the appeal, reverse the decision of the Commission or make such modifications
upon the appeal as it deems necessary to protect the public interest and not vote solely in the interest of the
appellant.
D. Appeal of a Decision by the City Council. Any person(s) aggrieved with the decision of the City Council may present
the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction for review within the time and in the manner required by state law.
Section 6. Amendments to this Ordinance
A. Any person(s) can make application for an Amendment to this Ordinance which must state the section of the ordinance
proposed for amendment, the proposed substitute wording, the reasons for requesting the amendment, and any other
information which the P & Z Staff feels that the P & Z Commission and City Council may require to make a proper
decision on the matter. Graphics and/or other visual aids may also be submitted if desired.
B. No amendment to this Ordinance can be adopted until a public hearing has been held by the P & Z Commission and
City Council in accordance with this ordinance.
C. The P & Z Commission and City Council shall decide whether or not to adopt a proposed amendment to this Ordinance.
In its deliberations, both bodies shall consider all oral and written statements from the applicant, the public, City staff, and
its own members. Neither body shall approve the amendment unless it finds the proposed amendment is in the public
interest and is not solely in the interest of the applicant.
D. City Council may approve, deny or table the proposed amendment for not more than one regularly scheduled City
Council meeting or for a period of time specified at the public hearing. If approved, the P & Z Staff shall take action to
revise this Ordinance according to the steps required for approval of an Ordinance as outlined in the City Codes.
Section 7. Annexation of Territory
A. Land proposed to be annexed into the City territory must be contiguous with existing City boundaries. The City
Planner and City Council can make a request to annex land into the City Territory for the benefit of the municipality. An
application for an annexation-by-petition shall be accompanied by a plat from a registered Land Surveyor in the State
showing the boundaries of land to be annexed, a legal description of the property to be annexed, a petition from land
owners in the area to be annexed showing 100% support and the additional information required on the City of Buffalo
annexation application form.
B. No annexations can be adopted until a public hearing has been held by the P & Z Commission and City Council and the
required referendum period has expired, in accordance with this ordinance and State Statutes.
C. The P & Z Commission and City Council shall decide whether or not to annex the proposed property into City territory.
In its deliberations, both bodies shall consider all statements from the applicant, public, staff, and its own members. Neither
body shall approve the annexation unless it finds the annexation to be in the public interest and not solely in the applicant’s
interest.
29-5
6
D. Any territorial additions to the incorporated area of the City of Buffalo resulting from annexation shall be classified and
regulated as an R-1 Low density Residential District. All uses in existence prior to being annexed and incorporated into the
City which are not permitted in the R-1 District shall be deemed as legal non-conforming uses, thereby limiting the extent
of the property’s use until the property is rezoned into conformance with this ordinance, after incorporation into the City
limits.
Section 8. Special Uses
A. Within any zoning district the use of land and buildings and their location on the land are substantially uniform;
however, special uses exist which, because of their unique character and special and unusual impact on adjacent properties,
cannot be properly classified into any zoning district without consideration of the impact of those uses upon adjacent
properties, the public and the need for the particular use. Special uses are usually operated by public or private agencies to
benefit the public at large.
B. The applicant for a special use shall be the property owner or agent. The application shall include the following
information:
1. The legal and common description of the property to be considered for a special use.
2. The property's present zoning classification.
3. A site plan drawn to scale showing the subject property and all adjacent properties.
4. The location, dimensions and square footage of all structures, existing and proposed.
5. The location of all existing/proposed curb cuts, parking, loading areas, sidewalks, landscaping, screening, open
spaces, signage, lighting, and other related items.
6. The special use requested, the reasons for it and any additional information to aid the P & Z Commission.
C. Special uses cannot be approved until a public hearing has been held by the P & Z Commission.
D. The Commission shall decide whether or not to approve a request for a special use. In its deliberations, the Commission
shall consider the impact of the special use upon the public health, safety, and welfare of the community; the existing and
anticipated vehicular/pedestrian traffic flows; parking conditions; setbacks, and height; landscaping and screening; open
spaces; signage; lighting; and other items. The P & Z Commission shall not approve a special use unless it finds it conforms
to the City's Land Use Plan, is in the public interest and is not solely in the interest of the applicant.
E. Limitations, Amendments, and Revisions. The Commission may approve, deny or table a special use request for not
more than one regularly scheduled meeting or for a period of time specified at the public hearing. The Commission may
stipulate conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the
special use as deemed necessary to protect the value, utilization, and operation of adjacent properties, and to insure
compliance with the requirements of this and other ordinances. If approved, the City Planner shall revise the official zoning
map.
Section 9. Zone Changes
A. The P & Z Commission may change the zoning classification on parcels of land within the City limits. These changes
shall be for the purpose of meeting the land use needs of the residents of the City in conformance with the City’s Land Use
Plan.
B. Applicants for a zone change shall be the property owner or agent. The application shall include the following
information:
1. The legal and common description of the property to be rezoned.
2. The property's present and proposed zoning classification.
3. The recommendation for use of the property by the City's Land Use Plan.
4. The reasons for requesting the rezoning.
5. Other information the P & Z Commission may need to make a decision.
C. Zone changes are adopted after a public hearing has been held by the P & Z Commission in accordance with this
ordinance.
D. The P & Z Commission shall decide whether or not to approve a request for a zone change. In its deliberations, the
Commission shall not approve a zone change unless it finds it conforms to the City's Land Use Plan, is in the public interest
and is not solely in the interest of the applicant.
29-6
7
E. The P & Z Commission may approve, deny or table a request for a zone change for not more than one regularly
scheduled meeting or for a period of time specified at the public hearing. The Commission may approve an amendment to
the original request for a zone change by changing the zone change request to a more restrictive zoning classification than
requested. The R-1 District is the most restrictive classification and the I-2 District is the least restrictive. Once the zone
change is approved, the City Planner shall revise the official zoning map. Disputes about the Official Zoning Map shall
be heard by the P & Z Commission for a final determination. In all cases, the Zoning Ordinance shall govern over
the Official Zoning Map.
Section 10. Plat - Preliminary/Final/Replat/Summary
A. All property proposed to be subdivided or which has lots, public rights-of-way or easements to be added to, or vacated
from an existing subdivision, must be approved as follows:
1. Lot Line/Boundary Adjustments, Replats and Summary Plats require P & Z Staff approval.
2. Preliminary Plat (Recommendations) and Lot Splits require P & Z Commission approval.
3. Preliminary Plats and Final Plats require P & Z Commission and City Council approval.
B. Any property owner can make application for a plat, which must include the plat, the legal description and all other
information required by the application. The plat must be certified by a State registered Land Surveyor. The plat must
show all property boundaries of lots, blocks or parcels, public rights-of-way and easements, and any other information as
required by the City of Buffalo Subdivision Ordinance, Development Review Committee, Planning Staff and the
application.
C. No Boundary Adjustment or Summary Plat can be adopted until approved by the P & Z Staff and recorded by Johnson
County. No Preliminary Plat or Lot Split can be adopted until approved by the P & Z Commission and recorded. No
Minor or Major Final Plat or Re-Plat can be adopted until approved by the P & Z Commission and City Council and it is
recorded with Johnson County.
D. The P & Z Commission and City Council shall decide whether or not to approve the proposed plat. In its deliberations,
both bodies shall consider all statements from the applicant, the public, City staff, and its own members. Neither body shall
approve the proposed plat unless it finds it to be in the public interest and not solely in the interest of the applicant.
E. Preliminary Plats, Final Plats and Zone Changes can be approved, in that order, by the P & Z Commission during the
same meeting; however, the Final Plats must be approved by City Council through an Ordinance and recorded with
Johnson County before the Final Plat and Zone Change can be adopted and incorporated into the land.
Section 11. Variances
A. The P & Z Commission may approve a variance to the zoning requirements for a property, if the reason for the
requested variance is due to the property being of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or having topographical
conditions or other extraordinary conditions which prevent the property owner from being able to comply with the zoning
requirements and, if the strict application of this ordinance would result in a peculiar, exceptional or undue hardship, as
opposed to a mere inconvenience upon the property owner.
B. The applicant for a variance shall be the property owner or agent. The application shall include the following
information:
1. The legal and common description of the property to be considered for a variance
2. The properties present zoning classification.
3. A site plan drawn to scale showing the subject property and all adjacent properties.
4. The location, dimensions and square footage of all structures, existing and proposed.
5. The variance requested and existing hardships that caused the variance request.
6. Other information the P & Z Commission may need to make a decision.
C. No variance can be approved until a public hearing has been held by the P & Z Commission.
D. The P & Z Commission shall decide whether or not to approve a variance request. In its deliberations, the P & Z
Commission shall consider all oral and written statements from the applicant, the public, the City staff, and its own
members. The P & Z Commission shall also consider the effect of the proposed variance upon the public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, traffic and parking conditions, open space areas, danger of fire, and upon the values of
property in the surrounding area. The Commission shall not approve a variance unless it is satisfied that the request will
alleviate some unusual hardship, is consistent with the general intent of this Ordinance, that it conforms to the City's Land
Use Plan, and that it is in the public interest and is not solely in the interest of the applicant.
29-7
8
E. Limitations, Amendments, and Revisions. The P & Z Commission may approve, deny or table a variance request for not
more than one regularly scheduled Commission meeting or for a period of time specified at the public hearing. The
Commission may stipulate conditions and restrictions upon the property benefited by the variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this ordinance, to reduce or minimize the adverse effect the variance may have upon
adjacent properties, and to ensure consistency with the general intent of the ordinance.
Section 12. Development Review Committee - Site Plan & Plan Reviews
A. Generally. Plan reviews are required for all commercial developments to promote attractive, well-planned and stable
urban conditions. Plan reviews ensure compatible interaction of the development with surrounding conditions and ensures
the developments conformance with regulations, provisions, and general intent of this and other ordinances and Building
Codes.
B. Site Plan Requirements. Plan reviews of all proposed multiple-family dwellings, mobile home parks, professional
offices, commercial, industrial, and other non-residential developments shall be required and submitted as part of the
building permit process. Contact the Planning and Zoning Department for the requirements needed to complete a Site Plan
or Plan Review.
C. Development Review Committee. The Development Review Committee (DRC) is comprised of members from City
Staff and any outside agencies having jurisdiction or control over any rights-of-way or properties abutting and/or adjacent
to property being reviewed for development or change. The City Planner will call the DRC to meetings as required and
shall notify the applicant in writing within three (3) business days of the DRC meeting of all comments or
recommendations from the DRC.
D. Review and Findings by the Development Review Committee. The DRC will review preliminary site plans,
preliminary construction plans and plans for a Foundation Permit or a Building Permit as needed for each project. One fullsize
hard copy set of plans and one electronic version of the plans, plat or project shall be submitted to the Planning
Department and a Building Permit application shall be filled out in advance, if required. The Planning Department will
coordinate, schedule and invite all departments and outside agencies as needed for a plan review. The DRC shall review
the plans and document all comments, recommendations and required changes and notify applicant of same within three (3)
business days of the DRC meeting.
E. Limitations, Alternatives, and Revisions. The DRC shall complete the Plat, site plan or plan review within ten
business days from the date of submission. If approved and required, City Staff will issue a building permit allowing
construction to begin, after the General Contractor has been identified.
Section 13. Certificate of Occupancy (C-of-O)
A. Generally. A C-of-O shall be required before the owner can occupy a newly erected building, an existing building that
has been remodeled or for any change in use of an existing building. No building shall be occupied until it has been
determined by City Staff that the building, its premises, and its use conform to the regulations of this and other ordinances
and Building Codes.
B. Certificate of Occupancy Application. A C-of-O must be approved by the Building Department before occupying new
or structurally altered buildings.
C. Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. A C-of-O is issued by the Building Inspector (BI) within 10 business days
after completion of construction and inspection. The BI shall not issue a C-of-O until all City Staff determine the building
and its use conform with the regulations of this and other ordinances. The BI may issue a sixty (60) day, temporary C-of-O
(T-C-O) to allow for completion of punch-list items and partial occupancy. The BI may impose contingencies on either a
C-of-O or T-C-O.
Section 14. Removal of Signs, Renew./Altern. Energy Systems, Cell Towers or Other Items or Structures
A. The City may require the removal of such items as listed above when: such items with a permit have been abandoned
for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days, shall be removed within 90 days; the permitted items fall
into such disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard as determined pursuant to a review by a Wyoming licensed
engineer; an item has been located, constructed or modified without a permit, or in a manner inconsistent with the approved
permit requirements; a certificate holder has failed to comply with the liability insurance requirements; and, such item is not
repaired within 60 days, or longer as necessary upon the permit holder demonstrating that despite good faith efforts, such
29-8
9
disrepair could not be responsibly cured within the time; and, the Facilities have been located, constructed, or modified
without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by the required Permit, or other authorization.
B. If the City makes a determination as noted in (A) above, then the City shall notify the Permit holder within 48 hours that
said items are to be removed, the City may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, to enable the sale of the
item. After receiving notice of decision, the permit holder shall have 90 calendar days to cure the violation. The City shall
extend such cure period as needed upon the Permit holder demonstrating that despite good faith efforts, such default cannot
be reasonably cured.
C. If the permit holder cannot cure the violation within the cure period, the permit holder shall dismantle and remove such
item, and any associated structures, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as possible,
reasonable wear and tear excepted, within 90 days of the expiration of the cure period.
D. If item is not removed or substantial progress has not been made to remove it within 90 days of the permit holder
receiving notice, then City may order representatives of the City to remove the item at the expense of the owner or Permit
holder.
E. If the City removes, or causes to be removed, the item, and the owner does not claim and remove it from the site to a
lawful location within 120 days, then the City may take steps to declare the item abandoned, and sell it and its components.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, the City may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for
the item for no more than 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion or re-location of the affected
item shall be developed by the holder of the Permit, subject to the approval of the City, and an agreement to such plan shall
be executed by the holder of the Permit and the City. If such a plan is not developed, approved, and executed within the 90
day time period, then the City may take possession of and dispose of the affected item in the manner provided in this
Section.
G. If City determines item is a hazard, creates an emergency situation or adversely affects public safety, it may remove or
cause to be removed the item after 3 days written notice to the Permit or Certificate of Compliance holder or the holder.
Written notice, pursuant to Section 3 above, shall be deemed sufficient for the purposes of the ordinance.
ARTICLE 4: DEFINITIONS
Section 1. Rules of Interpretation Language set forth in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as follows: Words
used in the present tense shall include the past and future tenses; A singular number shall include the plural and the plural
the singular; The words "shall" and “must” are mandatory and not discretionary; The word "may" is permissive; The
masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders; The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel",
“block” and "tract"; The phrase "used for" shall also mean "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and “occupied
for"; The word "building" shall include the word "structure"; Any words not defined herein shall be as defined by Webster's
Dictionary.
Section 2. Definitions For the purposes of this Ordinance, and where not inconsistent with the context of a
particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall be as meant in this
section.
Abut, abutting. To have a common property line or zoning district line.
Accessory Facility or Structure. Secondary structures located on the same property as the Principle Structure,
Renewable/Alternative Energy System or WTF Facility, but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds
or cabinets.
Adjacent. Touching, abutting or contiguous.
Administrator. The City Planner for the City of Buffalo.
Administrative Approval. Approval received by the Administrator.
Agent/Representative. Anyone appointed by the property owner to represent them on matters regarding their property.
Agri-business. A business directly supportive of an agricultural use as defined herein.
Agriculture. Land and/or structures whose principal use includes the growing of farm crops, truck garden crops,
animal/poultry husbandry, dairying, floriculture, horticulture, pasturage; and accessory uses customarily incidental to
agricultural activities.
Airport, heliport. Any premises intended for the purpose of landing and take-off of aircraft.
Alley. A secondary means of vehicular right-of-way affording access to neighboring properties.
29-9
10
Alteration. Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a building or structure.
Amusement establishment. A building offering varieties of recreational facilities like pool halls, miniature golf, driving
ranges, go-cart tracks, amusement parks, skating rinks, and game rooms.
Animal hospital, clinic. A building used for the care and treatment of animals.
Applicant. The person(s) responsible for the filing of the application for a Building Permit, Zoning Case, Renewable or
Alternative Energy System or WTF System permit.
Application. All required documents submitted by an applicant to receive a permit, ruling or zoning determination.
Antenna. Means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or
other wireless signals. Such shall include, but not be limited to radio, television, cellular, paging, personal
telecommunications services (PCS), microwave Telecommunications and services not licensed by the FCC, but not
expressly exempt from the City’s citing, building and permitting authority.
Auditorium. A building intended to gather people to hear a performance or other presentations.
Automobile/motor vehicle sales. An area used to display/sell automobiles or motor vehicles.
Automobile laundry/Car Wash. A building where automobiles or motor vehicles are washed.
Automobile service station. A building or portion thereof where gasoline, diesel fuel and other automobile fuels, oils or
chemicals are offered for sale and where automotive repairs may be offered.
Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, alleys, railroads, or river channels.
Boarding or lodging home. A building for accommodating persons, not members of the keeper's family and not a
hotel/motel, where lodging and meals are provided for definite periods.
Buildable area. The area remaining on a lot after the minimum yard setbacks have been met.
Building/Structure. Any building constructed for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or
moveable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
Building, accessory. A subordinate building which serves and is on the same lot as a principal building, which is
subordinate in area, extent, and/or purpose to the principal building and contributes to the comfort, convenience, and/or
necessity of the occupants of the principal building being served.
Building, conforming. A structure which complies with this Ordinance or any amendment thereto and is intended for a
use permitted in the zoning district where it is located.
Building, non-conforming. A structure which doesn’t comply with this Ordinance or any amendment thereto and is
intended for a use not permitted in the zoning district where it is located.
Building, principal. The main building where the principal use of the lot is conducted.
Building, temporary. Any building not permanently affixed in place.
Business. Any money-making enterprise where goods are sold or services are rendered.
Campground. Includes, but is not limited to tourist camps, travel trailer camps or parks, recreation camps, family
campgrounds, camping resorts, camping communities or any area on which three or more campsites occupy the area for
recreational uses only.
Camping Unit. Tent, tent-trailer, travel trailer, camping trailer, pickup camper, motor home, recreational vehicle or any
other unit used as temporary living quarters for recreational purposes.
Carport. A building used for the parking of motor vehicles with few if any enclosed walls.
Certificate of Occupancy/Compliance. The certificate issued by the Administrator/Building Inspector after final
inspection.
Certified or Certification. Documents bearing the signature and seal of a professional Engineer or Architect licensed in
the State of Wyoming.
City Council or Council. The City of Buffalo governing body.
City Limits/City Boundaries. The legal jurisdictional boundaries which encompass the limits of the City of Buffalo.
Club or lodge. A building which restricts entry to anyone other than members and their guests.
Co-location. A structure to support a wireless services antennae without increasing height or adding a new
carrier/provider.
Commission. The City of Buffalo P & Z Commission.
Committee. The City of Buffalo Development Review Committee.
Completed Application. Means an Application containing all of the required information
Comprehensive Plan/City Land Use Plan. The Comprehensive Master Plan approved and adopted by the City.
Contiguous: Sharing a boundary or where two or more lots are touching at any one single point of contact.
Contingency: A precondition agreed upon by all parties which must be fulfilled prior to acceptance or final approval.
Day care center. A facility where services and supervision are provided for more than six children at a time.
Day care home. A residence where services and supervision are provided for no more than six children at a time. The
resident’s relatives under age six count towards the number permitted.
29-10
11
Duplex. A two family attached dwelling on a single lot held under one ownership.
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof used for residential purposes. Not including hotels, motels, mobile homes, travel
trailers, lodging, boarding, group care or nursing homes.
Dwelling, attached. A dwelling permanently attached to another dwelling on the same lot.
Dwelling, detached. A single dwelling on a single lot which is surrounded by open space.
Dwelling, multi-family. A building housing three (3) or more dwelling units on the same lot.
Dwelling, single family detached. Two detached dwelling units on the same lot for one family.
Dwelling, two family attached. Two attached dwelling units on the same lot for one family.
Dwelling unit. Rooms used as living quarters for a family with the amenities/facilities of a home.
Electronic copy. As opposed to a hard paper copy, this is a copy of a document, plan, plat or form which can be
transmitted electronically via the internet in a format readily usable by the City staff such as: Microsoft Office WORD or
PDF formatting.
Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided and shielded downward to prevent direct illumination of sleeping
areas or any adjacent property of a more restrictive zoning district.
F.A.A. The Federal Aviation Administration or its authorized successor agency.
Facility. A building, structure or device whose sum of all parts provides a functional use.
Family. One or more persons related to each other, or a group of persons not related, living together in a dwelling unit. A
family may also include boarders, roomers or permanent guests.
Farm. Any tract of land where income is derived from activities defined in the term "agriculture".
F.C.C. The Federal Communications Commission or its authorized successor agency.
Fence. A structure erected on a property, solid or otherwise, used to keep things in or out.
Floor area interior, gross. The square footage of a structure measured from the exterior face of walls.
Floor area interior, net. The interior square footage of a structure measured from the interior face of walls or for figuring
parking, the area “not” considered off-limits to customers or patrons on the inside of a business.
Floor Area, Net: For Parking, the floor area of a structure which is readily accessible to patrons or visitors to a business.
Garage, public. A structure used for servicing, leasing, selling, or storage of automobiles.
Height. The distance from the pre-existing grade to the highest point on a structure.
Home Occupation. A home business operated in accordance with Article 26.
Home Space. Specific area set aside for occupancy in an MHC which is offered for rent or lease.
Hotel, Motel. A building containing lodging accommodations for paying temporary guests.
Independent Camping Unit. Unit including operational water-flush toilet, sink and shower.
Junkyard. A building, lot or portion/combination thereof used for the storage and possible resale of anything discarded by
others and deemed valuable to the property “Junkyard” owner.
Kennel. A building, lot or portion/combination thereof which houses more than three domestic animals which are boarded,
bred or cared for in return for remuneration or for the purpose of sale.
Lot. A parcel of land adequate in size for occupancy by a permitted use which is part of a subdivision or described by
metes and bounds with a legal description recorded with the County.
Lot area. The square footage of a lot.
Lot, corner. A lot where two intersecting sides abut public or private streets.
Lot, depth. The average distance between the front and rear property lines.
Lot, double frontage. A lot having frontage on two parallel streets.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner or double frontage lot.
Lot lines. The property boundary lines of a lot.
Lot line, front. The property line of a lot abutting a street, except on a corner lot, where the front lot line shall be the lot
line abutting a street with the shortest dimension.
Lot line, rear. The lot line which is approximately parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet
in length or if the two side lot lines form a point, then the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot,
parallel to the front lot line.
Lot line, side. One of two lot lines which is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot width. The average distance between the two side property lines.
Manufactured/Mobile Home Community. 2 or more manufactured/mobile homes located on a tract of land held under
single ownership which provide permanent residential spaces for a fee.
Manufactured Home/Multi-sectional Manufactured Home. Modular or pre-manufactured homes constructed in a
factory and built to International Building Code standards, designed to be permanently affixed to real property, or any
moveable housing structure over 12’ x 40’ which is used for non-residential purposes, or any housing structure over 32’ x
8’ constructed to be towed and installed with or without permanent foundation Not for recreational usage.
29-11
12
Material or Material Change. Means a significant change to a facility which may require a determination be made on the
basis of the anticipated actual or potential impact of the change. Changes that affect the physical appearance, facility's
structural loading, NIER, or safety of the facility would be material changes. The Administrator shall determine, based on
an individual case basis, and applying this definition whether or not changes are material.
Mobile home. A dwelling unit built on a chassis, not less than eight (8) feet wide and forty (40) feet long, designed to be
used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation.
Mobile home park. A tract of rentable lots or spaces designated for long term residential use and intended for rent or lease
exclusively for mobile homes.
Mobile home subdivision. A subdivision of rentable/saleable lots designated for long term residential use for mobile
homes.
Modification or Modify. Means the addition or change of any of the physical and visually discernable components or
aspects of a building, structure or wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing,
utility needs, changing the color or materials of any visually discernable components, vehicular access, and/or parking.
Adding a new wireless service is a modification. A modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a
wireless facility where replacement is reasonably similar to the component being replaced or for the normal repair and
maintenance of a WTF.
Motor freight terminal. A structure where freight is shipped and received by truck or rail.
Multi-family residence. A multiple family dwelling unit.
NIER. Means Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation.
Outside storage. The outside collection of materials that is not covered by a structure.
Oversized Vehicle. A vehicle, trailer, or boat exceeding 22 feet in length, eight feet in width or 10 feet in height.
Owner. The property owner and/or his or her designated agent.
Permit. The official City document enabling the construction or installation of a structure.
Permanent. As opposed to temporary, something affixed in place, lasting for a very long time, without significant change.
Person. Means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company, association of two (2) or more
persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity.
Personal Wireless Services Facility. See Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or WTF.
Personal Wireless Services ("PWS") or Personal Communctns Service. As defined in the 1996 Telecommunications
Act.
Professional office. The place of business for a professional or group of various professionals.
Ramada. A covered porch or trellis for picnic tables or other similar uses protected from overhead weather conditions.
Recreation building or community center. A building with land offering recreational facilities.
Recycling center. A building with land which is used to process and recycle various materials for reuse.
Renewable/Alternative Energy Site (RAES). The site, property, location where the RAES will be placed or installed.
Renewable/Alternative Energy Systems. Any and all equipment used in the conversion, collection, storage and/or
transfer of renewable/alternative energy into a usable form of energy.
Repairs and Maintenance. The repair, maintenance or replacement of components or materials necessary to make a
system, building or structure function properly, where the replacement is similar to the existing component.
Seating capacity. The seating capacity of an area indicated by the adopted International Building Code (IBC).
Single family residence. A single family detached dwelling.
Solar Energy System. All components needed to convert Sun energy into useable energy.
State. The State of Wyoming.
Stealth or Stealth Technology. Anything used to minimize the adverse impact or effects or improve the aesthetics of the
area of the requested location.
Street; arterial. A street designed to carry and move large volumes of traffic, with minimal stopping, ingress and egress as
designated on the Functional Street Classification Map in the City's Comprehensive Master Plan.
Street; collector. A street designed to carry and move moderate volumes of traffic as designated on the Functional Street
Classification Map in the City's Comprehensive Master Plan. Collector Streets typically feed into larger arterial streets.
Street; local. A street designed to carry low volumes of traffic as designated on the Functional Street Classification Map in
the City's Comprehensive Plan. Local Streets typically feed into larger collector streets and occasionally into arterial
streets.
Street; road or highway. A permanent public or private right-of-way for vehicular travel and use.
Structure. A building, dwelling unit, tower, antennae, stand-alone system or facility that is constructed or installed.
Summary Plat. The consolidation of two or more lots into one lot of record, under single ownership.
System. The sum of all components used to make up a complete system.
Telecommunications Site. Means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire,
radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems.
29-12
13
Telecommunications Permit. Means the official permit issued by the City allowing Applicant to construct and use WTF.
Telecommunications Structure. Means a structure used in the provision of services described in the definition of
'Wireless Telecommunication Facilities' or WTF.
Temporary. Means, temporary as opposed to permanent structures, vehicles and dwelling units.
Tower. (See also Antenna and WTF) A structure situated on a site intended for transmitting/receiving television, radio,
telephone or dispatch communications.
Travel trailer or recreational vehicle. Any vehicle or portable structure, with or without mobile power, designed to be
driven, drawn or placed on a vehicle for short term dwelling. Such units shall be eight (8) feet or less in width and less than
forty (40) feet in length.
Use. The purpose or activity which a piece of property and/or a building are intended to be used.
Use, accessory. A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily incidental to the principal use of a building or premises
and which is located on the same lot as the principal use or building.
Use, conditional. Any use which may be established in the particular zoning district in which it is allowed only upon
meeting the conditions and limitations as prescribed by this Ordinance.
Use, conforming. The use of a building or premises which complies with all of the applicable use regulations of the
zoning district in which said building, property or premises is located.
Use, non-conforming. The use of a building or premises which does not comply with all of the applicable use regulations
of the zoning district in which said building, property or premises is located.
Use, permitted. The use of a building or premises which complies with all of the applicable use regulations of the zoning
district in which said building, property or premises is located.
Use, principal. The primary use of a building or land as distinguished from an accessory use.
Use, special. Any use having unusual operational, physical, or other characteristics different from those of the predominant
permitted uses in a zoning district, but which can complement or be compatible with the intended over-all development.
Wind Energy System. All components used to convert wind energy into useable energy.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or WTF. Include a "Telecommunications Site" and "Tower" and "Personal
Wireless Facility" and means a structure or location intended to be used to support Antennas or other wireless
transmitting/receiving devices, including without limit structures of all types and kinds and that can employ camouflage
technology.
Yard. An open space on the same lot as a principal building, which extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a
depth or width specified in the minimum required yard regulations for the use and zoning district in which the lot is located.
Yard, required front. The setback at the front of a building where no structures can be built.
Yard, required rear. The setback at the rear of a building where no structures can be built.
Yard, required side. The setback on the sides of a building where no structures can be built.
Zero lot line. This means a building can be built right to the lot line without any setbacks.
ARTICLE 5: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 1. Establishment of Zoning Districts In order to fulfill the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance, the
area within the corporate limits of the City of Buffalo is divided into the following zoning districts:
Residential R - 1 Single-Family Residential
R - 2 Medium-Density Residential
R - 3 High-Density Residential
R M S Mobile Home Subdivision
R M P Mobile Home Park
Commercial B - 1 Neighborhood “Light” Commercial
B - 2 Community “Heavy” Commercial
B - 3 Central Business District
Industrial I – 1 Light Industrial District
I – 2 Heavy Industrial District
Mixed Use P U D Planned Unit Development – Residential or Commercial
Section 2. Official Zoning Map The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Ordinance
are set forth on the official zoning map hereby adopted by reference and declared to be an official part of this
Ordinance.
A. The official zoning map for the City is located in the Planning and Zoning Department, which is the final authority on
the zoning status of all lands within the City limits.
B. Whenever changes are made to zoning district boundaries, they shall be made promptly on the official zoning map by
the City Planner or Zoning Administrator and become a part thereof. 29-13
14
C. Changes to the zoning map can only be made by either the City Planner or Zoning Administrator. No other persons can
make changes to the official zoning map.
D. Should the official zoning map become worn, damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret for any reason, the P &
Z Commission may adopt a new official zoning map to replace the previous one. The newly adopted official zoning map
may only correct drafting or other errors and omissions from the previous zoning map, but such corrections shall not amend
or change existing zoning districts or boundaries.
Section 3. Zoning District and Annexation Boundaries Whenever uncertainty exists with respect to boundaries
of the various zoning districts or annexations as indicated on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Zoning district boundary lines are the centerline of streets, alleys, railroads, river channels, or easements or the
boundary lines of sections, divisions of sections, tracts, blocks, lots, or lines that may extended through lots as otherwise
indicated. Verify exact locations with the cases on file.
B. Annexation boundary lines shall include all of the right-of-way of any abutting street(s).
ARTICLE 6: “R-l” SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
Section 1. Purpose This district is intended for low density single family detached dwellings and other uses which
uphold and maintain the low density residential nature of the district.
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the R-l district are as follows:
1. Day care homes
2. Home occupations
3. Publicly owned police/fire stations/parks or playgrounds and related buildings
4. Temporary real estate office for use during the development of a residential subdivision
5. Single family detached dwellings
6. Temporary structure for use during construction of a permitted use.
7. Temporary sign not exceeding six sq. ft. in area for the lease or sale of a building.
8. Two temporary signs not exceeding thirty-two (32) sq. ft. in area for the sale of lots/buildings in the subdivision.
9. Permits must be obtained from the building inspector who determines their location so they will not be a traffic
hazard. Permits are renewable annually but must be removed when the subdivision is completed.
10. Beehives, assisted living homes, group care homes.
11. Manufactured housing units applying to be placed in R-1 neighborhoods must have a pitched roof with eaves, must
have been manufactured no more than 24 months prior to the date of application, must be placed on a permanent
foundation, must have skirting installed within 30 days of placement on the permanent foundation. Portable steps/stairs
may not be used for ingress/egress.
B. Special Uses in the R-1 district are as follows:
1. Cemeteries and mausoleums
2. Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses, rectories, seminaries and other places of worship and those uses
usually associated with them such as day care services
3. Community Association swimming pools and/or recreational facilities
4. Golf courses and related buildings
5. Parking lots as a principal use
6. Public utility/service/television/radio companies
7. Schools, public or private, elementary, secondary and colleges
8. Stadiums and arenas.
ARTICLE 7: “R-2” MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
Section 1. Purpose This district is intended for medium density residential uses provided through a variety of housing
types and other non-residential uses that are compatible with the surrounding area and which uphold and maintain the
medium density residential nature of the district.
29-14
15
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the R-2 district are as follows:
1. Any use permitted in the R-1 District
2. Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses, rectories, seminaries and other places of worship and those
uses usually associated with them like day care services.
3. Two family attached dwellings (duplexes) per lot.
4. Multiple family dwellings meeting the medium density requirements of approximately 9 dwelling units per net
acre for single story and approximately 18 dwelling units per net acre for two story dwellings. Multiple family
dwellings in excess of two stories are not permitted in the R-2 district. The P & Z Staff, Building Inspector and
Fire Marshall shall make the determination of whether or not to allow additional dwelling units per net acre
based on life safety issues and how well the dwellings fit in with the area or neighborhood where the
proposed dwelling units are built.
5. Beehives, assisted living homes, group care homes.
B. Special Uses in the R-2 district are as follows:
1. Any special use in the R-1 District, except those permitted uses in the R-3 District.
2. Bed & Breakfast - Three (3) units maximum including the operators dwelling unit.
3. Boarding or lodging homes
4. Day care centers
5. Hospitals, sanitariums, and group care residences
6. Libraries
7. Museums and art galleries
8. Nursing and convalescent homes and retirement centers
9. Professional offices not exceeding 7,500 sq. ft. in gross floor area
10. Professional offices not exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. in gross floor area, where an additional 5% landscaping shall
be provided and side yard setbacks on interior lot lines shall be no less than 10 feet.
11. Recreation buildings and community centers
12. Music, dance, business, commercial and trade schools
13. Multiple family dwellings for sale that meet the requirements in A-4 above.
ARTICLE 8: “R-3” HIGH DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
Section 1. Purpose This district is intended for high density residential uses provided through a variety of housing types
and other non-residential uses that are compatible with the surrounding area and which uphold and maintain the high
density residential nature of the district.
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the R-3 district are as follows:
1. Any permitted use or special use permitted in the R-2 District.
2. Multiple family dwellings meeting the high density requirements of approximately 16 dwelling units per net acre
for single story and 32 dwelling units per net acre for two story dwellings. Multiple family dwellings in excess of
two stories and which exceed the density requirements shall be approved by the P & Z Staff and Fire Marshall prior
to the issuance of a Building Permit to ensure the life safety issues have been addressed and the development fits
in with the area or neighborhood where they are to be built. These dwelling units can be for rent only.
3. Beehives, assisted living homes, group care homes.
B. Special Uses in the R-3 district are as follows:
1. Any special use in the R-2 District.
2. Professional offices not exceeding 15,000 sq. ft. in gross floor area, where an additional 10% landscaping shall be
provided, and side yard setbacks on interior lot lines shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
3. Multiple family dwelling units for sale that meet the requirements in A-2 above.
ARTICLE 9: “RMS” RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION.
Section 1. Purpose This district shall be a minimum of two acres in size and it is intended to provide an alternative to
conventional housing by permitting low to medium density mobile home development on privately owned or rented lots in
subdivisions designed for such development.
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the RMS district are as follows: 29.15
16
1. Any use permitted in the R-l district
2. Manufactured/Mobile homes on individual lots
3. Single family detached dwellings.
4. Beehives, assisted living homes, group care homes.
B. Special Uses in the RMS district shall include any special use in the R-l district.
Section 3. Area. Setback. and Height Requirements In the RMS district, the following requirements shall apply:
1. Lot Area. Lot size shall not be less than 4,500 sq. ft..
2. Front Yard. The required front yard shall not be less than 20 feet.
3. Side Yard. The required side yard shall not be less than 5 feet.
4. Rear Yard. The required rear yard shall not be less than 15 feet.
5. Height. A building or structure shall not exceed 35 feet.
Section 4. General Standards Each mobile home located in this district shall be installed according to the
requirements contained in the Wyoming Manufactured Housing Act and shall be skirted with a material of sufficient
strength to withstand winds gusting up to 90 miles per hour and local weather cycles without noticeable deterioration. Each
mobile home shall be anchored and have a minimum of four roof and frame tie-downs. All tie-downs, anchors, piers,
footings structural stabilizers shall be in compliance with the most recent state codes for placing manufactured/mobile
homes.
ARTICLE 10: “MHC” MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY or “RVP”
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Section 1. Purpose This district shall be a minimum of five acres in size and it is intended to provide an alternative to
conventional housing by permitting high density manufactured/mobile home development in a park designed for such
development and under single ownership or group of owners. Recreational Vehicle Parks “RVP” shall meet the same
requirements as that of an MHC, except as noted is bold italics and beginning with RVP in each of the following
sections.
Section 2. Use Regulations Permitted uses in the MHC include manufactured/mobile homes, self-contained travel
trailers and those uses customarily associated with mobile home parks. No Special Uses are permitted.
Section 3. Area, Setback, and Height Requirements
A. Park Area. The MHC shall not be less than two acres in size and shall be designed to facilitate efficient utilization and
management. RVP shall be sized to accommodate efficient design and management with no minimum size requirement.
B. Setbacks. Building setbacks from all property lines which are adjacent to public streets shall not be less than 25 feet and
from all other property lines which form the perimeter of the mobile home park shall not be less than fifteen 15 feet.
C. Height. A building or structure shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
D. Lot Area. The minimum lot area for each mobile home shall be at least 4,000 square ft. RVP lot area shall be a
minimum of 1,250 sq. ft. per travel trailer lot.
E. Lot Width. The minimum width of a lot for each mobile home shall be 30 feet. RVP lot width shall be at least 25 feet.
F. Spacing. The minimum side to side and end to end spacing between mobile homes and structures shall be 20 feet.
Section 4. General Standards and Requirements An MHC or RVP Development Plan shall be submitted to P & Z
Staff in accordance with the following before a building permit can be issued:
A. Development Plan. The plan shall be drawn to scale on a 24"x 36" reproducible sheet. The following additional
information shall also be shown:
1. Name of MHC or RVP, ownership, developer, scale, north arrow, date, and location map showing the location
of the park in the City.
2. All corners of the development shall be tied by course and distance to established survey monuments,
describing how the bearings were determined.
3. Tract and lot boundary lines, rights-of-way and easements with dimensions and bearings on each line, radius,
length, semi-tangent, and central angle for each curve.
4. Rights-of-way width for each private street and paved width, location, dimensions and purpose of any
easements, fully described with the development.
29-16
17
5. Identification of each trailer lot or space by number and/or letter.
6. Reference to adjoining recorded plats of land by name, date, book and page number.
7. Certification by a registered land surveyor verifying the Plan represents a survey made by him and all
monuments exist and their location, size and materials are correct.
8. Show existing contours and proposed finish grade for the development and adjacent properties and any streets
and drainage. Contour interval shall not exceed two feet.
9. The applicant shall provide the City of Buffalo four sets of the development Plan. After final approval the
applicant shall furnish the City two sets for recording purposes.
B. Site Conditions. Conditions of soil, ground water, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or
occupants. Development of the site shall not create a public nuisance.
C. Fencing, screening and landscaping. The MHC or RVP shall place either a solid screen fence or wall made of brick,
masonry, stone, or wood, no less than six feet in height; or an irrigated and maintained landscaped fence planted with a
density equaling the opacity and height of a solid fence or wall; or any combination thereof at all perimeter lot lines of the
park. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with this ordinance.
D. Access to the Site. Direct vehicular access to the park shall be provided by means of an abutting collector or arterial
street. Vehicular access shall not be provided through an alley.
E. Design of Entrance and Exits. Entrances and exits (E/E) shall be designed for safe and convenient movement of traffic
into and out of the park, and to minimize marginal friction with movement of traffic on adjacent streets. A minimum of two
access points shall be provided and all traffic into and out of the park shall be through them. No E/E shall require a turn at
an acute angle for vehicles moving in the direction intended, and radii of curbs and pavement at intersections shall be a
minimum of 25 feet to facilitate easy turning movements for vehicles. No object shall obscure the view of an approaching
driver in the right lane. No E/E shall be located closer than 30 feet from street intersections, or 10 feet from the radius
point, whichever is more.
F. Internal Streets. Streets shall be privately owned and maintained and provided in the park where necessary to allow
safe, convenient access to all spaces and facilities used by occupants.
G. Street Alignment and Gradient. Street alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography for safe
movement of traffic anticipated and to control surface and ground water.
H. Street Surfacing and Maintenance. A sound all weather driving surface consisting of a minimum of a four inch base
and 1-1/2 inches of asphalt shall be provided and maintained. It shall be kept free from mud, dust, or standing surface
water.
I. Street Widths. Streets shall be wide enough to contain the anticipated parking and traffic load, pedestrian travel and
shall be approved by the City’s Engineer. Width at entrances shall permit free flow of traffic with no parking at or near
access points.
J. Parking Spaces. One 9' x 18' off-street parking space per lot and one additional space for each four lots for guest
parking, for two car tenants, for delivery and emergency service vehicles.
K. Driveways. Driveways shall be provided for access to service entrances of buildings, to delivery and collection points
for refuse and recyclables. Driveways shall have a minimum full-width of eight feet or 10 feet where it is also used as a
walkway. RVP driveways shall have enough space for maneuvering trailers in and out of spaces. No public streets,
sidewalks, or rights-of-way shall be used for this purpose. All maneuvering to be done on RVP property.
L. Pedestrian Circulation. For MHC only, pedestrian walkways shall be designed and maintained for safe and convenient
movement from all lots to principal destinations in the park and out of the park. Streets may be used as pedestrian ways
except where concentration of either pedestrian or vehicular traffic appears likely to lead to congestion or safety hazards.
M. Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided and shielded downward to prevent direct illumination of
sleeping areas or any adjacent property of a more restrictive zoning district.
N. Type of Residential Occupancy. For MHC only, no lot shall be rented for any use other than residential in a mobile
home park. No mobile unit shall be admitted to any mobile home park unless it conforms to the standards set forth in this
ordinance. 29-17
18
O. Tie-downs and Footings. For MHC only, mobile homes shall be anchored and have a minimum of four roof and
frame tie-downs. All tie-downs, anchors, piers, footings structural stabilizers shall be in compliance with the most recent
state codes for placing manufactured/mobile homes.
P. Management Offices, Common and Recreational areas. The structure(s) containing the management office and other
common facilities shall be conveniently located. Placing all facilities and services in a single building and location is
acceptable if it serves all of the mobile home lots. All structures shall meet the requirements of the International Building
Code. RVP showers, toilets, laundries or other uses for park residents are permitted as long as the area including
parking for these facilities does not exceed 10% of the total RVP area. Toilet and bath facilities shall be of permanent
construction in accordance with local Building Codes. No less than 5% of park area shall be devoted to recreational
areas.
Q. Cooking Shelters, Barbecue Pits and Fireplaces. Shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used to minimize
fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on and off the property. No open fire shall be permitted except in approved facilities.
No open fire shall be left unattended and all open fires shall be extinguished before occupants of spaces retire or leave the
area. No fuel or material shall be used or burned, which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors.
R. Disposal of Wastewater, Sewage and Trash. No self-contained or dependent unit shall dispose of wastewater, sewage
or trash except in approved facilities provided by management.
S. Sanitary Stations. RVP only, sufficient permanent facilities shall be provided for the sole purpose of disposing of
waste from all holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner in accordance with local Building Codes.
T. Spaces for Occupancy. RVP only, spaces in travel trailer parks may only be used by travel trailers, equivalent
facilities on or towed by vehicles, tents, or other short-term housing. Spaces shall be for short-term rental only, for a
period not to exceed 14 calendar days. The wheels of a travel trailer shall not be removed except temporarily for repairs.
Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under travel trailer to prevent movement while the trailer is parked and occupied.
Section 5. Location of Mobile Homes/Travel Trailers/Recreational/Oversize Vehicles Outside of
Approved Subdivisions or Parks: These units shall not be parked, used for storage or as a dwelling on any public
right-of-way or other public place or on any occupied or vacant property except in approved areas as provided in this
Ordinance. In all cases; the unit shall comply with the regulations in the International Building Code for the fire zone
where placed.
A. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any public right-of-way for no longer than 72 hours,
subject to any further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by other traffic and parking regulations and
ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
B. No unit shall be parked or occupied on the premises of a lot having a principle structure except in a completely enclosed
parking structure, in the side or rear yard, but not in the setback.
C. The travel trailer, recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle or boats shall not be used as a dwelling except as provided
herein. Units designed for occupancy and parked as provided below, may be occupied for no more than 10 days per
occupancy, with no more than 3 occupancies per year. Oversize vehicles shall not discharge any litter, sewage effluent, or
other matter except into sanitary facilities designed to dispose of such materials.
1. The unit is parked as close to perpendicular as practical to the front curb.
2. The unit is at least 11 feet from the curb and is within the side and/or rear yard setback.
3. No part of the oversize vehicle extends over the public sidewalk.
4. Placement in the required front or side yard is permitted with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP). The applicant
shall be the owner and submit application in accordance with the requirements for a Special Use as outlined in
Article 3, Section 8. The external dimensions and manufacturers stated turning radius shall be included on
the application
5. The unit shall not be permanently connected to sewer/water lines, or electricity. The unit may be temporarily
connected to electricity for charging batteries and other purposes through an approved receptacle and connection.
6. The unit cannot be used for storage for anything not associated the units intended use.
D. One unit may be parked on a vacant lot in accordance with paragraph ‘C’ above and it is used as a temporary dwelling
unit or office, with connections to utilities, for the construction of a dwelling unit or building for no more than 6 months.
E. Institutions which are publicly owned, operated and maintained may utilize one mobile home on the premises as a
residence for a watchman or caretaker and his immediate family.
29-18
19
F. Oversized commercial trucks or trailers cannot be parked or stored in residential districts.
ARTICLE 11: “B-1” COMMUNITY LIGHT COMMERCIAL
Section 1. Purpose This district is intended to provide for retail and personal service types of uses of a limited nature
for the consumer population of the neighborhoods in which they are located and is not intended for those types of uses that
will either attract the consumer population of the entire community, attract large volumes of traffic, or have an appearance
and performance that may be detrimental to the neighborhoods in which they are located.
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the B-1 district are as follows:
1. Any use permitted in the R-3 Districts, except single family detached and two family attached dwellings.
2. Approved Accessory uses 3. Barber shops
4. Beauty shops 5. Bed & Breakfast (5 units max. includes owner)
6. Boarding or lodging homes 7. Day care centers
8. Drive-in banks and tellers 9. Drugstores/Food stores/markets
10. Convenience store 5,000 SF 11. Florists and greenhouses, retail
12. Laundries/dry cleaning 13. Libraries and other public facilities
14. Museums and art galleries 15. Nursing/convalescent/group care homes
16. Professional office 7,500 SF 17. Rec. bldgs./community centers
18. Music/dance/trade schools 19. Colleges/universities
20. Travel agencies 21. Restaurants/Food/Drink/Lounges/Liquor
22. Hotels and Motels
23. Any other use that meets the intent/purpose of this Article and is similar and comparable to those uses listed above.
B. Special Uses in the B-1 district are as follows:
1. Amusement establishments 2. Arenas and Stadiums
3. Automobile service stations 4. Hospitals and sanitariums
5. Public utility/service/television companies 6. Parking lots, as a principal use
7. Professional offices (15,000 S.F. Maximum with an additional 10% landscaping).
8. New residential uses in the district may be allowed through obtaining a special use permit approval from City
Council. (R.O. 1380 § 10/2015)
ARTICLE 12: “B-2” COMMUNITY HEAVY COMMERCIAL
Section 1. Purpose This district is intended to provide for a wide variety of retail, personal service, wholesale office,
and other general service types of uses for the consumer population of the entire community and, because of their heavy
traffic generating characteristics, ability to stay open 24/7 and potentially detrimental appearance and performance, are
located on the periphery of residential areas along collector and arterial street facilities.
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the B-2 district are as follows:
1. Any use permitted in the B-l District 2. Amusement establishments
3. Animal hospitals, clinics, kennels, and pounds 4. Athletic clubs
5. Auditoriums 6. Automobile service stations
7. Automobile accessory/sales/laundries 8. Banks/Financial institutions
9. Banquet halls 10. Bicycle stores, rental, and repair
11. Blueprinting/Photo-copying 12. Book, stationery, school supplies
13. Retail building material sales 14. Bldg contractor/office/storage
15. Businesses, public and private 16. Carpet and floor covering stores
17. Catering establishments 18. Commercial Retail/Service stores
19. Clubs/lodges but not gun clubs. 20. Convention/Exhibition Centers
21. Department stores 22. Electrical sales/storage
23. Employment agencies 24. Funeral parlors
25. Food/Grocery stores/bakeries/delicatessens 26. Golf courses
27. Hardware stores 28. Health centers
29. Libraries 30. Lumberyards
31. Mobile Home/Travel Trailer Sales 32. Newspaper Offices
33. Parking Lots/Garages/Decks 34. Post Offices
35. Printing/Publishing 36. Professional Offices
37. Self Storage Establishments 38. Public Utility/Service/Radio/TV/Cable
39. Sign Shop 40. Stadiums and Arenas
20
41. Theaters, Indoor 42. Warehouses as Accessory Use
43. Any other use meeting the intent and purpose of this Article and similar and comparable to those uses listed above.
B. Special Uses in the B-2 district are as follows:
1. Any special use in the B-l District 2. Airports/heliports/landing fields
3. Bottling works 4. Bus stations and terminals
5. Gun clubs 6. Outdoor theaters, drive-ins
7. Outside storage as a principal use 8. Parcel delivery/mail order
9. Penal/Correctional institutions 10. Travel trailer parks
11. Light welding and fabrication
ARTICLE 13: “B-3” DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 1. Purpose The district boundaries generally include those lots fronting Main St., from Foote to Angus Streets
along Main on the west side and from Foote to Bennett Streets on the east; also including properties from Fort Street on the
north to Angus Street on the south and extending to Burritt as well as those properties between Benteen and Fetterman on
both sides of Lobban Avenue and properties on the west side of Lobban between Bennett and Fetterman Street. The B-3 is
intended to provide for retail, service, wholesale, office, art and other general service types of uses for the consumer
population or the community in a centrally located and contained high density setting. (RO 1379 9/15)
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the B-3 district shall include retail, wholesale, hospitality and service uses as well as craft
breweries, artisan studios and art production. Manufacturing and industrial uses are not permitted.
B. Existing residential use of properties at the time of adoption of this section is an acceptable non-conforming
use.
C. Special Uses not currently existing on a property in the B-3 district at the date of passage of this Zoning
Ordinance amendment which vary from those listed in A above and the Table of Uses shall first be considered
before the City Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by City Council on a case by case basis. New
residential uses in the district may be allowed through obtaining a special use permit approval from City
Council. Tattoo establishments shall not be permitted in the B-3 district. (RO 1379 9/15; R.O. 1380 § 10/2015)
ARTICLE 14: “I-1” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
Section 1. Purpose This district is intended to provide for light manufacturing, processing, assembly/disassembly,
fabrication, and treatment activities conducted in a non-detrimental manner to the community by reason of emission or
creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulates, toxic or noxious materials, odors, fire, explosive hazards,
glare or heat.
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted Uses in the I-1 district are as follows:
1. Any use permitted in the Heavy Commercial districts.
2. Any primary use which includes light manufacturing, fabrication, assembly/disassembly, processing or
treatment of goods and products.
3. Bottling works (C-2 Special Use)
4. Bus stations and terminals
5. Food and grain processing, canning, and storage, excluding meat, fish, and poultry and Ice processing and
storage
6. Gun clubs
7. Machinery and service for farm, tractor and trailer rigs and well drilling equipment
8. One dwelling unit for a watchman or caretaker and family on the premises.
9. Outdoor theaters, drive-in
10. Parcel delivery, mail order services, and motor freight terminals
11. Wholesale distribution centers
12. Warehouses
13. Light welding
14. Any other use meeting the intent of this Article and comparable with the above.
B. Special Uses in the I-1 district are as follows:
1. Airports, heliports, and aircraft landing fields
2. Hospitals, sanitariums, and group care residences
21
3. Livestock feed and sales yards
4. Nursery or day care center and private schools as an accessory function for employees.
5. Oil and gas wells and pumping stations
6. Outside storage as a principal use, and junk yards
7. Penal, correctional, and other institutions necessitating restraint of patients
8. Saw mills or other similar types of mills like pulp mills.
9. Recycling activities in a structure with outside storage as a secondary use. Outside storage to be screened with
an 8 foot high solid wall except for access openings, with a maximum opening of 16 feet with a solid gate(s).
ARTICLE 15: “I-2” HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
Section 1. Purpose This district is intended to provide for a wide range of industrial activities including heavy
manufacturing, fabrication, assembly/disassembly, processing and treatment activities conducted in a manner not
detrimental to the rest of the community by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, toxic or noxious materials odors, fire, explosive hazards, glare or heat.
Section 2. Use Regulations
A. Permitted uses in the I-1 district are as follows:
1. Any use permitted in the I-1 District
2. Any primary use which includes heavy manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, disassembly, processing and/or
treatment of goods and products,
3. Food and grain processing, canning, and storage, including meat, fish, and poultry
4. Foundries, iron works, and steel fabricating
5. Livestock feed and sales yards
6. Outside storage as a principal use and junk yards
7. Petroleum products including refining and storage
8. Saw mills and other types of mills
9. Any other use that is similar and comparable to those listed above.
B. Special Uses. In the 1-2 district, special uses are as follows:
1. Any special use in the 1-1 District
2. Landfills
3. Mining, loading, and hauling of sand, gravel, top soil, or other aggregate or minerals, including equipment and
buildings or structures for screening, crushing, mixing, washing, storage or office purposes.
4. Recycling activities with a structure and permanent outside storage. Outside storage to be screened with an 8 foot
high solid wall except for access openings, with a maximum opening of 16 feet with a solid gate(s).
ARTICLE 16: “PUD” PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Section 1. Purpose This district allows for more of a mixed use and an alternative to conventional zoning by permitting
flexibility and innovation in land use, design, placement of buildings, use of open spaces, circulation facilities and off-street
parking areas to encourage a more creative approach in the utilization of land. This district permits a more efficient,
aesthetic and desirable development characterized by special features of the geography, topography, size or shape of a
particular piece of property while simultaneously providing a compatible and stable environment in harmony with and at
substantially the same population density and area coverage of the surrounding area.
Section 2. Use Regulations The PUD district permits any use or combination of mixed uses allowed in the various
residential, commercial and/or industrial zoning districts established by this Ordinance in accordance with the procedures,
requirements, and standards set forth herein.
Section 3. Procedures, Requirements, and Standards Applications for a PUD district shall meet and follow the
same procedures, requirements, and standards as that of a zone change request. In addition, the application for a PUD
shall include a development plan that meets the following requirements and standards:
A. Ownership. The tract shall be under unified ownership and shall be planned as a whole. If the tract is to be developed
in phases, all phases must be indicated and a schedule shall be provided showing the chronological order of development.
B. Conformance with the City's Land Use and Thoroughfare Plans. The development shall conform to the City's Land
Use and Thoroughfare Plans for land use, density, streets, and traffic.
C. Lot Area Regulations. A residential PUD or one mixed with commercial and/or industrial uses shall be no smaller
22
than five acres in size. A proposed commercial and/or industrial planned unit development shall be no smaller than two
acres in size.
D. Density. In a residential PUD with a variety of housing types, the number of dwelling units allowed per net acre shall
be as close to that outlined in the Comprehensive Master Plan for the property’s current zoning classification. The
maximum density standards may be exceeded if it can be demonstrated that a higher density will not adversely affect public
facilities, traffic flows, safety or enjoyment of adjacent properties. Open space shall be provided to offset increases in
dwelling unit density, if required.
E. Setbacks. Building setbacks for all perimeter property lines in the PUD shall blend well with adjacent property
setbacks already developed or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance for the current zoning district classification of the
property, whichever one blends best.
F. Height Restrictions. Heights of structures shall blend well with adjacent structures already developed or as set forth
elsewhere in this ordinance for the height restrictions for the property as currently zoned prior to the approval of the PUD,
whichever height restriction is lower.
H. Streets, Utilities, Services, and Public Facilities. Because of the uniqueness of each PUD, the specifications and
standards for streets, utilities, services, and public facilities may be different from those normally required in this and other
ordinances if it can be demonstrated that such variations will not adversely affect the interests of the general public or City.
In addition, the PUD proposal shall illustrate how the streets, utilities, services, public facilities and traffic circulation will
function and serve the PUD as well as adjacent properties.
I. Off-Street Parking. The PUD shall provide the necessary amount of off-street parking spaces and illustrate how such
proposed parking will adequately serve the entire development.
J. Any other information which allows staff to properly assess the request for the PUD district.
Section 4. Building Permit Requirements
A. Exact development information shall be submitted either with the application for a PUD, or separately at a later time as
a whole, or in phases, prior to receiving a Building Permit for construction of any structures within the PUD.
B. The exact development plan shall be substantially the same as that submitted for the initial PUD request. In addition to
the information submitted for the application for a PUD district, the development plan shall include specific details such as,
but not limited to: type and placement of buildings/structures; internal building setbacks; building and structure heights;
location, number, and operation of off-street parking spaces; street construction, flows and maintenance standards; traffic
circulation; pavement and ROW widths; utility and facility type, location and service; easement type, location and service;
size and location of open spaces; dwelling unit densities; and any other information which staff may require to assess and
approve the request.
Section 5. Decisions and Conditions
A. Approval. The PUD request may be approved after a public hearing by the P & Z Commission, where additional
conditions may be imposed to insure the public interest, safety and welfare and where the development plan has been
presented to meet the general and/or specific uses, placement of buildings and structures, amount and location of open
space areas, street and utility locations and performances, off-street parking areas, and other items essential to the
development's operation, performance and ability to blend well with adjacent properties.
B. Building Permit. A building permit shall be issued only if the building or structure is in conformance with the
approved development plan and only if all site and facility improvements are in place for the building or structure.
ARTICLE 17: AREA, SETBACK, DENSITY & HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
Section 1. Generally Every building, structure and use hereafter constructed or established shall meet the following
area, setback and height requirements in addition to requirements set forth elsewhere in this and in other ordinances.
Section 2. Residential Districts Area, Setback and Height requirements for the R-1 through R-3 zoning districts:
Area, setback and height requirements for residentially zoned districts shall be in compliance with the following chart.
29-22
23
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS (in feet)
Zoning
District
Use
Minimum
Lot Size
Required Front Yard
Local Collector or
Arterial Street
Street
Required
Rear
Yard
Required Side Yard
Interior Corner
Local/Collector or Arterial
1 story/2 Story Street
Maximum
Height
R – 1
Residential
Single
Family
Residence
6,000 S.F. 25 35 * 20 5 20 35
R - 2
Residential
Single
Family
Residence
4,500 S.F.
Per Unit
20 25 20 5 20 35
Duplex
4,000 S.F.
Per Unit
20 25 20 5 20 35
Multi
Family
Residence
2,000 S.F.
Per Unit
20 25 20 10 / 10 20 35
R – 3
Residential
Single
Family
Residence
4,500 S.F.
Per Unit
20 25 20 5 20 35
Duplex
4,000 S.F.
Per Unit
20 25 20 5 20 35
Multi
Family
Residence
1,500 S.F.
Per Unit
20 25 20 10 / 10 20 35
*On lots subdivided and recorded after the effective date of this ordinance, including Summary Plats, Replats, and
Revisions of a P.U.D. If otherwise, the requirements in effect at the time the lots were recorded shall apply. (RO 1392
4/18)
Section 3. Commercial and Industrial Districts Setbacks in effect at platting shall apply to all commercial and
industrial lots. All buildings, structures, and uses in the commercial and industrial districts on property platted after the
date of this ordinance, except the B-3 district, shall meet the following setback, screening, landscaping, and height
requirements. Buildings, structures and uses in the B-3 district are exempt from the following(RO 1385 7/16)
A. Front Yard Setback. The minimum setback shall be 40 feet or the setback line established by an existing principal
building on an adjacent lot within the same block, whichever is less.
B. Side Yard Setback. A side yard setback shall not be required, except where the side lot line abuts a residential zoning
district or an adjacent street. Where the interior side lot line abuts a residential zoning district, the minimum side yard
setback shall be 20% of the lot width or 35 feet, whichever is less. The lot shall be effectively screened by placing a solid
fence or wall no less than six feet in height on the structure side of the lot line, made of brick, masonry, stone, wood or an
irrigated and maintained landscaped area, planted at a density equal to the opacity and height of a solid fence or wall or any
combination thereof. Where the side yard is on the street side of a corner lot, the minimum side yard setback shall be 30
feet or the setback line established by an existing principal building on an adjacent lot within the same block, whichever is
less.
C. Rear Yard Setback. The minimum setback shall not be less than 15 feet, except where the rear lot line abuts a
residential zoning district, where the rear lot line shall then be 20% of the lot depth or 35 feet, whichever is less. The lot
shall be effectively screened by placing a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height on the structure side of the lot
line, made of brick, masonry, stone, wood or an irrigated and maintained landscaped area, planted at a density equal to the
opacity and height of a solid fence or wall or any combination thereof.
D. Building Height Restrictions.
1. In the B-1 district, a building shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
24
2. In the B-2 and M-1 districts, a building shall not exceed 35 feet in height without Fire Department approval.
3. In the B-3 district, a building's height shall meet the approval of the Fire Department.
E. Structure Height Restrictions. Structures in all zoning districts not used for the support of people-like businesses or
dwelling units, such as antennae, monuments, towers, church spires or other such structures shall be reviewed on an
individual basis either through the Renewable Alternative Energy Systems Ordinance or the Telecommunications
Ordinance application processes or by City staff through the Building Permit, Plan Review process to determine if the
structure’s height poses any threat to the health, safety, welfare and/or aesthetics of the adjacent properties or the
community as a whole.
F. Density Requirements.
1. In the R-1 Zoning District, the density should not exceed five (5) dwelling units/acre.
2. In the R-2 Zoning District, the density should not exceed nine (9) dwelling units/acre.
3. In the R-3 Zoning District, the density should not exceed sixteen (16) dwelling units/acre. If a multi-story complex,
there can be no more than 16 dwelling units per floor, as long as all other aspects of this ordinance have been met
on the developed lot for open space, parking, accessory buildings, access-ways, garages, setbacks, etc.
4. In the RMS and MHC Zoning Districts, the density should not exceed nine (9) dwelling units/acre.
5. In Residential PUD Zoning Districts, the density should not exceed the highest density allowed on abutting lots.
ARTICLE 18: GENERAL BUILDING & PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 1. Purpose The purpose of this article is to establish general building and performance standards to preserve
and promote an attractive, well-planned and stable urban environment. All local, state and federal construction guidelines
and regulations shall be adhered to during the time of construction and this is the responsibility of the owner/contractor.
Section 2. Access to Public Streets Except in the PUD district and as otherwise provided for in this and other
ordinances, every residential dwelling unit structure constructed or erected after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be
located on a lot which has access to or abuts, as a minimum, a local public street.
Section 3. Buildings Per Lot
A. In residentially zoned districts, every single family detached dwelling, mobile home, two family attached dwelling or
multiple family dwellings used for rental purposes only, constructed or erected after the effective date of this ordinance,
shall be located on one duly subdivided and recorded lot and there shall not be more than one principal building on one lot.
B. In the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, more than one principal building may locate on one lot if that lot is held under one
ownership and the dwelling units are used for rental purposes only.
C. In the R-2 and R-3 districts, where the dwelling units of multiple family dwellings are sold to individual owners, each
dwelling unit shall be recorded as one lot of record.
D. When two or more lots, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension alone to qualify for a permitted use, are
contiguous and are held under one owner, they may be used as one zoning lot for such use after summary platting such lots
into one lot of record.
Section 4. Accessory Uses In all residentially zoned districts, accessory uses shall meet the following requirements:
A. Except when used for agricultural purposes in the R-1 district, an accessory building shall be compatible with the
principal building that it serves and shall not be constructed prior to the construction of the principal building.
B. An accessory structure such as an antenna, tower or satellite dish shall not be closer than 60 feet from the front property
line, five feet to any side or rear property line or be closer than 10 feet from the principle building or structure that it serves
or any other structure on that lot.
C. A carport, garage, Ramada or similar accessory structure cannot be located closer to any property lines than the setbacks
established and permitted for a principle building in the property’s zoning district without approval of a setback variance.
D. An accessory structure not attached to the principal structure shall not occupy more than 40% of the required rear yard
area, nor have more floor area than the principal structure it serves.
29-24
E. An accessory building shall not exceed the height of the principal building it serves.
25
Section 5. Exceptions to Required Yards Yard spaces shall remain open and unobstructed, except as follows:
A. Eaves, overhangs, ornamental features, and other common projections normally associated with residential dwellings
may project no more than 18 inches into required yard spaces.
B. Open stairways, balconies and chimneys may project no more than five feet into required yard.
C. An uncovered porch or terrace may project no more than 10 feet into required yard spaces.
D. Where a lot is adjacent to a lot with a principal building that projects into the required front yard setback and if both lots
are in the same block on the same side of the street, then the required front yard setback of the lot may be that as established
by the adjacent principal building setback.
E. In all zoning districts, required off-street parking may be located in required yards after receiving approval from P & Z
Staff.
Section 6. Exceptions to Height Requirements Except in the B-3, following are exceptions to height
requirements.
A. If provided with an approved fire sprinkler and standpipe system, buildings can exceed the normal height requirements.
B. Churches and temple spires shall not exceed 75 feet in height.
C. In residentially zoned areas, privately-owned, non-commercial radio towers, antennas, monuments, steeples, chimneys
or other similar structures shall not exceed 75 feet in height.
Section 7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
A. Location of Off-Street Parking Spaces. All required off-street parking spaces shall be located within the property
lines of the same lot that accommodates the building or use being served, except that where an increase in the number of
spaces is required by a change or enlargement of a use, or where such spaces are provided collectively and are to be used
jointly or shared by two or more uses as provided herein, the required spaces may be located not more than four hundred
(400) feet from the property line if the lot accommodates the use being served. If such is the case, a written agreement
assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to
form by the City Attorney, and content by the City Planner, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
B. Shared Off-Street Parking. Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking spaces provided for other uses may be
utilized by those uses seeking additional off-street parking spaces, provided that the two uses are not normally open, used,
or operated during the same hours. The parking spaces must be within the distance requirement set forth herein.
C. Rules for Computing the Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces. The number of required off-street parking spaces to
be provided for each use shall be determined as set forth herein.
1. The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of
a similar nature, as determined by the City Planner.
2. Except as otherwise indicated, the number of parking spaces shall be determined by the net floor area, which for the
purpose of this section, shall mean that floor area of the building accessible to or devoted to use by the customer or
patron. Net fl. area shall not include those areas used for storage, cooking, stairwells, etc.
3. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to be the nearest whole number.
4. Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units,
seating capacity, or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the number of existing
parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the change or enlargement.
D. Minimum Standards for the number of Off-Street Parking Spaces. For all zoning districts, except B-3, the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be as follows: (Sq. Ft. – Square Feet / NFA = Net Floor Area). ADA
Handicapped Parking requirements and minimum number of spaces shall be adhered to for all uses.
1. Bowling alley: 5 spaces per lane, plus additional spaces as required for ancillary uses.
2. Business, professional, medical, or public office bldg: minimum of 3 plus 1 for every 300 sq. ft. of NFA.
3. Church or temple: 1 space for every 3 seats or seating places in a pew.
4. Community center, library, museum, private club/lodge: minimum of 10 plus 1 for every 300 sq. ft. of NFA.
5. Convention/civic/exhibition center, dance or assembly hall: 1 for every 100 sq. ft. of NFA.
6. Daycare facilities: 2 for every 10 children, plus 1 for each employee.
7. Furniture/household equipment or appliance store: minimum of 2 plus 1 for every 300 sq. ft. of NFA.
8. Hospital: 1 for every 2 beds plus 1 for every employee during peak shift.
9. Hotel, motel: 1 per room plus additional spaces as required for ancillary uses.
10. Industrial/Manufacturing establishment: 1 per employee during peak shift plus 1 for each company vehicle.
26
11. Motor vehicle or machinery sales: 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of NFA.
12. Outside sales areas: display and sales area accessible to patron, the display area shall be paved for a parking lot.
13. Residential dwelling: 2 for every dwelling unit.
14. Restaurant, night club, cafe, amusement establishment or similar activity: 2 per 100 sq. f. of NFA.
15. Retail store or bank: minimum of 3 plus 1 for every 250 sq. ft. of NFA.
16. Retirement/convalescent, sanitarium or group care facility: 1 for every 4 beds.
17. Theater, stadium, or auditorium (except school): 1 per 3 seats inside facility.
18. Shopping center: 5 per 1,000 sq. ft. of NFA, including open mall areas.
19. Schools: elementary/Junior high - 2 per classroom; high schools, trade schools, colleges -1 for every 3 students.
20. Warehouses/storage establishment or motor freight terminal: 1 per employee during peak shift plus 1 for each
company vehicle used for business purposes.
E. Minimum Standards for parking lots. Parking lots shall be designed to City standards for efficient access, traffic flow
and drive lanes and shall be approved by the City Planner and City Engineer.
F. Loading Zones. For all zoning districts where loading and unloading is needed, except the B-3 district, a designated
off-street Loading Zone shall be provided so as not to obstruct parking, pedestrian, ADA or vehicular traffic flows on-site
or to adjacent properties, streets and alleys.
G. Construction and maintenance of Off-street Parking and Loading Zones. All parking and Loading Zones shall be
constructed with either 4 inches of base coarse and 1-1/2 inches of asphalt or a minimum of 6 inches of concrete.
1. Each parking space shall be a minimum of 9 x 18 feet with circulation drives of adequate width for accessibility.
2. Each Loading Zone shall be a minimum of 12 x 35 feet with a minimum height clearance of 15 feet and it shall not
reduce the number of required parking spaces.
Section 8. Fences. Walls. and Other Obstructions
A. Except as set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance and in other ordinances, fences and walls shall comply with this
Ordinance and with the existing Fence Code, located in City Code, Chapter 5 - Buildings, Section 1.10.
B. Fences shall not consist of barbed wire, except if the fence is built with conventional materials, then up to three strands
of barbed wire may be placed at the top for security purposes. Such exception is only allowed in commercial/industrial
districts.
C. In no instance shall a fence, wall or other obstruction restrict or invade upon the line-of-site requirements for vehicular
traffic on corner lots, or other lots abutting streets where line-of-site issues may come into play.
Section 9. Outside Storage Outside storage of materials, not on display for direct sale or rental to the consumer, shall
be enclosed and effectively screened from adjacent streets and properties by placing a solid fence or wall, made of brick,
masonry, stone or wood at property line not less than 6 feet in height or the height of the materials being screened,
whichever is greater.
Section 10. Lighting
A. All lighting, glare, and/or general illumination shall not be cast upon properties that are adjacent to the site from which
the lighting, glare, and/or general illumination originates. All exterior lighting shall conform to the Wyoming Night Skies
Act.
B. No lighting, glare, and/or general illumination which flashes, revolves, or otherwise resembles a traffic control signal or
in any way creates a hazard for passing traffic shall be permitted.
Section 11. Landscaping To promote and preserve an aesthetically pleasing setting, reduce water erosion, runoff
and improve the quality of the environment, owners of buildings and parking lots hereinafter constructed in the R-3
through I-2 zoning districts, except B-3, shall provide and maintain landscaping in the amount and locations set forth
herein.
A. Definition. Landscaping shall mean trees with a combination of either shrubs or ground cover. Trees are mandatory
for landscaping to count towards the total required landscaping.
1. Deciduous or evergreen trees shall be placed throughout the required landscaped area, spaced no more than 30
29-26
feet on-center. Trees shall have a minimum 2" caliper trunk at the time of planting, measured 6 inches above
soil line.
27
2. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 2 feet in height at the time of planting. Spacing for shrubs at time of planting
shall be based on the overall width of shrubs at maturity so they will cover at least 75% of the ground area at
maturity.
3. Grass and/or low-lying green plants shall be planted to provide at least 90% coverage of ground area at
maturity.
4. Mulch, bark, asphalt, concrete, gravel or other decorative or non-decorative aggregate are not permitted as
ground
cover for the required landscaping purposes.
5. Materials. Planting materials shall be selected for drought tolerance, water conservation, and adaptability to
area.
B. Location and area requirements in the R-3, B-1, B-2 and I-1 zoning districts.
1. To determine the required area to be landscaped, take the entire area to be developed and subtract the total are
being used by all structures; this shall be called the remaining area. 12% of the remaining area is the area that
must be landscaped to meet the landscape requirements of this ordinance.
2. The required landscaped areas shall be clearly visible from bordering streets.
3. Landscaping for Phased developments will be determined based on the square footage of area developed by
phase.
4. If a lot is being partially developed, only apply the formula outlined in #1 above to the total area to be
developed.
C. Landscape screen fence. This section only includes screen fencing made from living plants.
1. A screen fence shall have the opacity of a solid fence to a height of at least six feet.
2. A screen fence shall be irrigated and maintained continuously.
3. A screen fence shall be planted so that it will have the opacity of a solid fence at the time of maturity. In no
instance shall plants that cannot survive in this close proximity to other plants be permitted in the screen fence.
4. A screen fence shall not extend onto sidewalks, drive lanes or public rights-of-ways.
5. A screen fence can account for up to 2% of the total 12% required landscaping.
6. A screen fence shall not be changed, modified, reduced or deleted at any time without approval of the P & Z
Staff.
D. Other location criteria.
1. 50% of the required 12% landscaping and its required irrigation may be located within the public ROW with
approval from the City Engineer or the WYDOT to ensure safety, practicality and accessibility are not hindered.
2. Landscaping located in the sight triangle shall be in accordance with City Code.
E. Landscape plan review. A landscape plan shall include the type and location of all living plants and irrigation system
components. This plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the site plan during the building permit application and be
approved in accordance with this ordinance. Changes to approved landscaping will require approval prior to planting.
F. Installation. In order to receive a certificate of occupancy, the irrigation system and all landscaping must be in place in
accordance with the approved landscape plan. Only 1 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (maximum of 60 days) may be
granted to complete the landscaping.
G. Maintenance. It is the property owner's responsibility to maintain all landscaped areas, including public rights-of-way
and sight triangles in a healthy, neat, trimmed, clean and weed-free condition, whether or not negligence or damage to the
landscaping was the cause of the owner. Dead plant material shall be replaced with new plant material in accordance with
this ordinance within 60 days of receiving written notice from city staff.
H. Approved landscaping shall not be changed, modified, reduced or removed at any time without approval of the P & Z
Staff. When landscaping is removed for construction or any other reason, it shall be replanted within 180 days after being
removed.
I. Landscaped areas shall not be used for retail sales, temporary signs or any kind of temporary or permanent storage.
Landscaped areas shall not be used for any type of vehicular parking. This includes, but is not limited to, the parking of
carts, ATVs, motorcycles, cars, trucks, utility vehicles, recreational vehicles, trailers, boats and airplanes.
Section 12. Site Specific Drainage Control Requirements
A. For a residential-commercial, commercial or industrial development, as required by the City Engineer or the WYDOT,
29-27
the developer shall provide a drainage site plan which shows the site elevations for the existing and developed conditions
and how the storm water shall be detained on the property. This plan may also require the calculations and design for the
28
detention structure as designed by a professional engineer registered in Wyoming.
B. The amount of storm water that shall be detained and the rate at which it can be released shall be in accordance with the
standards and procedures as required by the City Engineer or the WYDOT, and as adopted and required by the City in this
and other ordinances.
Section 13. Site Specific Traffic analysis Requirements For a residential-commercial, commercial or industrial
development, as required by the City Engineer or the WYDOT, the developer shall provide a traffic impact analysis for
developments which require in excess of 12 parking spaces. If required by the City Engineer, the traffic impact analysis
shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in Wyoming.
ARTICLE 19: SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Section 1. Purpose The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of building and performance standards to
promote attractive, well-planned and stable urban conditions within special flood hazard areas.
Section 2. Finished Floor Elevation
A. The finished floor elevation for all new construction on properties which lie within a special flood hazard area shall be 1
foot above the elevation indicated for that property on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City of
Buffalo.
B. Reconstruction, alteration or additions to structures on properties which lie within a special flood hazard area, which are
valued at more than fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure shall require flood proofing of the structure to at least the
elevation indicated for that property on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map.
C. Additions or enlargements to structures on properties which lie within a special flood hazard area, which are valued at
less than fifty (50) percent of the existing structures shall have the finished floor elevation, of the addition or enlargement,
at or above the elevation indicated for that property on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map.
D. Restoration to structures on properties which lie within a special flood hazard area which is valued at fifty (50) percent
or more of the value of the structure shall be flood proofed to at least the elevation indicated for that property on the most
current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map.
ARTICLE 20: TELECOMMUNICATIONS or Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
Section 1. Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent is to minimize the negative impact of Wireless
Telecommunications Facility (WTF), establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, protect
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Buffalo, encourage the use and assure the improved appearance
and functionality of existing facilities and insure all new facilities are constructed using stealth technologies and built to
accommodate future growth.
Section 2. Exclusions; the following shall be exempt from this ordinance
A. The fire, police, and other public service facilities owned and operated by the local, county, state, or federal
government.
B. Any facilities expressly exempt for the City's citing, building, and permitting authority.
C. Over-the-Air reception devices including the reception antennas for direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multi-channel,
multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers (MMDS), television broadcast stations (TVBS) and other customer-end
antennas that receive and transmit fixed wireless signals and are primarily used for reception.
D. Facilities exclusively for private, non-commercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, and other
similar non-commercial Telecommunications.
E. FCC licensed amateur radio facilities require Administrative Approval and are exempt from all aspects of this ordinance
except logical screening, setback, placement, construction, height and health and safety standards in accordance with State
law.
F. Facilities exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies (such as IEEE 802.11a, b, g {WiFi and
Bluetooth}) where the facility does not require a new tower. 29-28
Section 3. Permit Application Process and Other Requirements
A. Applicants for a WTF Permit shall comply with the requirements set forth in this ordinance. The City Council
29
designates the P & Z Staff as the Administrator to whom applications for a WTF Permit must be made, and that is
authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting, not granting, or revoking Permits. The
City may at its discretion designate the P & Z Commission to accept, review, analyze, evaluate, and make
recommendations to the City Council with respect to the granting, not granting, or revoking of Permits that are appealed to
the City Council.
B. The applicant shall complete the following steps, in order, to assist administrator in expediting completion of the
process:
1. Obtain and review the WTF Ordinance and discuss any questions regarding the requirements with
Administrator.
2. Determine the best potential location for the WTF Facility, taking into consideration the City's defined
priorities that meet the applicant's requirements for service. The application process will require an
explanation for a selected location not using the highest priority available to the applicant. The City's
priorities (listed from highest to lowest) are: On existing Towers or structures without increasing their
height; on City- owned properties; on properties zoned for Industrial use; on properties zoned for
Commercial use; and finally, on properties zoned for Residential use.
3. Attend the pre-application meeting to address issues to help expedite the review and permitting process. A preapplication
meeting shall also include a site visit. The pre-application meeting will: Determine the types of
applications being made; define information required to support the proposed location; and, define the specific
application requirements for what is needed for review and consideration by the City. Requirements will vary
based on the specific location, type of facility selected and its Potential impact to the City and its citizens.
4. Deposit funds sufficient to reimburse the City for all reasonable costs of expert consultation in connection with
the review of the application and construction or modification of the site. Funds will be deposited into an
escrow account controlled by the City. The City's consultant will invoice the City as needed for
reviewing the application or performing construction inspections. Funds remaining in the escrow account
after issuance of the Certificate of Compliance will be returned to the applicant. The initial amount of the
escrow deposit and the minimum balance to be maintained throughout the project varies based on the type of
project as defined below:
a. New towers require an initial deposit of $8,500 and maintain a balance of $2,500 throughout project.
b. Co-locations or material modifications on existing structures, without increasing the height, requires an
initial deposit of $5,000 and maintaining a balance of $1,500 throughout the project.
c. Applicants applying for a permit for multiple (3 or more) projects concurrently may negotiate a lower
initial escrow amount since many aspects of concurrent projects may be addressed at the same time.
d. Should an escrow account fall below prescribed minimums and the City requests additional funding, all
work will stop until the escrow account is replenished.
5. Submit 3 copies of applications to the Administrator. Incomplete applications will not be accepted.
6. Submit a report inventorying existing suitable Towers and structures within 2 miles of proposed Tower,
unless applicant can show another distance is more reasonable and demonstrate why an existing structure
cannot be used.
C. The City and its consultant will review the application to verify if it is complete and that it meets the requirements of
the ordinance. Based on the review of the application the City may:
1. Approve, approve with conditions or deny a WTF Permit. Its decision shall be in writing and supported
evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the granting of the permit shall always be on the
applicant.
2. Refer application to the P & Z Commission for recommendations.
3. Based on the agreed upon location for a new tower, if it is located in a zone other than an industrial zone, or if
any variance is required, this application may require a public hearing through the P & Z Commission.
D. The City's approval/denial of an application shall be provided to the applicant in writing within 10 business days of
decision.
E. Anyone can appeal the decision of staff or the P & Z Commission to the City Council by submitting written notification
to the administrator. The appeal will be heard and considered at the next City Council meeting. The appeal must be
submitted by noon on the second business day following the Commission meeting or within 30 calendar days after the
decision by staff.
29-29
F. Limitations. A proposed rezoning, special use or variance which has been denied by the P & Z Commission and/or City
Council on a particular tract of land for a particular purpose cannot again be applied for within 1 year from the date of the
30
denial, unless the new request is determined to be substantially different from the original zoning request (i.e., an
application for a different but not necessarily more restrictive zoning district, use, distance, area, height, use of stealth
technology, etc.)
G. An Applicant that receives an approved Permit may proceed to the construction phase of the project. Since the
application fee includes the Building Permit for the tower only, any additional support buildings will require a separate
Building Permit and fee. The City will conduct its normal building inspection process during construction.
H. When the applicant completes project construction, they shall notify the administrator of the need for a final inspection.
I. When the City has verified that the site is constructed in accordance with the application, meets all the requirements of
the ordinance and that the applicant has paid all monies due to the City, the City will issue a Certificate of Occupancy to the
applicant that allows operational use of the site.
Section 4. Permit Application Contents and Other Requirements
A. All applications shall demonstrate the facility will be sited so as to be the least visually intrusive as reasonably possible.
B. All applications for the construction or installation of new WTF shall contain the information hereinafter set forth.
C. The application requirements may vary based on the type of facility and its location. Final determination of the specific
information to be included with each application will be defined in the pre-application meeting, but will generally follow
the established guidelines as set forth below:
1. An application to co-locate on an existing structure or modify an existing structure without increasing its height
shall include: The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the person preparing application; the applicant; including
legal name; the WTF facility owner; the property owner; the building contractors; the postal address and legal
description of the property and its zoning designation; written verification that the facility complies with State and
Federal rules and regulations; a copy of the State license; and, documentation that verifies the ownership of the site,
and all lease or sublease agreements.
2. The applicant shall furnish a Visual Impact Assessment, which includes: a "Zone of Visibility Map" to determine
locations from which the Tower may be seen; and, pictorial "before & after" representations of proposed facility.
3. A Certified site plan which shall include: The location, size, and height of all structures on the property to scale;
landscaping, irrigation, and fencing; a description of the proposed Tower and Antenna(s) for aesthetics; grounding;
parking and turn around facilities; signage; and, demonstrate how it shall effectively screen from view the base and
all related structures.
4. A copy of the geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report, drainage report and foundation
recommendation for a proposed or existing tower site.
5. Certification that the WTF Facility, foundation and attachments are designed and will be constructed to meet all
local structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads.
6. Verification that proposed facility complies with current FCC RF emissions guidelines.
7. Documentation that satisfies the Liability Insurance requirements.
8. Documentation that satisfies the Performance Bond requirements.
9. Applications to co-locate on or modify an existing structure where an increase in height is requested requires #1 -
#8 above, and: Documentation demonstrating the need for the proposed height of the Facility; propagation studies of
the proposed site and all adjoining proposed and existing sites; certified structural drawings verifying structure can
handle the load of additional antennas and/or structure; supporting documents showing actual intended
transmission and the maximum effective radiated power of the Antenna(s); and, equipment specification sheets for
the proposed radio, combiner, isolator, and antennas planned for the proposed and adjoining sites.
10. An application to install a new tower or facility will include the above information, and: The number, type, and
design of the Tower(s) and Antenna(s) proposed and the basis for the calculations of the Tower's capacity to
accommodate multiple users; and, the applicant shall be required to submit documentation demonstrating its
meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing Tower(s) or other structures within the City. Copies of written
requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to the City in the application.
Section 5. Visibility of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
A. WTFs shall not be lighted or marked, unless required by law.
29-30
B. Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the
surroundings and shall be maintained for the life of the Tower.
31
C. No tower shall exceed the height which requires lighting. If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a detailed plan
for sufficient lighting as inoffensive as permissible under State and Federal regulations. Applicant shall also be in
compliance with the Wyoming Night Skies Act.
Section 6. Security of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities All WTF and Antennas shall be located, fenced,
or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access.
Section 7. Signage
A. WTFs shall contain signs no larger than 4 sq. ft. to notify persons of the presence of RF radiation or to control exposure
to RF radiation and a sign with the I.D. number and emergency phone number(s) located on the equipment shelter or
cabinet and visible from the access point of the site. On tower sites, an FCC registration site shall also be present. The
signs shall not be lighted, unless required by law, rule, or regulation. No other signage shall be permitted, such as
advertising.
B. The applicant or future owner of the site shall update the site identification number and emergency phone numbers of
the WTF as displayed on the required sign within 6 months of any sale, assignment, or transfer.
Section 8. Parameters of WTF Permits
A. Permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or conveyed without written notice to and approval from the City within 6
months.
B. Such Permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for
violation of the conditions and provisions of the WTF Permit or for a material violation of this ordinance after prior written
notice to the holder of the WTF Permit and the applicant is given an opportunity to cure the same.
Section 9. Application Fee At the time a person submits an application for a WTF Permit for a new Tower or requires
an increase in height to an existing Tower, such applicant shall pay a non-refundable application fee of $3,000.00 to the
City. If the application is for a WTF Permit for co-locating on an existing Tower or other suitable structure, where no
increase in height of the Tower or structure is required, the non-refundable fee shall be $1,000.00.
Section 10. Liability Insurance
A. A holder of a Permit for a WTF shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries,
death, and property damage and umbrella insurance coverage for the duration of the Permit in amounts as set forth below:
1. Commercial General Liability & automobile coverage: $1 million per occurrence/ $2 million aggregate.
2. Workers Compensation and Disability: Statutory Amounts
B. The Commercial General liability insurance policy shall specifically include the City and its officers, employees, agents,
and consultants as additional named insured's.
C. The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in
the State and with a “Best's” rating of at least A.
D. The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the City with at least
30 days prior written notice of the cancellation of the insurance.
E. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the City at least 15 days before the expiration of the
insurance that such policies are to renew or replace.
F. Provide the city the policies/certificates before construction, but in no later than 15 days after the granting of the Permit.
Section 11. Indemnification Any application for WTF that is proposed on City property, pursuant to this Ordinance,
shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted
by the Law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the City, and its officers, Councils,
employees, commission members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges,
arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive,
29-31
or expenses arising therein, either from law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement,
construction, erection, modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation,
32
replacement, removal, or restoration of said Facility, exempting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands,
causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the City, or
its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages, or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees,
consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the City.
Section 12. Default and/or Revocation If WTF are repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, relocated, modified, or
maintained in a way not in compliance with this Ordinance or the WTF Permit, then the City shall notify the Permit holder
in writing of such violation. After receiving written notification of the violation, a Permit holder has 60 days to cure such
violations. The City shall consider extensions to the cure period as necessary upon the Permit holder demonstrating that
despite its good faith efforts, such default cannot be reasonably cured within the provided time. A Permit holder still in
violation after the expiration of the cure period may be considered in default, subject to fines as set forth in this Ordinance,
and the Permit is subject to revocation.
Section 13. Temporary Communications on Wheels (COW)
A. If a COW becomes inoperable due to force majeure or Acts of God, it must be removed from the site within 30 days.
B. If a COW must be used, it must be removed from the site within 48 hours of the conclusion of the event.
C. In the event of an emergency or natural disaster which renders other forms of communication nonviable, thus
necessitating a COW, the City and the Telecommunications provider shall agree to special terms and conditions as required
by both entities.
Section 14. Relief Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any requirement of this Ordinance may
request such at the pre-application meeting. The burden of proving the need for the request lies solely with the applicant.
The applicant shall bear all costs to the City in considering the request. No request shall be approved unless the applicant
provides convincing evidence that the request will have no significant affect on the health, safety and welfare of the City or
its residents.
ARTICLE 21: RENEWABLE/ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM (RAES)
Section 1. Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to allow for the placement of RAES to
create alternative energy, while creating the smallest amount of nuisance possible to the general public. The boundary
limits wherein this ordinance is enforceable include any properties or structures located within the City limits of Buffalo,
WY, as defined by the Official City Boundary map, as maintained by the P & Z Department.
Section 2. Permit Application Process All Applicants for a RAES Permit shall comply with the requirements of
this ordinance. City Council designates the Planning and Zoning Department as the Administrator to whom
applications must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to
granting, not granting or revoking RAES Permits. The City may at its discretion designate the P & Z Commission to
accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to City Council regarding the granting, not granting or
revoking of an RAES Permit on cases that are appealed to City Council. The applicant for an RAES Permit shall
complete the following steps, in order, to assist City staff in expediting the completion of the application process:
A. The applicant shall submit 4 copies of the application to administrator for review. Incomplete applications may be
rejected. The administrator will review the application to determine if it is complete. If application is deemed complete or
incomplete, the applicant will be provided written notice with the administrator’s action with regard to the application.
Actions which may be taken by the administrator with respect to the completed application include: Approve, approve with
conditions, request additional information or deny an RAES Permit. The administrator will provide its decision to the
address on the application. The burden of proof for the granting of the permit shall always be upon the Applicant; and/or,
refer the application to the P & Z Commission for further recommendations if applicant is dissatisfied with staff’s decision;
and/or, should any variance be required, this application shall require a public hearing through the P & Z Commission.
B. Anyone can appeal the decision of the administrator to the P & Z Commission by submitting written notification to the
administrator, stating the desire to appeal the decision. The appeal will be heard and considered at the next regularly
scheduled meeting. The appeal must be submitted within 5 business days of being notified of administrator’s decision.
Written notice sent to address on the application shall be deemed sufficient for the purposes of this ordinance.
29-32
C. Limitations. A proposed variance which has been denied by the P & Z Commission and/or City Council on a particular
tract of land for a particular purpose cannot again be applied for within 1 year from the date of the denial, unless the new
33
request is determined to be substantially different from the original request (i.e. an application for a different but not
necessarily more restrictive zoning district, use, distance, area, etc.)
D. Applicants receiving approved Permits may begin construction. Since permit is for the RAES only, all
support/accessory structures will require a separate Building Permit and fee. City will conduct the building inspection
process for construction.
E. After completing construction, the applicant shall request a final inspection from administrator.
F. When City verifies site was constructed in accordance with the application, the RAES meets the Ordinance
requirements and all monies are paid to the City, the City will issue a Certificate of Compliance that allows operational use
of the facility.
Section 3. Notification of Applicant and/or Certificate Holder It is the responsibility of the permit applicant,
holder and/or Certificate of Compliance holder to notify administrator of all pertinent addresses and address changes that
may have taken effect from the date of application, while RAES is in use. Written notice sent to the last address provided
to administrator by any of the previously listed people in this section shall be deemed sufficient for any purposes set forth
in this Ordinance.
Section 4. Permit Application Contents
A. Applications shall contain demonstrations as needed to show the RAES is the least intrusive as reasonably possible.
B. Applications for RAES construction/installation shall contain, but may not be limited to, the information contained
herein. Where Certification is called for, it shall bear the signature and seal of a Professional Engineer/Architect licensed in
Wyoming.
C. The application requirements may vary based on the type of facility and its location. Final determination of the
specific information to be included with each application will be defined by the administrator, but will generally follow the
established guidelines as set forth below. Permit applications may include, but not be limited to the following:
1. Name, address and phone number of the Applicant and Property Owner where RAES is to be located.
2. The Postal address, legal description and Zoning designation of the property.
3. A scaled drawing showing the square footage of the property and all lot lines.
4. A written statement verifying the RAES complies with State and Federal rules and regulations.
5. Documentation that verifies ownership of, or the right to occupy the site.
6. Documentation, drawings or descriptions showing how the RAES will visually impact neighboring properties.
7. A site plan shall include: Location, size and height of proposed/existing structures and system(s);
landscaping, irrigation and fencing; Warning Signage; electrical grounding and junctions to electrical
service; and, the administrator can require applicant to have site plan certified in regards to structure or
nature.
8. The proposed stealth applications for the RAES for aesthetic purposes and screening from neighboring
properties.
9. Certified structural drawings showing RAES foundation and attachments will meet required wind and snow
loads.
10. Certified soils report verifying the soil can handle the live and dead load of the proposed structure.
12. Documentation satisfying Liability Insurance requirements, for Wind Systems only.
13. Documentation demonstrating the need for the proposed height of the RAES.
14. The number, type, design and Equipment specification sheets for the proposed RAES system(s).
Section 5. General Building Requirements
A. The administrator may require the system installer to be a licensed Wyoming contractor, experienced in installing an
RAES.
B. Both the system and all accessory structures shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed
to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include
the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as required by the City.
29-33
C. The holder of a Permit granted under this Ordinance shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required
by applicable Law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by
34
the City or other governmental entity having jurisdiction over the applicant.
D. The Permit holder shall notify City of intended facility Modifications and shall apply to modify, relocate or rebuild an
RAES.
E. No artificial lighting of an RAES is permitted unless required by Federal Aviation Administration, due to structure’s
height.
F. An RAES shall be constructed to comply with all local, State and Federal construction building and electrical codes.
G. An RAES that is to be interconnected with a local electrical utility shall be done in accordance with the Wyoming
Public Service Commission and the utility provider’s rules and regulations.
H. Wind Energy System owners shall always maintain current Liability Insurance covering bodily injury and property
damage with minimum limits of $1 million per occurrence and $2 million aggregate. Certificates of insurance shall be
provided to City before a Certificate of Compliance can be issued and shall be available upon request when the System is
on owner’s property.
I. Upon completion of construction, and prior to operating the system, the applicant must call the Administrator to request
a final inspection of the system to ensure the system has been installed in accordance with the approved permit.
Section 6. Nuisance Control
A. Measures shall be taken to prevent the following nuisances from disrupting the residential nature and setting of
neighborhoods throughout the City. Applicant and owner are responsible for preventing the development of, and correcting
any nuisance created by, the RAES which could adversely affect neighboring properties and/or vehicular passersby on local
streets:
1. Solar Energy Systems: Glare from reflections created by system onto neighboring properties and vehicular
passersby on roadways; debris off of system detached by natural forces; visual impairment of neighboring property
views which hinder safety; create physical obstructions which reduces or eliminates the emergency responders
ability to access the permitted property; and, appearance of system must always remain in good condition.
2. Wind Energy Systems: Audible sound from system shall not exceed 50 decibels measured at exterior
property boundaries of site; methods for measuring/reporting acoustic emissions shall be equal to minimum
standards for precision described in AWEA standard 2.1, titled “Procedures for the measurement and
reporting of acoustic emissions from wind turbine energy systems, volume I, first tier.”; minimize shadow
flicker and glare created by system onto neighboring properties or vehicular passersby; prevent disruption or
loss of radio, telephone, television, internet or other wireless signals to neighboring properties. System
owner shall be responsible for mitigating harm caused by the system; debris off of system detached by
natural forces; Visual impairment of neighboring property views which hinder safety; create a physical
obstruction which reduces or eliminates the emergency responders ability to access the permitted property;
and, system must always remain in good condition.
B. Systems that fall into disrepair and create a nuisance shall be repaired or shut down within 24 hours of when nuisance is
first reported. If repairs cannot be administered within 24 hours, the system must be turned “OFF” until such repairs can be
made.
C. Irreparable and non-functional systems must be removed from the property in accordance with Section 7 below.
Section 7. Safety Precautions
A. System Protection. Wind Energy Systems shall be constructed to prevent unauthorized persons from climbing them by
securely fencing off access to wind turbines and electrical equipment to prevent injury or death from the system
components.
B. Controls and Brakes. Wind Energy Systems shall be equipped with redundant braking systems which include
aerodynamic over-speed controls which vary the pitch of the blades to slow them down, as well as a fail-safe mechanical
braking system, to slow down the rotation speed of the blades at the hub. Stall regulation is not an approved or sufficient
braking system.
C. Wind Resistance. Every RAES shall be designed and certified to withstand sustained winds of 90 miles per hour (90
mph) is in accordance with City Building Code requirements for wind load requirements for Exposure-C classifications.
29-34
D. Batteries. An RAES containing batteries for any reason shall comply with all local, State and Federal
regulations/guidelines for the safe handling, use, storage and disposal of said batteries.
35
E. Clearance. RAESs shall be installed on private property, with no parts overhanging public Rights-of-Way. Caution
must be taken during design and planning of system to ensure no part of the system will interfere with overhead or
underground utilities.
F. Bottom Sweep of propeller. The tips of propellers from a Wind Energy System at the lowest point in its rotation shall
be no closer than 10 feet from the existing grade in all installations.
Section 8. Setback Requirements A stand alone Wind Energy System shall be no closer to any property line than the
total height of the completed unit, plus five feet. Should the structure collapse for any reason, it shall not be capable of
falling onto an adjacent property or structure. The height is measured from the pre-existing grade to the highest point of the
structure.
Section 9. Height Restrictions
A. In Residential Districts. The RAES shall not exceed 35 feet from the pre-existing grade to the highest point of the
system, or the height needed to meet the setback requirements in Section 8 above, whichever is lesser in height.
B. In Commercial Districts. The RAES shall not exceed 35 feet from the pre-existing grade to the highest point of the
system, or the height needed to meet the setback requirements in Section 8 above, whichever is lesser in height.
C. In Industrial Districts. The RAES shall not exceed the height to meet the setback requirements in Section 8 above.
ARTICLE 22: SIGN ORDINANCE
Section 1. Purpose
Section 2. Applicability
Section 3. Definitions
Section 4. Sign Regulations
Section 5. Administrative Procedure
Section 6. Location of Signs
Section 7. Exemptions
Section 8. Nonconforming Signs
Section 9. Prohibited Signs
Section 10. Sign Standards
Section 11. Abatement or Removal
Section 12. Variance Procedure
Section 13. Enforcement
29-35
Section 1. PURPOSE:
36
The purpose of this Chapter is to afford the business and residential community of Buffalo equal and fair
opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination; to protect and enhance
the community character and visual environment; to preserve the right of the citizens to enjoy our Town’s scenic
beauty; to improve pedestrian, bike and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby
public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
Signs are an important aspect of the City. When abused, signs create a visual blight which detracts from the
quality of the environment and can increase the risk of vehicle/pedestrian accidents if they are not properly sited
or if they represent a distraction. When unduly restricted, the lack of signs creates a hardship for merchants who
rely on effective signs to identify their establishments.
The Sign Ordinance is intended to provide comprehensive regulations for signs within the City of Buffalo to
eliminate confusing, distracting and unsafe signs while assuring the reasonable efficient transfer of information
and enhancing the visual environment of the City of Buffalo. It is declared that the regulation of signs within
the City of Buffalo is necessary and in the public interest and also related to the following goals:
A. To provide a pleasing overall environmental setting and community appearance which is deemed
vital to tourism and the continued economic attractiveness of the City; and
B. To enhance the economy and the businesses and industries by promoting reasonable, orderly and
effective signs which achieve better communication with the public; and
C. To promote the public safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the unique historic character
of the City of Buffalo; and
D. To minimize distractions to motorists and pedestrians while promoting visual harmony and safety
of the community; and
E. To allow signs appropriate to the planned character of each zoning district.
Section 2. APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of the Chapter shall apply to all signs located within the City boundaries; no sign,
unless specified, shall be erected, altered, or relocated without prior authorization pursuant to this
Chapter.
Section 3. DEFINITIONS:
Animated Sign. A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion. Animated signs, which are
differentiated from changeable signs as defined and regulated by this code, include the following
types:
Electrically Activated. Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of
electronic, electrical or electro-mechanical input and/or illumination capable of stimulating
movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted
below:
29-36
1. Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is
37
characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period illumination is either the same as
or less than the period of non-illumination. For the purpose of this ordinance, flashing
will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of
illumination exceeds 4 seconds.
2. Patterned illusionary movement. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential
activation of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light
patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
Environmentally Activated. Animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal changes or
other natural environmental input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other
devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
Area of a Sign. The area of a sign shall include the entire area within any type of perimeter border
that may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character, exclusive
of the supporting framework.
An area circumscribed by the smallest geometric shape created with a maximum of eight straight lines,
which will enclose all words, letters, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing,
background material, colored or illuminated areas and attention-attracting devices, forming an integral
part of an individual message except that:
1. Signs having no discernible boundary shall have the areas between letters, words
intended to be read together and any device intended to draw attention to the sign
message included in any computation of surface area.
2. For spherical, cylindrical or other three-dimensional signs the area of the sign shall
be computed from the smallest two-dimensional geometrical shape or shapes, which
will best approximate the greatest actual surface area visible from any one direction.
For two sided signs (such as projecting or free-standing signs), only one (1) sign face is included when
determining the total sign area. Where a sign has three (3) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be
included in the total sign area.
Banner: A sign of fabric, plastic, paper, or other light pliable material not completely enclosed by a
rigid frame, and which is suspended, mounted or attached to building or poles. Flags, pennants,
streamers and temporary signs, defined elsewhere, shall not be considered banners.
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more
points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or
move.
Changeable Sign. A sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or remote input,
including signs which are:
29-37
Electrically Activated. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be
38
changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching
combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display
surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized
by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an external light
source designed to reflect off the changeable component display. Also known
as LED signs.
Manually Activated. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be
changed manually.
Flag. Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a
symbol of government, political subdivision or other entity.
Kiosk. A freestanding structure with two (2) or more sides used to display community and visitor
information, business directories and maps.
Marquee Theater Sign. A sign on a bona fide performing arts center or theater used for bona fide
performing arts and entertainment purposes, and includes movie theaters, that is attached to and
supported by the building.
Multiple-Business Complex. A group of structures housing at least two (2) separate businesses or
agencies, or a single structure containing more than one (1) business with separating walls and at least
one outside access for each business which shares a common lot, access and/or parking facility.
Multi-Tenant Building, One building shared by two (2) or more tenants or occupants that are separate
tax entities.
Mural. A painting applied to the exterior of a building for artistic and aesthetic purposes.
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, not containing a message of any kind,
suspended from a rope, wire, pole or string, designed to move in the wind.
Primary Building. A fully enclosed and roofed structure, or portion thereof in separate ownership,
which houses the primary uses of at least one (1) business, residence or other establishment.
Accessory building or outbuildings are not included in this definition.
Sign. Any material, structure, statue or device used or located out-of-doors or on the exterior of any
building or window, for the purpose of displaying, illustrating or directing attention to a business or
building, advertisement, announcement, notice, name or emblem for the identification of a person,
place, object or product. The definition of a sign shall also include the sign structure, supports,
lighting system, and any attachments, flags, ornaments or other features used to draw the attention of
observers.
Sign, Abandoned. Any sign applicable to a use which has been discontinued for a period of sixty (60)
days or more.
29-38
Sign, Building. Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.
39
Sign, Campaign. A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in
connections with a specific national, state, or local election.
Sign, Directional. A sign limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, such as “one way”, “entrance”, and “exit”, but not used for advertising.
Sign, Directory. An on premise identification sign that contains the name of three (3) or more
businesses located within the same building or complex.
Sign, Freestanding. Any sign supported by a structure or supports that are permanently anchored in
the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.
Sign, Government. Any sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any government
function, or required by law, ordinance, or other government regulation.
Sign, Identification. A sign incorporated into the structure of a building for the sole purpose of
identifying the building or its address.
Sign, Incidental. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on
which it is located, such as “no parking”, “entrance”, “loading only”, “telephone”, and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message shall be considered incidental.
Sign, Inflatable. Any three (3) dimensional air or gas filled object which is attached or tethered to the
ground, site, merchandise, structure, or roof and used to attract attention to a business or activity.
Sign, Internally Lit. Any sign lighted by a source which is inside of or behind an enclosed sign or
sign face made of translucent material.
Sign, Legal Nonconforming. Any sign which was legally erected or existed prior to the adoption of
this Section that does not comply with the provision of this Chapter.
Sign, Monument. A ground-related, freestanding sign which is attached to the ground or to its base
on grade by a solid sign structure that extends from the ground or base to the sign face at the same or
greater width as the sign face.
Sign, Memorial. A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or site.
Sign, Non-Conforming. Any advertising structure or sign existing at the time of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance which does not conform to the regulation herein.
Sign, Off –Site. Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premise on which the sign is located.
29-39
Sign, Portable. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or site. This definition
includes “sandwich signs”, designed to be placed in a sidewalk or pedestrian walk way and placards
40
temporarily affixed to a structure other than a wall.
Sign, Projecting. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends
more than six (6) inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.
Sign, Real Estate. Any sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is
located.
Sign, Roof. Any sign mounted on the roof of a building. Also any sign which is wholly dependent
upon a building for support and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof; the eave
line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof; or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
Sign, Subdivision Identification. A monument style identification sign located at the entrance of a
subdivision or planned unit development.
Sign, Temporary. Any sign that is used temporarily and is not permanently mounted and which is
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, paper, cardboard, or other light materials, without frames,
which is displayed for a limited time only.
Sign, Wall. A sign with messages or copy erected parallel to and attached to or painted on the outside
wall of a building or a canopy.
Sign, Warning. Signs limited to a message of warning, danger or caution.
Sign, Window. Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate
information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a
window or upon the window glass panes and is visible from the exterior of the window. This term
does not include merchandise displays.
Streamer. An attention-attracting device consisting of two (2) or more pennants, banners, balloons,
ribbons, reflectors, fringes or similar objects strung together on a common line, pole, or sign structure,
or attached to one or more products offered for sale.
Section 4. SIGN REGULATIONS:
A. General Provisions.
1. No sign shall be erected or altered unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this
Ordinance.
2. Unless exempted under Section 7 of this Ordinance, a permit issued by the City of Buffalo shall
be required for the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any outdoor sign visible from the
exterior of any building.
3. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and maintained in good condition. No sign
shall be permitted to become dilapidated or a hazard to the health, safety or general welfare of
the community. 29-40
4. All signs shall comply with the existing state and federal laws and regulations.
41
5. Every residential dwelling unit shall be identified by a street number visible from adjacent
streets. Also, every non-residential building or group of buildings shall be identified with a
street number visible from adjacent streets, not to exceed three (3) square feet in area. This
sign shall not be counted as part of the total sign area permitted for said building or groups of
buildings and shall not require a sign permit.
6. No sign shall be located so as to conflict with the clear and obvious appearance of public devices
controlling traffic or impair the safety of moving vehicles by distracting the vision of the driver.
B. Sign Plans. The owner, landlord, occupant, or tenant of a building seeking new signage or
changing existing signage shall submit and receive approval for an overall sign plan for their property,
meeting the standards in Section 10 of this Ordinance.
C. Sign Permit and Fee Required. No person shall erect, alter, or relocate any permanent sign or
mural within the City of Buffalo without first submitting a Sign Application and fee, and receiving a
Sign Permit for the City, unless the sign is exempt pursuant to Section 7 of this Ordinance. Any
person who hangs, posts, or installs a sign that requires a permit under this Ordinance and who fails to
obtain an approved permit before installing the sign, shall be required to remove the non-compliant
sign, or be subject to a fine as specified in this Chapter.
D. Sign Applications. All sign applications shall be submitted to the City Building Department to be
reviewed for compliance with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. A Sign Application shall
include the appropriate fee plus two copies of the following items (one copy will be returned to the
applicant when the sign permit is issued):
1. A competed Sign Application form supplied by the City.
2. A drawing of the sign including dimensions of all sign faces; descriptions and colors of materials
to be used for sign faces and support structures, including all posts and hardware; and a detailed
sign lighting plan which clearly indicates the locations, type and wattages of all sign lighting
fixtues, and plan of installation depicting clearances and setbacks for the subject property.
3. A Site Plan which specifies the location of the building and proposed new sign structure, as well
as the size, dimension and location of all existing on premise signs-including freestanding signs
and wall signs-relating to the particular business making such application. Any other
information deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Building Inspector
or the City Planner.
4. For free-standing signs. If the proposed sign is free-standing, or projecting, the site plan shall
specify the sign location on the parcel and show its relation to adjacent streets, buildings, and
property line including necessary setbacks from any intersecting roadways. Construction details
are required for review for safety and code compliance by the City Building Inspector.
29-41
5. For wall signs: A building elevation which specifies the location of the proposed new sign, as
well as the location of any other sign on the building relating to the particular business making
42
such application.
6. Buildings with multiple occupants. Tenants of buildings with multiple occupants shall include a
copy of the approved overall sign plan and indicate how their proposed sign(s) fit(s) into the
approved plan.
Section 5. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE:
All signs shall meet the standards set forth in this Chapter.
A. After receiving a Sign Application for a sign permit, including the application fee, the Building
Inspector and/or City Planning Director shall review the application and advise the applicant within
seven (7) days on the application’s completeness and general conformance with the requirements set
forth in this Ordinance and shall issue this permit if it complies with this ordinance.
B. The Sign Permit shall be retained on site until the construction is completed. The Sign Permit shall
state:
1. The type and description of sign(s) as defined in this Ordinance;
2. The location at which the approved sign(s) will be installed;
3. The date of issuance;
4. The name of the sign owner;
5. The name of the person or company installing the sign.
C. Variances and Appeals. Variances and appeals to the Building Inspector’s decision shall be
requested in writing and directed to the City Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall schedule
the item with proper notice on its next regularly scheduled meeting.
D. Expiration. Sign installation permits shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, if the sign
has not been erected or altered pursuant to the issue permit. A permit extension may be obtained from
the Building Inspector for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
Section 6. LOCATION OF SIGNS:
1. No sign shall be located in or over the public Right-of-Way, except for traffic control devices,
directional signs authorized by the City or State agencies, projecting, portable or temporary
signs.
2. No permitted sign in a Non-Residential Zone shall be located within ten (10) feet of a
Residential Zone.
29-42
3. No signs shall be located or placed where they will interfere with safe sight distance (refer to
Chapter 21 Subdivision Regulations: Article 16, Section 3-T), traffic flow, pedestrian traffic,
43
views or vistas, or any aspect of public safety.
Section 7. EXEMPTIONS:
A sign Permit is not required for the following types of signs in any zoning district in which they are
allowed:
A. All signs erected in a public right-of-way by a public agency:
B. Official notices issued by any court, public agency, or officer;
C. Government signs;
D. Property notification signs: Non-illuminated, private warning signs and for sale or for rent signs
are permitted, provided that they do not exceed six (6) square feet per side in residential areas;
E. Memorial signs;
F. Flags, either official or historic, of any state or nation;
G. Signs designated by the City Council as having historical significance to the City;
H. Directional signs, including signs designating parking area entrances and exits; parking lot
directional signs shall not project higher than seven (7) feet above the established grade of the parking
area;
I. Temporary signs pertaining to a specific sale or event which are displayed no longer than fifteen
(15) days. Temporary signs may not be larger than twenty (20) square feet;
J. Any sign in or upon a vehicle, provided that the vehicle is not left standing in conspicuous places
nor used primarily as an advertising device;
K. Holiday decorations such as signs or other material temporarily displayed on traditionally accepted
civic, patriotic, or religious holidays;
L. Window signs;
M. Incidental signs which do not exceed four (4) square feet for each exposed face. Such signs shall
not project higher than seven (7) feet above the established grade and must not convey a commercial
message;
N. Campaign signs. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet, shall not be placed prior to the
beginning of the primary filing period, and shall be removed within ten (10) days after the election.
All successful candidates in a primary election may display their signs until 10 days after the general
election. Signs shall be located on private property and shall not impede the public right-of-way;
29-43
O. Identification signs for single-family dwellings, provided such signs do not exceed (3) square feet
44
in area;
P. One identification sign per commercial building, provided such sign does not exceed four (4)
square feet in area;
Q. Street numbers: Numbers placed on structure or lot for purposes of identifying the address or the
location;
R. Construction Signs: Construction signs for buildings or projects, naming owners, contractor,
subcontractors and architects shall be permitted, provided that they do not exceed one sign of fifty (50)
square feet for each street frontage of the building or project having a current building permit;
S. Town, State, or National historical signs;
T. Informational signs. An on-premise sign designed to provide courtesy information or direction to
the public by using such words as “entrance”, “exit”, “parking”, “drive-up”, “restrooms”, or similar
directional instruction, but not including any advertising of the business. The directional signs shall
not exceed six square feet in area. The maximum height should be four feet unless attached to an
existing freestanding sign;
U. Portable signs.
In addition, the repainting, refacing, changing of parts, and maintenance of legally conforming signs
shall not require a permit, provided that the changes do not enlarge or increase the sign height or
prevent compliance with this Chapter.
Section 8. NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
All signs that are in existence at the time of adoption of this Chapter, and its amendments, may
continue for the life of the sign. Existing signs may be refurbished, refaced, renamed and businesses
change ownership without a permit but may not be enlarged, relocated or increased in height without
complying with the regulations herein. Such sign or signs can be replaced only with a conforming sign
or signs, regardless of how the original sign was approved or erected. A new and separate permit will
be required to change, alter, add or otherwise modify any signs within the City of Buffalo. Nothing in
these sections shall be construed to prohibit the normal maintenance and upkeep of legally existing and
conforming signs, in so far as they retain their existing size, configuration, etc.
Section 9. PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Signs which are prohibited are those which:
A. Are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination which may be
confused with, or construed as, a traffic-control device or which hide from view any traffic or street
or street sign or signal;
29-44
B. Are placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree or other surface located on
public property, including the posting of handbills except as may otherwise specifically be
45
permitted by this section.
C. Are erected after adoption of this code and do not comply with this provisions of this section;
D. Streamers of any size or type;
E. All vertical banner flag signage adjacent to public sidewalks and within rights of way.
Section 10. SIGN STANDARDS:
Sign zones In the City of Buffalo are as follows:
1. Downtown – the B-3 Downtown Business District
2. Hart Street (East City Limits to Main Street)
3. Fort Street (Main Street to West City Limits)
4. North and South Main (North City Limit to South City Limits outside the B3 Zoning District)
5. All other commercial/business and residential areas.
A. All Zones.
1. Sign Materials and Color.
a. Materials are encouraged to be used that are in harmony and relate to the building and
architecture;
b. All signs shall be constructed of painted, stained or carved wood, brick or stone, glass,
vinyl, metal or other materials which are corrosion resistant, painted, or anodized, all of which
are treated to prevent reflective glare;
c. Support structures – including, but not limited to, post, poles, mountings, and sign sides or
edges – shall be faced or covered with material which is corrosion resistant, painted or
anodized;
d. All colors used on any sign are encouraged to relate in harmony to the building color and
architecture.
29-45
2. Illumination.
46
a. Externally lit signs shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, shielded light sources
directed solely onto the sign without causing glare. Sign illumination shall be simple in form
and should not clutter the building or structure. All light sources should shine down in order to
protect the night sky;
b. Continuous lights which flash or move in any manner which poses a hazard to the public
are prohibited;
c. Internal illumination is permitted.
B. Commercial and Industrial Zones.
1. Total Sign Area.
a. The total maximum area of signs (for a property shall allow each occupant or tenant a
minimum sign area of sixteen (16) square feet;
b. Maximum sizes and heights of allowed signage vary by Sign Zone.
2. Wall Signs.
a. The total area of wall signs on the exterior front surface and each side and rear surface of a
building shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the vertical surface of the building or one hundred
(100) square feet, whichever is less, provided that every occupant is allowed a minimum sign
of sixteen (16) square feet except for theater marquee signs which may be up to 175 square
feet;
b. If a mural incorporates an advertising message into its design, the area of the advertising
message shall be considered a wall sign;
c. No wall sign may obscure architectural details of the building; nor cover doors, windows, or
other integral elements of the façade.
3. Projecting Signs. Each building may have only one projecting sign per entrance, unless more
have been approved in conjunction with an overall sign plan for a multi-tenant building.
Projecting signs shall meet the following conditions:
a. The top of any projecting sign shall be no higher than twenty (20) feet above street grade, or
the roof line of the building the sign is attached to, whichever is lower, and shall maintain a
clearance of at least eight (8) feet from ground level and fifteen (15) feet above driveways or
alleys;
b. Projecting signs shall not extend more than four (4) feet from the building wall and may not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
29-46
4. Freestanding Signs.
47
a. One on-site freestanding sign per primary building or multi-business complex is permitted
provided the sign meets the following requirements by Sign Zone:
b. One off-site sign is allowed in commercial zones per lot except in the B-3 Zoning District.
A. Downton Business District (B-3) Zone:
1. No freestanding sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet;
2. The top of any freestanding sign shall be no higher than twenty (20) feet above street
grade;
3. The sign shall be erected on or within the subject property.
B. Hart Street Sign Zone:
1. No freestanding sign shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet per sign face;
2. The top of any freestanding sign shall be no higher than one hundred (100) feet
above street grade;
C. Fort Street Sign Zone:
1. No freestanding sign shall exceed sixty four (64) square feet per sign face;
2. The top of any freestanding sign shall be no higher than the height of the structural
building.
D. North and South Main.
1. No freestanding sign shall exceed sixty four (64) square feet per sign face;
2. The top of any freestanding sign shall be no higher than one and one-half (1 ½)
times the height of the structural building not to exceed thirty five feet.
E. All Other including Residential:
1.Commercial signs on property zoned business or industrial:
a. No freestanding sign shall exceed sixty four (64) square feet per sign face;
b. The top of any freestanding sign shall be no higher than one and one-half (1 ½ )
times the height of the structural building not to exceed thirty five feet.
c. If adjacent to residential property, illumination will only be allowed with Planning
and Zoning Commission permission.
29-47
2. Signage on residential zoned property:
48
a. Allowed for temporary purposes only, including yard sales, political expression and
may not exceed 36 square feet per sign face and may not be illuminated.
b. The sign shall be erected on or within the subject property except temporary
directional signage may be placed with other property owner’s permission to direct
traffic to subject property for a yard sale.
c. The sign shall be removed immediately following the event.
5. Portable Signs.
a. Portable Signs shall not exceed four (4) feet in height or three (3) feet in width.
b. Portable Signs are only allowed in Commercial/Business Zoning Districts.
c. Portable Signs shall not be located so as to obstruct vehicular traffic, or visibility for
vehicles at intersections, and the clear space for pedestrian passage shall not be reduced to
less than three (3) feet. Repeated violations of placing signage obstructing pedestrian walkways
or when closed may be caused to suspend a business’ permission to display such signs.
d. Portable Signs shall be weighted or secured in some manner as to prevent them from being
moved or blown over by the wind.
e. Portable Signs shall be displayed during business hours only and be stored inside the
premises when the business is closed.
6. Changeable Copy Signs.
a. One changeable copy sign is allowed per business or multi-tenant building in the B-1, B-2,
B-3 and Industrial zones.
b. A changeable copy sign may be erected as a freestanding, wall or projecting sign, but may not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowed area of such sign and shall meet all other conditions set
forth under the chosen sign type. Theater marquee signs are exempt from this provision.
Messages alternating on such signs may not change more than once per three (3) seconds.
7. Non-Temporary Banners.
Temporary banners meeting the requirements of Section 7 are exempt.
a. Non-temporary banners are allowed in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and I zones.
b. Banners shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the edge of the roadway.
c. Banners shall be securely fastened against a building to avoid being moved by the wind.
29-48
d. The area of any single banner shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet, and the total area of
all banners shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
49
8. Pennants. (see also the definition of streamers, which are prohibited):
a. Pennants shall meet all of the requirements for a projecting sign;
b. No more than one pennant shall be erected for every ten (10) lineal feet of building frontage.
9. Kiosks. The planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to permit erection of
kiosks by the City or by nonprofit community organizations representing a large number of
retail businesses. Such kiosks should provide community and visitor information services of
broad interest and a current directory of retail businesses with a location map. No more than
one such kiosk may be place within the boundaries of Business (B-1, B-2 or B-3) Zones.
C. Multi-Tenant Buildings and Multi-Business Complexes.
A sign plan is required for all new multi-tenant buildings and multi-business complexes. The plan
shall indicate size and location of all projecting, wall, freestanding, directory, and other signs. Only
one freestanding sign and one directory sign is allowed per multi-tenant building or multi-business
complex. Individual tenants of a multi-tenant building or multi-business complex shall subsequently
receive permits for their individual signs, which shall conform to the overall sign plan.
1. One on-site directory sign is permitted per building or complex that includes three (3) or more
businesses, provided the sign meets the following requirements.
a. Such sign does not exceed four (4) square feet per business and fifty (50) square feet total.
b. Such sign may be either a wall sign or freestanding sign. However, the directory sign may
not be freestanding if another freestanding sign already exists on the premises.
D. Residential Subdivisions.
1. One identification sign per multi-family dwelling or mobile home park is permitted, provided
such sign does not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and uses only external illumination.
2. One on-site identification sign, which may include, but is not limited to, names of contractor,
subcontractors, and financial institutions involved in the construction of a project, during the first
year of construction of a new residential project, condominium project or subdivision, provided
such sign does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face and is unlighted, is permitted
3. One identification sign per public or semi-public use, provided such sign does not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area and has only external illumination, is permitted.
4. Home Occupation signage in residential districts is regulated in Article 21 Home Occupations.
29-49
Section 11. ABATEMENT OR REMOVAL:
50
A. Abatement or Removal of Signs.
1. If, upon inspection, the Building Inspector or other designated official determines a sign
within the City limits of Buffalo to be unsafe, un-maintained or abandoned, the designated
official may issue a written order to the owner of the sign and/or occupant of the premises
stating the nature of the violation and requiring them to repair or remove the sign within ten
(10) working days after receipt of notice from the City. In cases of emergency, the designated
official may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign. Signs removed in
this manner shall present an imminent hazard to the public safety.
2. The designated official may cause the removal of an illegal sign for failure to comply
with the written orders of removal or repair under the procedures and authority of this
Ordinance. Violators of any provision of this Ordinance shall be required to remove the
non-compliant sign, or be subject to a fine as specified in this Chapter.
3. The owner of a sign removed under the provisions of this Section shall be billed a
minimum of $200 or the cost of such removal whichever is greater.
Section 12. VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
A. Application and Fee Required:
1. Any person, business or organization desiring to locate, construct, substantially alter or
otherwise place any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter may first
make application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a variance to locate, construct,
substantially alter or otherwise place such a sign.
2. The application shall be filed with the Planning Director, accompanied by the appropriate fee
established by the City Council and by a drawing or sketch in sufficient detail to determine the
location and type of construction for the proposed sign and a letter of justification.
3. Upon receipt of a completed application accompanied by the requisite fee(s), the Planning and
Zoning Commission, shall hold a public hearing and vote to recommend to approve or to deny said
variance to the City Council within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof. The City Council will make
a final determination on the variance at their next regularly scheduled meeting.
B. Conditions of Variances.
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and City Council may impose such
conditions or requirements in a variance as are necessary in that board’s judgement to protect the
overall character of the community and to achieve the fundamental purposes of this chapter. A
violation of such conditions or requirements shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
2. If a variance is granted and the sign so authorized is not substantially under construction
within six (6) months of the date of approval of the variance, the variance shall lapse and
become of no force or effect. 29-50
Section 13. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
51
1. Wherever by the provisions of this chapter the performance of any act is required or the
performance of any act is prohibited, or wherever any regulation, dimension or limitation is
imposed on the location, design or use of any sign, a failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
2. The City Council or duly authorized responsible official may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, relocation,
alteration, repair or use of any sign, and to restrain, correct or abate such violation. Every day
on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation and a separate offense. The
penalty for each offense shall be according to General Penalty 14-13 as outlined for Municipal
Court. (RO 1383 7/16)
ARTICLE 23: HOME OCCUPATIONS
Section 1. Purpose The standards of this Section are designed to protect and maintain the character of residential areas
while recognizing that certain professional and trade activities may, on a limited scale, with no physical outside evidence of
a business use, be acceptable accessory uses in residential dwellings. These activities are subordinate to the right of
surrounding residents to enjoy the use of their property for residential purposes and shall be as permitted below in the R-1
and R-3 districts.
Section 2. Permits & Restrictions
A. Minor Home Occupations require approval of the P & Z Staff. Major Home Occupations require approval of a
Conditional Use Permit by the P & Z Commission at a public hearing.
B. Minor Home Occupations are permitted in all residential zoning districts. Major Home Occupations are only permitted
in the R-2 and R-3 residential zoning districts.
C. The applicant for the Home Occupation shall live on the premises and shall either be the owner of the residence, have
some controlling interest in the property or have the notarized, written consent and signature of the property owner or agent,
which allows the home occupation to be conducted on the premises.
D. Home Occupations may only be conducted after approval from either the staff or the Commission. Approval for Home
Occupations may only be granted if the following items have been met:
1. Home Occupation application conforms to the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Conditional Use Permit application conforms to the provisions of this ordinance.
3. Home Occupation will not alter the residential nature of the home or neighborhood.
E. Conditional Use Permits for Home Occupations require an application fee. (See Fee Schedule below Table of Contents).
F. Violations. If it is determined by inspection or public complaint that the operation of a Home Occupation is in violation
of any provision of this ordinance or the Conditional Use Permit, action may be taken to revoke the Conditional Use Permit
through City Council procedures. A violator may also be subject to legal sanctions.
Section 3. General Guidelines for Minor and Major Home Occupations
A. No alterations of a property or structures shall be made to accommodate a Home Occupation, which in any way changes
the residential character and nature of that property and its buildings.
B. The traffic and parking generated by a Home Occupation shall not increase the volumes of those normally expected in a
residential neighborhood. Deliveries to and from the Home Occupation shall not require the use of vehicles other than
standard USPS, Fed-Ex, U.P.S. or similar vehicles. Deliveries by semi-tractor-trailer rigs are not permitted, nor shall the
Home Occupation operator make use of these vehicles at the residence for any reason.
C. Outdoor storage or display of goods/equipment is not permitted for a Home Occupation.
29-51
D. The sale or accumulation of salvage is not permitted as a Home Occupation.
E. No flammable/explosive/hazardous products and/or materials deemed inappropriate for a residential use by City, State
52
or other governmental departments shall be permitted as a part of a Home Occupation.
F. No activity shall be allowed which interferes with wireless telecommunications transmissions or reception in the area or
creates any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare.
G. The sale of merchandise shall be limited to items normally found in a residential dwelling as permitted in Sect. 4 & 5
below.
H. No external evidence of an activity that creates a public nuisance will be permitted.
I. No heavy equipment shall be installed or used except those normally used in residential homes.
J. Clients or students are permitted on the premises only between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m.
Section 4. Standards and Regulations for Minor Home Occupations
A. Minor Home Occupations (MHO) shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling. Exceptions may be
approved by staff for outside activities which create no public nuisance.
B. Only persons residing on the premises shall be employed in any MHO.
C. No more than 25% of the home floor area shall be devoted to the MHO and no accessory buildings shall be used.
D. Storage shall be totally enclosed within the Home Occupation floor area allowed. A site plan must be approved by
staff.
E. No signs or other indications of a MHO shall be permitted on the premises.
F. Instruction of students shall be limited to 3 pupils at a time for a maximum of 6 per day.
G. A MHO shall not generate the need for additional parking on the premises.
H. Permitted Minor Home Occupations (MHO). (Permitted in all residential zoning districts)
1. Private professional office which shall not be open to the general public. All meetings with a client shall be by
appointment only, and only one client shall be allowed on the premises at any given time for a maximum of six/day.
2. Medical offices are permitted for personal use but not for the practice of the profession, except for an
emergency.
3. Small home crafts and workshops or studios for an artist, photographer, writer, composer, dressmaker, tailor,
typist or computer programmer (some light carpentry or light welding incidental to the craft or art is acceptable). Such
home workshops or studios shall not be open to the general public. Meetings with a client shall be by appointment
only, and only one client shall be allowed on the premises at any given time for a maximum of 6 per day.
4. Instruction in music, arts, crafts, dance and tutoring to no more than 3 pupils at a time for a maximum of 9 per
day.
5. Mobile repair service conducted at the client's site (small appliance, computer and electronics). No exception
for outside activity or storage is permitted.
6. Other uses that meet the intent and purpose of this section.
Section 5. Standards and Regulations for Major Home Occupations
A. A site and floor plan must be approved by the P & Z Commission at a Public Hearing prior to approval.
B. The business shall be conducted entirely within enclosed structures. Exceptions may be granted by the Commission for
outside activities that do not create a public nuisance.
C. No more than 1 worker, plus residence inhabitants shall be on the premises at one time to conduct a major home
occupation.
D. No more than 25% of all structures shall be devoted to the major home occupation, including storage and shall be
wholly enclosed inside a structure. Accessory building(s) may be used for a major Home Occupation if approved by the
Commission.
29-52
E. Instruction of students shall be limited to not more than 3 pupils at a time for a maximum of 12 per day, or as
determined by the Commission for the Conditional Use Permit.
53
F. Major home occupations are subject to inspection by City officials.
G. Permitted Major Home Occupations. (Permitted in R-2 & R-3 Residential Zoning Districts)
1. Any use permitted in the Minor Home Occupations.
2. Group Day Care Homes for Children are limited to 12 children and one employee and they are not subject to
restricted hours of operation due to the nature of the business.
3. Group Day Care Homes for Adults are limited to 6 adults and one employee and they are not subject to
restricted hours of operation due to the nature of the business.
4. Small appliance, computer and electronics repair. No exception for outside activity or storage is permitted.
5. Small engine repair conducted at customer’s site. No outside activity or storage is permitted.
6. Retail photo developing as a mail order service.
7. Other uses that meet the intent and purpose of this section.
Section 6. Prohibited Minor and Major Home Occupations. The following uses, by nature of the investments or
operations involved, have a pronounced tendency once started, to rapidly increase beyond the limits intended for Home
Occupations, and thereby impair the use and value of a residential zoning district. Therefore, the uses specified below
shall not be permitted as either Minor or Major Home Occupations:
1. Antique, furniture or gift shops.
2. Beauty shop, barber shop, body piercing or tattoo shops.
3. On site small engine repair shops.
4. Welding (Non-incidental to the Home Occupation).
5. Pet shops, kennels, animal hospitals or other related pet businesses.
6. Funeral-homes, mortuaries, crematories and other related services.
7. Restaurants, Bars, lounges or similar types of businesses.
8. Merchandise/equipment rental businesses.
9. Taxi-cab service and/or vehicles for hire.
10. Tow truck service or storage of towed vehicles.
11. Construction contractor involving parking/storage of special purpose vehicles.
12. Motor vehicle repair, body/frame repair, painting or sanding, rebuilding/reconditioning, cleaning or
undercoating.
13. The sale of fuel, oil or other products for propulsion or lubrication of motor vehicles.
14. Workshops for heavy carpentry, household furniture or cabinet making.
15. Furniture Refinishing and/or Painting
16. Professional offices open to the public where client consultation is practiced.
17. Any use listed as a Commercial or Industrial permitted use.
18. Any other uses similar to the above that are detrimental to the character and nature of a residential zoning
district.
ARTICLE 24: NON-CONFORMING USES
Section 1. Purpose The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of non-conforming uses and to specify
those circumstances under which they shall be allowed to continue as legal non-conforming uses.
Section 2. Authority to Continue Any use that existed lawfully prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
lawful use that has become non-conforming upon the adoption of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, may continue
to operate as that same use, as it did prior to becoming non-conforming, subject to the rules, regulations and provisions of
this article.
Section 3. Restrictions Any non-conforming use, except residences, that does not conform with the regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located, shall be subject to the following:
A. Repairs and Alterations. Ordinary cosmetic repairs may be made to a building or structure devoted to or designed for
a use not permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. No structural repairs or alterations shall be made in or to
such building or structure, except those required by law or to alter the design and use of the building or structure to conform
to the permitted use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
29-53
B. Additions and Enlargements. A building or structure devoted to or designed for a use not permitted in the zoning
district in which it is located, shall not have additions or enlargements made to it in any way other than to bring such
building or structure into compliance with the permitted use(s) of the zoning district in which it is located.
54
C. Restoration as a Result of Damages. A building or structure devoted to or designed for a use not permitted in the
zoning district in which it is located, that is damaged or destroyed by any means, and where the cost of the repairs exceed
50% or more of its replacement value, shall not be restored except if such restoration results in a building or structure
devoted to or designed for a use that conforms to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
D. Discontinuance of a Non-Conforming Use. In the event that a non-conforming use of a building, structure, premises
or parts thereof, is discontinued for any reason for a minimum of 6 months, and such non-conforming use is changed to or
replaced by a use conforming to the zoning district in which it is located, such building, structure, premises or parts thereof
shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a non-conforming use, even though the building, structure, premises or parts
thereof may have been originally constructed for the prior non-conforming use.
E. Vacant Non-Conforming Use. In the event the building, structure or premises of a non-conforming use have sat
vacant for a minimum of 6 months, any use brought into said building, structure or premises shall be a use conforming to
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and, all requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be met
before the new permitted use is allowed to operate, including the most current building guidelines as set forth in this and
other ordinances.
ARTICLE-25: PENALTIES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE
Section 1. Duty to Enforce It is the duty of every official of the City of Buffalo to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Section 2. Inspections The Building Inspector, Fire Marshall, Code Enforcement Officers, P & Z Staff and any other
duly authorized City staff shall inspect all buildings, structures and land to determine compliance with the rules, regulations
and provisions of this and other City ordinances.
Section 3. Penalties for Non-Compliance
A. Any person or party convicted of violating any of the rules, regulations, and/or provisions of this Ordinance shall be
fined in accordance with the General Penalty 14-13 as outlined for Municipal Court.
B. In the event of a violation of this Ordinance, the City may impose and collect, and the holder of a Building, Cell Tower,
RAES or Sign Permit shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in ‘A’ above and ‘C’ below.
C. Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance, the holder of any of the above mentioned Permits may not use the payment
of fines, liquidated damages, or other penalties to evade or avoid compliance with this Ordinance or any Article or Section
of this Ordinance. Any attempt to do so shall subject the Permit holder to termination and revocation of the Permit. The
City may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this Ordinance, without limiting other remedies
available to the City.(R.O. 1351 10/2011)
29-54
55
56
APPENDIX – ZONING.
FLOODWAY AND FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICTS.
(Ordinance 895 – 4/78 is amended by replacing the terms “Mobile Home”, “Federal
Insurance Administration”, and “Habitable Floor” wherever said terms may appear in
said ordinance by the terms “Manufactured Home”, “Federal Emergency
Management Agency”, and “Lowest Floor”, respectively.
(Ord. 1082, § 1, 11/89)
§ 1-1. Authorization.
§ 1-2. Statement of purpose.
§ 1-3. Methods of reducing losses.
§ 2. Definitions.
§ 3. General provisions.
§ 3-2. Basis for establishing flood hazard area.
§ 3-3. Compliance.
§ 3-4. Disclaimer of liability.
§ 4. Administration.
§ 4-1. Permit requirements.
§ 4-2. Designation of officers.
§ 4-3. Duties and responsibilities.
§ 5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
§ 5-2. Construction materials.
§ 5-3. Utilities.
§ 5-4. Subdivision proposals.
§ 5-5. Manufactured home placement.
§ 6. Specific standards.
§ 6-2. Residential construction.
§ 6-3. Nonresidential construction.
§ 6-4. Manufactured homes.
§ 6-5. Floodways.
§ 6-6. Floodproofing.
§ 7. Variance procedure.
§ 7-1. Appeal board.
§ 7-2. Conditions for variance.
§ 8. Amendments.
SEC. 1-1. AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislation of the State of Wyoming has in Wyoming Statutes § 15-1-601 to 15-1-611, 1977, as amended,
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Buffalo, Wyoming do
hereby ordain as follows:
SEC. 1-2. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
1) protecting human life and health; 2) minimizing public money for costly flood control projects; 3) minimizing
damage to public facilities and utilities; 4) insuring that potential buyers are notified that property is in the areas of
special flood will be eligible to buy flood insurance; and 5) providing for the use and development of areas of special
flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
29-29
SEC. 1-3. METHODS OF REDUCING LOSSES.
In order to accomplish its purpose, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for 1) restricting and
prohibiting uses which are due to water erosion hazards; 2) provide that uses vulnerable to floods be protected
against damage at the time of initial construction; 3) control the alteration of natural flood plains and protective
barriers which channel flood waters; 4) controlling filling, grading, and dredging which may increase flood damage;
and 5) prevent or regulate construction of flood barriers which will divert flood waters or increase flood hazards in
other areas.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them
the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
For the purpose of this ordinance only, the following definitions shall apply:
Actuarial Rates: Those established rates pursuant to community study and investigation which are undertaken to
provide flood insurance in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 4014.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year.
Channel: A watercourse with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing
water.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the City. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow that results in water overlapping its banks and inundating areas adjacent to
the channel. An unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff from any source.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community,
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that included flood
profiles, the Flood Hazard Boundary – Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood Plain Management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood damage.
Flood Proofing: Those physical structural works constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the
extent of the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazards”. These specialized modifying works are
those constructed in conformance with sound federal engineering standards.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is
not considered a building’s lowest floor, providing that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. (Ord. 1082, § 4, 11/89)
29-30
Manufactured Home: Manufactured Home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the require
utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
New Construction: Those structures where new construction or substantial improvements which is begun on or after
the effective date of this ordinance.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the City. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
Recreational Vehicle: Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is 1) built on a single chassis; 2) 400 square feet
or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a light duty truck; and 4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, replacement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
state of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and / or walkways; nor does it include the
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. (Ord. 1082, § 6, 11/89)
Structure: A walled or roofed structure including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above the ground,
including but without limitation to buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, mobile homes, and other similar uses.
Substantial Damage: Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
Substantial Improvement: Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 1) Any project
for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 2) Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the structure is
continued to be designated as a “historic structure”. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
Variance: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a flood plain management regulation.
SEC. 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards as identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration for the City of Buffalo, Wyoming.
SEC. 3-2. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The areas of special flood hazard are identified by
the Federal Insurance Administration in a report entitled “Flood Insurance Study” for the Town of Buffalo, Wyoming
dated March 1977, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps which is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City of Buffalo City Hall.
29-31
SEC. 3-3. COMPLIANCE. No structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Where this ordinance conflicts with
other regulation, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
SEC. 3-4. DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Buffalo,
Wyoming, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result
and reliance has been made on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
SEC. 4. ADMINISTRATION.
SEC. 4-1. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. A permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction and other
developments including the placement of mobile homes, within Zone A on the communities FIRM (Flood Hazard
Boundary Map). Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Buffalo Building Inspector.
SEC. 4-2. DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS. The City of Buffalo Building Inspector is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this ordinance by granting or denying permit application in accordance with its provisions.
SEC. 4-3. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The duties of the Building Inspector shall include, but not be limited to
the following:
1) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 3-2, the City of Buffalo
Building Inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a Federal, State, or other source as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development in Zone A meets the requirements of Sections 5 and 6 of this ordinance. (Ord. 1082, § 7, 11/89)
2) Obtain and record the actual elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or not such structure contains a basement; if
structure has been flood proofed; obtain elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood
proofed; and maintain a record of all such information.
3) Notify adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. Require the
maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
4) Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards, the person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Section 6.
SEC. 5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
SEC. 5-2. CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. All new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes) shall be 1) Constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage; 2) methods and practices shall be used that minimize flood damage; and 3) be designed or
modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of structure.
SEC. 5-3. UTILITIES. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall minimize or eliminate
29-32
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal
systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and / or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding. (Ord. 1082, § 8, 11/89)
SEC. 5-4. SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS. All subdivision proposals shall 1) be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage within the flood prone area; 2) have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 3) shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards; and 4) base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is less.
SEC. 5-5. MANUFACTURED HOME PLACEMENT. All Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the
provisions of Section 6-4-1. (Ord. 1082, § 9, 11/89)
SEC. 6. SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided the following provisions
are required:
SEC. 6-2. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION. Construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
within Zone A-3 on the FIRM (Flood Insurance Rate Map) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above base flood elevation.
SEC. 6-3. NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial
industrial or other non-residential structure within Zone A-3 on the FIRM shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall 1) be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; and 2) have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
SEC. 6-4. MANUFACTURED HOMES.
1) All manufacture homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement and
capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods anchoring may include, but are not limited to
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements may be:
i) Over-the-top ties be provided by each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties
per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per
side;
ii) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points,
with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
iii) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and;
iv) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. (Ord. 1082, § 10, 11/89)
2) All mobile homes to be placed within Zone A-3, new mobile home parks and mobile home sub-divisions; and
29-33
for expansion to existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or
improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and
pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; require that; 1) stands or lots are elevated on
compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; 2)
surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; 3) in the instance of elevation of pilings that lots are large
enough to permit steps, piling foundations are placed on stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement is
provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level.
3) For mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions located within Zone A-3 on the communities FIRM,
require that an evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes to be filed with appropriate
disaster preparedness authorities.
4) No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway, except in any existing mobile home park or existing mobile
home subdivision. The floodway is defined on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map marked Exhibit 2.
SEC. 6-5. FLOODWAYS. Since the floodway is a hazardous area the following provisions apply: 1) prohibit
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted
regulatory floodway that would result in any increase in the flood levels within the community during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge; 2) all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions.
SEC. 6-6. FLOODPROOFING. Where floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure 1) a registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood, and a record of such certificates
indicating specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained by the City; or, a certified copy of a local regulation containing detailed floodproofing specifications which
satisfy the watertight performance standards shall be submitted to the FIA for approval.
SEC. 6-7. Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AD on the
City’s FIRM on sites 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home
has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest flood of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
SEC. 6-8. Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the City’s FIRM that are not subject to the provision of Section
6-7 shall be elevated so that either 1) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation, or 2) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above the grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
SEC. 6-9. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings
having a total new area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. (Ord. 1083, 3/90)
29-34
SEC. 7. VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
SEC. 7-1. APPEAL BOARD. The City of Buffalo Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby established as the
Appeal Board to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement of this ordinance; and 2) to authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such variances from the terms of this ordinance. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided
by the rules of the Appeal Board by filing with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Building Inspector will transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, giving notice to parties in interest, and decide
same within a reasonable time. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Building Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to effect any variation in this ordinance.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision to a court of record.
SEC. 7-2. CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCE. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places,
without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
Variances may be issued if the structure is to be erected on a lot of one half acre or less in size and such lot is
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
Variances shall only be issued upon 1) showing of good and sufficient cause; 2) determination that failure to grant
the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 3) a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances. The community will notify the applicant that the issuance of a variance to locate a structure at an
elevation below the 100 year flood level will result in increased actuarial rates for flood insurance coverage.
SEC. 8. AMENDMENTS.
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may from time to time be amended
supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973, provided that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing has been held. Notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the area at least 15 days prior to
said hearing.
29-35